<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910326-0002</DOCNO><DOCID>910326-0002.</DOCID><HL>   Smooth Talker:   Banker Seems to Thrive   By Promising Funding   And Not Delivering   ---   FBI Looks Into Lloyd Rubin,   An American in Panama   With Many Angry Clients   ---   He Says Costs Ate Up Fees   ----   By Jose de Cordoba   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   PANAMA CITY, Panama -- Jerry Forness was a frustratedMinnesota executive in search of cash to launch his ownbusiness when in November 1989 he saw an ad in VentureCapital magazine promising access to millions in offshorefunds. Five months later, he was sitting in the plush officehere of Lloyd S. Rublin.   Mr. Rubin, who acquaintances say resembles a thinner andsmaller version of Jackie Gleason, clearly wasn't a typicalinvestment banker. He wore an open-collar white shirt thatrevealed a thick gold chain, Mr. Forness recalls, and hisoffice walls bore pictures of Mr. Rubin with Manuel Noriegaand former Haitian dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier. A companybrochure welcoming clients to Panama boasted of &quot;greatweather, beautiful ladies and third world politics.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   His office, whose lobby featured a mock jungle brook, wascrammed with the securities prospectuses of internationalcompanies.   And Mr. Rubin certainly talked a good game, regaling theMinnesotan with tales of his Thursday-night poker games withtop Panamanian officials and occasionally the dictatorhimself. What Mr. Rubin couldn't discuss were the previousdeals he had done, he said, because of Panamanian privacylaws.   The upshot of his detailed, four-hour presentation wasthat the company Mr. Rubin was associated with, Morgan GundyInternational, would do a $3.8 million private placement ofpreferred stock for Mr. Forness's new photocopier-supplyconcern. Mr. Rubin just needed some up-front expense money.   One year later, Mr. Forness says he is out about $150,000,half of which went to Mr. Rubin's company, yet no stock hasbeen sold. In fact, according to the executive director ofPanama's national securities commission, Eryx Tejada Him, Mr.Rubin hasn't sold any stock in Panama for anybody. Yet formeremployees say Mr. Rubin and companies he has worked with havetaken in roughly $8 million in fees from about 200individuals and companies, mostly American, seeking financingfor their projects.   Mr. Rubin is living quite well, according to an associate,with a wine-colored Jaguar, a high-rise apartment with acommanding view of the Pacific Ocean and a large and eclecticart collection.   The U.S. Embassy here has an eight-inch thick filecontaining roughly two dozen extensively documentedcomplaints against Mr. Rubin. &quot;I was hoodwinked, lied to,cheated,&quot; says Mr. Forness. &quot;It's my life savings,&quot; says JohnWolff, 61, a Baltimore man who says he lost $70,000 last yearafter a Rubin company canceled a contract to underwrite a$1.8 million bond offering to expand his rental-car business.&quot;I don't know what to do.&quot;   One former client, Besicorp Group Inc., has filed suitalleging fraud in New York federal court against Mr. Rubinand others.   The Federal Bureau of Investigation is now looking intoMr. Rubin's operation. &quot;We have an investigation under way,that's all I can say,&quot; says Special Agent R.T. Smith, of theAugusta, Ga., office.   Mr. Rubin insists he hasn't done anything wrong. He didn'trespond to numerous requests for an interview for thisarticle, but in a three-page letter, he said fees forunderwritings are &quot;quickly consumed by overhead, professionalsalaries and the general expense to bring a securities issuethrough registration to marketing.&quot;   Now, Mr. Rubin writes in the letter, he is in thelow-cost-housing business. He says Morgan Gundy was sold latelast year to a company called Financial Securities Network, afirm that he says he has nothing to do with. Since 1988, hesays, he hasn't held a management position or an ownershipstake in any of the Panamanian companies he has worked with.   Mr. Rubin initiated criminal litigation here against aWall Street Journal reporter for writing letters of inquiryabout him to people in Panama in connection with thisarticle.   U.S. officials here and in Washington suspect Mr. Rubin isstill the driving force behind the operation, noting, amongother things, that in the past seven years, the name of hismain operating venture has gone from Transnational Securitiesandamp; Investment Corp. to Morgan Gundy to Financial SecuritiesNetwork, but that neither the phone number nor the modusoperandi has changed.   Panama's Secretary of Commerce, Juan Chevalier, believesFinancial Securities Network is &quot;nothing but a front&quot; for Mr.Rubin's operations. The secretary is well acquainted withFinancial Securitiesits president is his cousin, CarlosChevalier, who didn't respond to repeated requests for aninterview.   Commerce Secretary Chevalier's skepticism aside, Mr. Rubinis himself well-connected politically in Panama andelsewhere, many people here say. Julio Harris, chief of staffto Panamanian President Guillermo Endara, was an executive atTransnational and Morgan Gundy for a total of more than threeyears. Mr. Harris didn't respond to numerous requests for aninterview, and a presidential spokesman declined to comment.   Mr. Rubin was an honored guest at last year's inaugurationof Costa Rica's president, Rafael Calderon. He was invited tothe event by Alfonso Guardia Mora, the Costa Ricanpresident's cousin, who says Mr. Rubin helped finance Mr.Calderon's campaign by buying $100,000 of bonds from Mr.Calderon's political party. The bonds have since beenredeemed, says Mr. Guardia Mora.   Mr. Rubin &quot;moved in the highest circles of Panamaniansociety,&quot; says Mr. Guardia Mora, who adds he met him throughMr. Harris. &quot;Before and after Noriega.&quot;   Mr. Rubin, who is 59 years old, arrived in Panama in 1983or '84 after selling real estate and working on otherventures in Denver. In his letter to the Journal, he writesthat he founded a world-wide real estate referral network,which he sold to a company that he doesn't name. He also sayshe was chairman of another unspecified company, and that hefounded a federal credit union, which he doesn't identify.   Mr. Rubin left behind a convoluted legal past in Denver.He and an associate, Robert Fisher, were indicted in Aurora,Colo., on state charges of conspiracy to commit theft in1979, according to reports at the time in the Denver Post andthe Rocky Mountain News. The reports said Mr. Rubin and hisassociates allegedly collected fees from people seeking loansbut never delivered anything in return.   Court records are sealed in the case, indicating that theindictment was dismissed or the defendants were acquitted.State officials, citing the sealed documents, say they can'tdiscuss the case.   Mr. Rubin's lawyer, Harold Haddon, writes in a letter tothe Journal that Mr. Rubin's indictment &quot;never occurred,&quot;citing the state law on sealed cases. Mr. Fisher's lawyer,Robert T. McAllister, writes that Mr. Fisher &quot;has never beenindicted&quot; and cites the same state law.   At around the same time as the state case against them,Mr. Rubin and Mr. Fisher testified under a grant of immunityin a related federal case, says Charles Torres, formerAssistant U.S. Attorney in Denver, who handled the case. Mr.Torres says an associate of Messrs. Rubin and Fisher pleadedguilty to a federal misdemeanor charge of obstruction ofjustice.   The U.S. in 1983 filed a civil suit in federal court inDenver against Mr. Rubin, a sister of his, and nine companiesit said Mr. Rubin controlled, in an attempt to recover a$439,000 Small Business Administration loan. The U.S. chargedthat Mr. Rubin used the companies to pay his personalexpenses and had his sister hold the stock in the companiesso that the SBA couldn't collect on its loan. Among otherthings, the U.S. said that one Rubin company paid $95,000 forMr. Rubin's home and an additional $50,000 for homeimprovements.   In 1984, the U.S. filed a motion to dismiss because, itsaid, &quot;Lloyd Rubin is being investigated by the federal grandjury,&quot; and the U.S. couldn't pursue discovery proceedingsbecause all the corporations and plaintiffs involved wereinvoking the Fifth Amendment.   Mr. Rubin tried to use this federal investigation to gethimself out of a 1984 lawsuit brought by one company that hadsought a loan through him. Pureline Hog Co. of Nevada, Iowa,sued in federal court in Denver to recover $300,000 it saidit had paid Mr. Rubin and a company he worked with, UnivestFinancial Fund Ltd., in 1981. In response, Mr. Rubin filed amotion to dismiss the case on Fifth Amendment grounds. In themotion, Mr. Rubin said that he was being investigated by&quot;various federal agencies for potential criminal violationsof the U.S. Code since 1984.&quot; The investigations were relatedto &quot;the practice of arranging third party guarantors forwould-be borrowers.&quot; The court rejected Mr. Rubin's FifthAmendment argument. In 1988 Mr. Rubin and Univest agreed to a$300,000 settlement with Pureline, but one of Pureline'sattorneys says the money was never paid. Pureline has sincegone out of business.   By 1984, Mr. Rubin was in Panama, where he quickly took upwith Mario Rognoni, a politician who later became Gen.Noriega's commerce minister. Mr. Rognoni, now a member of thePanamanian congress, says he introduced Mr. Rubin around townand helped get him a diplomatic posting -- as Panama'shonorary consul in Denver, which entitled Mr. Rubin to aconsular passport.   Messrs. Rubin and Rognoni and others soon startedTransnational Securities andamp; Investment, with Mr. Rubin as itsgeneral manager. Mr. Rognoni, whose shabby office suite isdecorated with bumper stickers, including one that says &quot;Therat race is over -- the rats won,&quot; insists he didn't knowmuch about the business. He says Mr. Rubin was in charge, andcalls the American &quot;a character.&quot;   That business, according to five former employees and adozen clients, changed little over time, even though the nameof the company Mr. Rubin said he was working for did.   Panama is no Wall Street, so the clients coming here tosee Mr. Rubin have tended to be would-be entrepreneurs whoseprojects have been turned down by U.S. banks or whosecompanies are in financial difficulty.   Eduardo Vallarino, Panama's ambassador to the U.S., saysthat while he has no evidence of any wrongdoing by Mr. Rubin,Panama's wide open business laws have sometimes led to abuse.&quot;It's a dismal legacy of our past,&quot; says Mr. Vallarino. &quot;Weare trying to get rid of all the fly-by-nights andre-establish Panama as a serious place to do business.&quot;   Clients say they generally found Mr. Rubin's companiesthrough ads in U.S. publications such as Forbes and CFOmagazine. Most clients say the ads that caught their eye wereactually placed by World Venture Partners, located in theDenver suburb of Westminster, whose general manager is RobertFisher, the man who Colorado newspapers said was indictedalong with Mr. Rubin in the 1979 case sealed by a statecourt. Mr. Fisher's lawyer says he has done nothing wrong.   Most of the clients say they flew to Denver to talk to Mr.Fisher and his associates at World Venture. Clients say theywere then referred to either Morgan Gundywhich succeededTransnational Securities in 1988-or Pan Global SecuritiesMarketing Corp., another Panamanian firm for which Mr. Rubinsays he worked as a consultant. World Venture sometimesarranged flight and hotel reservations, clients say.   In Panama, the clients say they met Mr. Rubin, generallyat either his fifth-floor office at Morgan Gundy or his25th-floor office about a mile away at Pan Global. Mr.Rubin's sales pitch typically lasted at least three hours,clients say, and thereafter, they signed a preliminaryunderwriting agreement and paid up-front fees ranging up to$50,000.   Clients say things quickly started going very wrong. Faxesand papers sent by courier somehow fail to arrive. Executivesat Pan Global and Morgan Gundy wouldn't come to thetelephone. Picayune mistakes were found in legal work, whichclients would have to resubmit.   &quot;It was always getting the final document, crossing theT's, dotting the I's,&quot; says Deems Pfaff, a Minneapolisentrepreneur, who says he lost $100,000 and spent a year withMorgan Gundy trying to register a $4.5 million stock offeringto develop a new road processing machine. &quot;They werecontinuously&quot; saying they hadn't received certain documents,Mr. Pfaff says.   Rogelio Arosemena, a lawyer, says that for the brief timehe worked at Morgan Gundy in 1989, the process of attemptingto register a company through Mr. Rubin cost a client about$65,000 before the client tended to get fed up and quit.   Services cost dearly. For instance, says Mr. Arosemena, atMorgan Gundy, clients were charged, in addition to theup-front fees, $25 a page for translations of documents. Thegoing rate is $10, lawyers in Panama say.   The head of Panama's version of the Securities andExchange Commission, Mr. Tejada Him, says Mr. Rubin's firmswent through the formality of registering a few securitiesofferings over the years, but that they never actually sold ashare of stock for anyone.   While in his letter to the Journal, Mr. Rubin says hefunctioned mostly as a consultant until ending hisassociation with Morgan Gundy in March of last year, Mr.Arosemena, the former Morgan Gundy employee, says that it wasMr. Rubin who controlled the bank accounts where money fromclients was deposited.   &quot;Rubin was the business,&quot; Mr. Arosemena says. &quot;He was themotor.&quot;   ---   Marj Charlier contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>