<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910923-0076</DOCNO><DOCID>910923-0076.</DOCID><HL>   Stiff Civil, Criminal Penalties Are Likely for Salomon   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1</SO><CO>   SB</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)INSIDER TRADING (ISD)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   NEW YORK -- Although Salomon Brothers Inc. has jettisonedtop executives, cooperated with government investigators andoverhauled its compliance procedures, the investment bank isstill likely to face stiff civil and criminal penalties inthe wake of its Treasury-auction bidding scandal.   Those penalties could include hundreds of millions ofdollars in fines and restitution and tough governmentsupervision of Salomon's trading activities.</LP><TEXT>   Legal experts and government officials say that thegovernment's investigation appears unlikely to end beforenext year because the probe has spread far beyond Salomonitself to a number of other Wall Street firms. That couldfrustrate the desire of Salomon Chairman Warren Buffet toquickly settle the auction scandal and put an end to a floodof bad publicity that threatens to erode the Salomon Inc.unit's business.   Meanwhile, individuals whom Salomon has linked to thewrongdoing are likely to face potentially stiff penalties andjail terms and will be under intense pressure to plea bargainwith prosecutors. Indeed, former Salomon Managing DirectorPaul Mozer, whom Salomon has said is the central figure inthe scandal, faces a jail term of more than 10 years underfederal sentencing guidelines if the government proves incourt that Mr. Mozer did everything Salomon has publicly saidhe did. Mr. Mozer's attorney, Lee Richards, calls thatsentencing estimate &quot;frankly ridiculous.&quot;   Mr. Buffett has told associates he believes that Salomonwill have reached a settlement with the government withinfive months. Mr. Buffett has also said Salomon hopes to faceonly civil fines, levied by the Securities and ExchangeCommission, and not criminal fraud penalties. Salomon is asubject of a criminal investigation by the Manhattan U.S.Attorney's Office and the Justice Department's AntitrustDivision.   But government officials say that while the investigationinto wrongdoing by Salomon and possibly others won't last aslong as the four-year probe into Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.,the latest investigation also won't end soon. &quot;We have tofigure out exactly what we're dealing with,&quot; says onegovernment attorney. &quot;There's a public interest in not havingthis go on for four years, but there's also a public interestin knowing what has gone on here and making sure that it isall cleaned up.&quot;   Drexel finally pleaded guilty to criminal violations andpaid $600 million in fines and restitution. But some Salomonofficials point out that, unlike Drexel, Salomon hascooperated almost from the start. Indeed, governmentofficials say their receipt of the results of Salomon'sinternal investigation, conducted by the New York law firmWachtell, Lipton, Rosen andamp; Katz, has markedly reduced the timeit will take to complete a federal investigation.   Cooperation and a willingness to overhaul top managementand compliance procedures resulted in lenient penalties forKidder, Peabody andamp; Co. in 1987. In a precedent-settingenforcement action, the SEC levied $25.3 million in penaltiesin return for Kidder's settling sweeping allegations of civilinsider trading, stock &quot;parking&quot; and other securities-lawviolations. The firm escaped criminal prosecution altogether.   But defense lawyers say that Salomon probably won't be sofortunate. For one thing, the landscape of public opinion haschanged markedly in the past four years and public andcongressional mistrust of Wall Street securities firms hasgrown. &quot;It would be hard for the Justice Department not tobring criminal charges in a circumstance where there has beenso much publicity about a case,&quot; says Elkan Abramowitz, a NewYork defense attorney.   In a recent article in the New York Law Journal, New Yorkdefense lawyer Jed Rakoff wrote that for cases in whichhighlevel management bore responsibility for criminal acts,there was an increasing tendency to bring criminal chargesagainst companies as well as individuals.   Salomon will argue that it shouldn't face criminalpenalties; a guilty plea to criminal charges would make itharder for the firm to do business with certain countries andstates. After all, Salomon insiders argue, why should Salomonshareholders and the firm's 9,000 employees be penalized forthe ill-fated actions of a handful of individuals?   Also, Salomon already faces dozens of lawsuits brought byinvestors who allege they have been harmed by Salomon'swrongdoing. This may lead the government to require Salomon,as part of any settlement, to set up a large restitution fundfor injured investors.   But prosecutors say that argument against bringingcriminal charges won't likely work. &quot;The only way to getcorporations to properly supervise is if they know they'llface stiff economic penalties if they don't,&quot; one prosecutorsays. &quot;Doing the right thing in the aftermath of wrongdoingreduces the amount of the penalty, but it doesn't reduce itto zero,&quot; he adds.   That theory is reflected in stiff new federal corporatesentencing guidelines that are set to take effect Nov. 1. Butthose guidelines, attorneys say, will probably only apply tocrimes committed after that date.   Still, having cooperated, Salomon will be in a much betterposition to settle with the government than will certain ofthe individuals whom the firm has publicly blamed for itsproblems. In news releases and submissions to Congress,Salomon has pinned most of the blame on Mr. Mozer, who headedSalomon's powerful government trading desk. The firm has alsopinned some of the blame on Thomas Murphy, also a formermanaging director on Salomon's government desk, and on HenryEpstein, a clerk on the desk, and Christopher Fitzmaurice, atrader.   Salomon has said Mr. Mozer masterminded a scheme to submitunauthorized bids in the names of several of its customers atseveral Treasury auctions from December 1990 to May 1991.Salomon hasn't quarreled with estimates by government and NewYork Stock Exchange officials that the scheme resulted inmillions of dollars of losses to other Wall Street firms,particularly from Salomon's efforts to &quot;squeeze&quot; otherparticipants in the May 1991 auction of two-year Treasurynotes.   If Mr. Mozer were to be found guilty at trial, and even ifhe were to plead guilty, tough federal sentencing guidelineswill apply to him. The guildelines, which apply only to casesin which the offense occurred after November 1987, prescribea range for how much time a defendant will spend in prison.Before the guidelines came into being, sentencing was leftlargely to a judge's discretion.   The guidelines have the virtue of providing judges with aset range of sentences based on a mathematical grid thattakes into account variables such as the amount of moneyinvolved in a fraud scheme, whether a weapon was used in aviolent crime, and whether the criminal was a repeatoffender.   Several criminal lawyers prepared guidelines calculationsfor this newspaper based on an analysis of what Salomon haspublicly said that Mr. Mozer has done wrong. If Mr. Mozerwere to be found guilty by a jury of everything Salomon hasclaimed, he would be sentenced to 121 months to 151 months inprison, or between 10 years, one month and 12 years, sevenmonths, they calculate. That sentence could be reduced 15%for good behavior.   The guidelines calculations assume that Mr. Mozer has noprior criminal record, that he did plan any crime in advance,did obstruct justice by tampering with trading records, anddid harm a financial institution. The estimates also assumethat losses by victims exceeded $80 million.   A guilty plea to everything that Salomon has alleged Mr.Mozer did wrong would reduce Mr. Mozer's potential sentenceto 97 to 121 months. The only way Mr. Mozer could avoid beingsentenced under the guidelines, if he believes he is guiltyor is found to be guilty, is if he makes a deal to pleadguilty to fewer crimes and if prosecutors believe he hasgiven &quot;substantial assistance in the investigation orprosecution of another person.&quot; That cooperation would give afederal judge discretion to depart from the guidelines.   Mr. Richards, the attorney representing Mr. Mozer whocalled the guidelines estimate obtained by this newspaper&quot;frankly ridiculous,&quot; added: &quot;First of all, your wholeanalysis is extraordinarily premature. It is far too earlyfor anyone to conclude that any criminal case is appropriate.Moreover, an analysis which results in any jail time -- leavealone a sentence approaching 10 years -- could only be basedon the kind of hysteria and inaccuracies which have typifiedthe public accounts of this matter over the last month and ahalf.&quot;   Attorneys say that Mr. Murphy, who had responsibility forsupervising the government trading desk, could be subject tothe same guidelines calculation, even if he was merely aparticipant in any wrongdoing and didn't mastermind thescheme. Charles Carberry, Mr. Murphy's attorney, wasn'tavailable to comment.   The guidelines make allowances for individuals whoseinvolvement in crimes is considered minimal. Salomon has saidthat Messrs. Epstein and Fitzmaurice had knowledge of some ofthe wrongdoing. But as junior employees on Salomon'sgovernment trading desk, Messrs. Epstein and Fitzmaurice,would be subject to much more lenient penalties.   Individuals involved in the investigation said that thetwo probably won't have to worry about the sentencingguidelines; they are likely to be granted immunity inexchange for their cooperation in the government's probe.Lawyers for both have declined to comment.</TEXT></DOC>