<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920116-0071</DOCNO><DOCID>920116-0071.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Head of Failed Texas Sandamp;L   Receives 20-Year Prison Sentence   ----   By Christi Harlan and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/16/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B7</SO><CO>   FORGN LABOR</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)</IN><NS>LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MIDLAND, Texas -- The former chairman of the long-defunctEmpire Savings andamp; Loan Association of Mesquite, Texas, wassentenced to 20 years in prison for his role in a costly andfraudulent loan scheme.   Spencer H. Blain Jr. was convicted in November ofconspiracy and other charges along with Dallas-area realestate speculators D.L. Faulkner and James L. Toler, who wereboth also sentenced to 20 years in prison. Former real estateappraiser Arthur Formann, who also was convicted in November,received a 10-year prison sentence.</LP><TEXT>   The sentences, handed down by federal Judge Lucius Bunton,capped one of the longest investigations and prosecutions ofthrift fraud in Texas.   Empire Savings collapsed in March 1984 after two years asthe leading lender in a scheme that poured $750 million intoland acquisitions and condominium developments alongInterstate 30, east of Dallas. The loans, based on fraudulentappraisals and borrowers' falsified financial statements, ledto the failures of at least five thrifts.   All of the defendants are expected to appeal theirconvictions. The sentences, which ranked among the heaviestin savings and loan cases, were described as &quot;fair&quot; by leadprosecutor Terry Hart, an assistant U.S. attorney fromDallas.   Mr. Faulkner was convicted of 42 charges related to thescheme. A one-time house-painter, Mr. Faulkner and hispartner, Mr. Toler, amassed hundreds of acres of land alongInterstate 30 and resold them at inflated prices to about 250buyers, most of whom later defaulted on their inflated loans.   Mr. Toler, who once served as mayor of the Dallas suburbof Garland, where many of the condominium developments werelocated, was convicted of 41 charges. Messrs. Toler andFaulkner used some of the proceeds from their real estatedeals to help Mr. Blain acquire control of Empire Savings in1982. Mr. Blain, who is now working as a window washer in LosAngeles, was convicted of 34 charges.   Mr. Formann, who worked as a federal thrift examiner andas chairman of another now-defunct thrift before becoming areal estate appraiser, was convicted of 21 charges. He wasone of three Dallas-area appraisers accused of assigningfalse values to land to support the inflated loans. Thecondominium financing scheme attracted the attention offederal investigators in late 1983, and the first of morethan 100 indictments was returned in 1985 by a federal grandjury in Dallas.   Mr. Blain, a former director of the Federal Home Loan Bankthat covered Texas thrifts, and six co-defendants wereindicted in October 1987. Their first trial, in 1989, endedwith a hung jury. Messrs. Blain, Faulkner, Toler and Formannwent on trial in Midland last year, and three otherco-defendants are still awaiting trial in Dallas.   Messrs. Faulkner, Toler and Blain were convicted ofviolating the federal anti-racketeering law, among the othercharges, and the jury found that they should forfeit a totalof $100 million in proceeds from the loan scheme. Theirlawyers asked Judge Bunton to reverse the racketeeringconvictions, but the judge declined.   ---   THIEVES FACE stiffer sentences for refusing to turn overstolen goods.   A judge may increase the prison sentence that a convictfaces if the judge finds the defendant has hidden the fruitsof the crime, the federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled.   The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that judgesin such cases aren't bound by the U.S. sentencing guidelines,which set a range of penalties depending on the crime and thedefendant's background. The court said the guidelines, whichtook effect in November 1987, failed to take such situationsinto account.   In the case before the court, three men were convicted ofstealing $3.7 million from customers of their own armored-carcompany. In giving the defendants substantially longer prisonsentences than the guidelines provided, the trial judge saidthe men &quot;obviously have this money stashed someplace wherethey at least expect it is beyond the reach of the governmentor those who were deprived of the money.&quot;   The defendants had argued that they were being penalizedfor refusing to incriminate themselves. But the appeals courtsaid that turning over the allegedly stolen money wouldn'thave been incriminating because it wouldn't have implicatedthe men in any crimes other than those of which they wereconvicted. The court said the return of the money wouldn'thave undermined the defendants' claim of innocence on appeal.   &quot;We don't believe the jail cell should be a way station onthe road to ill-gotten gains,&quot; the appellate panel said.   While upholding the ability of trial judges to increasepenalties in such cases, the appeals court sent thisparticular case back to the trial judge for resentencing. Thecourt said the trial judge must consider actual evidence ofwhether or not the defendants hid the money. &quot;While wesuspect that {the trial judge} is correct in thinking thatdefendants indeed have control over the money, appellantsshould have the opportunity to present evidence indicatingotherwise,&quot; the appeals court said.   Attorneys for the three defendants couldn't be reached forcomment.   (U.S. vs. Bryser et al., Second U.S. Circuit Court ofAppeals, Manhattan, 911220)   ---   BAR APPLICATION can't ask mental health history, groupclaims.   The 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act prohibitsemployers from quizzing applicants about mental problems,argues the Mental Health Law Project, an advocacy group inWashington. The group wants the D.C. Court of Appeals, whichlicenses bar members in the district, to stop askingapplicants whether they have ever been treated for mental,emotional or nervous disorders. Several bar applicantscomplained to the law project about the question, saidExecutive Director Leonard S. Rubenstein. The group'sconcerns were first reported in Legal Times, a trade journal.   &quot;You can't predict a person's conduct, except in the mostextreme cases, from their psychiatric records,&quot; Mr.Rubenstein said. He said the National Conference of BarExaminers, a Chicago group that handles applications for anumber of bars including Washington's, would be better offinterviewing an applicant's friends and associates aboutwhether the person is honest and responsible.   National Conference officials wouldn't comment, butsupporters of questioning applicants about their mentalhealth said the questions are used only as a tool. &quot;We wouldnever use a mental illness as a reason for not lettingsomeone in,&quot; said Jim Newes, character and fitnessadministrator for the Minnesota Board of Law Examiners. Butknowing about mental problems helps build a complete pictureof an applicant, supporters said.   Judith Rogers, chief judge of the D.C. appeals court, willreceive a recommendation from the court's admissionscommittee on how to deal with the issue later this month. Thepart of the disability law dealing with questions onapplications goes into effect this summer.   Lawyers who specialize in the disability act were dividedabout whether the law applies to licensing agencies, whichare not specifically mentioned in the act. Paul E. Starkman,a partner at Arnstein andamp; Lehr in Chicago, said the law coversstate and local governments, which would most likely includethe appeals court. But Tom Piekara, an associate in the NewYork law firm Jackson, Lewis, Schnitzler andamp; Krupman, notedthat the law applies mainly to employers.   State licensing agencies for physicians, real estateagents, teachers and other professionals also would beaffected if bar associations are. It is unclear how manycurrently inquire about applicants' mental health records,because each state does its own licensing.   ---   INTERNATIONAL COURT is proposed for drug cases and othercrimes.   A section of the New York State Bar Association issued areport calling for the creation of the court, arguing thatrecent changes in world politics have made such a court morefeasible and necessary. Currently there are internationallegal forums to deal with disputes between nations, but thereis no court to hear international criminal cases.   The bar association's Commercial and Federal LitigationSection recommended that the proposed court begin by focusingon narrow issues that are widely recognized as crimes ininternational treaties, such as hijacking, piracy and drugtrafficking.   Similar proposals have failed over the years. But the barsection's chairman, Mark H. Alcott, of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,Wharton andamp; Garrison, said that the disintegration of theSoviet Union and other former Soviet bloc countries &quot;hascreated a level of instability that might make this kind ofinstitution more desirable.&quot;   Mr. Alcott added, &quot;We do not fail to recognize that thereare going to be a lot of problems&quot; in setting up such acourt. For instance, the court would have to set standardsfor the rights of defendants, which differ in variouscountries' court systems.   James P. Linn, a defense attorney in Oklahoma City who hasrepresented such clients as Saudi financier Adnan Khashoggiand Imelda Marcos, former first lady of the Philippines, saidthat safeguarding defendants' rights would be a major hurdle.&quot;I would think that most American lawyers would be opposed,&quot;he said, to a system that didn't provide a jury trial andother protections guaranteed in the U.S.</TEXT></DOC>