<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900416-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>900416-0081.</DOCID><HL>   April Fool:   Tax Protesters Mail   False Income Reports   On Their Adversaries   ---   Phony Form 1099s List Sums   Supposedly Paid to Judges   Or Other Public Officials   ---   Indictments in New Mexico   ----   By Scott R. Schmedel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><GV>INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)</GV><LP>   FARMINGTON, N.M. -- This mile-high city of 37,000 has longbeen a stamping ground not only for folks of law-abidingindependence, but also for small bands of fervidly contrarytax protesters who do Uncle Sam out of his due as a matter ofprinciple.   And it's here, where New Mexico's sparsely settlednorthwest corner meets Arizona, Utah and Colorado, that thefirst details of an insidious new trick on the InternalRevenue Service are emerging. It's one that has led toindictments in this state as well as to criminalinvestigations nationwide.</LP><TEXT>   The tax collectors have long had to contend with cheatsand protesters who exaggerate the number of their dependentsor claim big contributions to spurious churches. But this newstrategy isn't designed to evade taxes.   These protesters are trying to turn one of the IRS's bestenforcement weapons, the Form 1099 report of income paid,against the tax agency itself -- and against anyone they havea grudge against.   Banks that pay interest, companies that pay dividends andother payers of nonwage compensation have to tell the IRSabout it, on a Form 1099. They also send a copy to therecipient. If the recipient doesn't reflect this income onhis federal tax return, an IRS computer flags thediscrepancy. The IRS then automatically sends a notice to thetaxpayer, and if he doesn't give a satisfactory explanation,an audit may result.   This matching program is an increasingly important elementof tax enforcement. Last year, the IRS got more than 750million 1099 income statements.   What the protesters do is file false 1099s reportingpayments of extravagant sums to unsuspecting law-enforcementand government officials, judges and private citizens, whowould be liable for huge taxes and penalties if the reportswere true. The purpose apparently is to provoke needlessaudits of the targets that could be costly and time-consumingboth for them and for the IRS. &quot;This could be a stick ofdynamite in the system,&quot; frets Lawrence B. Gibbs, a formerIRS commissioner.   &quot;People who do this are trying not only to disrupt the IRSbut our whole form of government,&quot; adds William L. Lutz, theU.S. Attorney in Albuquerque. For Mr. Lutz, it's not just aprofessional concern. He and the IRS received 1099 formsfalsely reporting the payment to him of $32,334,010.58 in1989.   In Albany, N.Y., New York State Tax Commissioner James W.Wetzler says he, four others in his department and anofficial of another state agency found copies of false 1099sin their mail a couple of months ago. He called the IRS. Mr.Wetzler says he is &quot;impressed by the speed with which the IRSgot on this case,&quot; but he declines to say more because of acriminal investigation that has resulted.   IRS officials in Washington don't want to talk about thescheme, either. Among the things they won't comment on is anindication that IRS Commissioner Fred T. Goldberg Jr. himselfhas been a target of a bogus 1099.   The IRS does say that since about a year ago, it hasidentified more than 2,000 fraudulent 1099s, received from atleast 92 sources. They have shown up in all seven of the IRSregions and in 22 of the 64 IRS districts. The tax agencysays it means to corral the culprits, and to that end isaggressively pursuing 40 criminal investigations in localesaround the country, which it won't name.   The first results of these investigations have been seenhere in New Mexico. A federal grand jury in Albuquerquehanded up indictments in February alleging the filing of 49false 1099s by four men and two women from the Farmingtonarea. The maximum penalty upon conviction is five years inprison and a $250,000 fine for each fraudulent 1099.   &quot;For anyone who thinks this is just a prank, theindictments in New Mexico ought to serve as a stern warning,&quot;says former IRS Commissioner Gibbs.   The IRS director of public affairs, Ellen Murphy, says theagency is concerned about a threat to the tax system. &quot;Wewant to make sure that the purity and integrity of tax dataare maintained, and we will take all necessary steps to dothat,&quot; she declares. IRS service centers have specialdetection units trained to spot suspicious documents beforethey get into the processing system, Ms. Murphy says. Sheurges taxpayers who receive questionable 1099s to call theIRS and ask to speak to a criminal investigator.   What sketchy details there are about the scheme come fromAlbuquerque, 180 miles southeast of here, and involveFarmington-area people with histories of resisting federaltaxation. False 1099s first popped up in New Mexico lastsummer during the tax-evasion prosecution of a couple whoeventually pleaded guilty of evasion in January. By February,when the grand jury issued the first false-1099 indictments(the couple weren't named), investigators had counted over140 phony forms.   Targets of false 1099s have included a federal judge inAlbuquerque, U.S. magistrates, IRS agents and current andformer federal prosecutors. In at least some instances, thedefendants listed themselves on 1099s sent to the IRS servicecenter in Austin, Texas, as payers of amounts ranging from$26,854.55 to $16,167,005.29.   Because both the IRS and the defendants are tight-lipped,it is not clear why a filer of a false 1099 would give hisown name, rather than a fictitious one, as the payer. Nor isit clear why the filer would list such a large sum, ratherthan a more plausible smaller sum.   On at least some 1099s, the filers had written &quot;requestdenied&quot; in the box for the target's Social Security number.There is a $50 civil penalty for failing to provide one'snumber for use on a 1099.   Two defendants are fugitives. The other four are in jailawaiting trials that may begin next month and that mayinvolve unorthodox defenses. Apart from rejecting any IRSclaims, the four refuse to recognize the authority of eitherthe grand jury or the federal court. They demand that theU.S. Attorney speak for them and not for the IRS. All fourstood mute at arraignments and refused legal aid; magistratesentered not-guilty pleas for them.   Defendant Jean R. Canon, a 47-year-old retired Air Forcemaster sergeant, once worked as a computer operator at SanJuan College in Farmington. He balked at having taxeswithheld from his pay and quit after the IRS put a levy onhis paycheck for back taxes three years ago. The indictmentaccuses him of fraudulently claiming on 1099s to have paidmillions of dollars to 16 recipients.   Besides a Farmington bank and two of its employees, thenamed recipients include the community college, itspresident, four trustees, and three college employees, amongthem the payroll clerk who carried out the IRS levy.   The payroll worker, Peggy A. Horner-Jenkins, says shebelieves the blow was aimed at the college, not her. &quot;I dowish this situation was over with,&quot; she says. &quot;You don't knowwhat they'll do next.&quot;   The chairman of the college board of trustees, SidneyMartin, also is the treasurer of San Juan County, whereFarmington is located. &quot;I didn't realize how serious thiscould be until I talked to my attorney,&quot; he recalls. &quot;Thenthe IRS agents told me I was lucky they got it {the 1099}before it got into the computer.&quot;   Mr. Canon is being held in a county detention center justnorth of Albuquerque. A self-assured man of medium height andbuild whose thinning dark hair falls toward thick glasses, hedenies in an interview there that he is part of any organizedgroup. He says he wants to know who is really behind theconfiscation of his property.   Discussion of 1099s is off limits. But he explains inconversational tones, &quot;They've been using racketeeringprocedures against me to avoid the truth from coming out. I'mthe injured party.&quot; He mentions that he is beginning to thinkthe IRS &quot;is a tool for somebody else -- maybe somebody higherup, maybe local.&quot;   Clinton P. Williams, 65, and his wife, Peggy R. Williams,are being held on charges of filing 1099s falsely reportingincome paid to Federal Judge Juan G. Burciaga of Albuquerque,who sentenced them to prison in 1984; U.S. Attorney Lutz, andfour other public servants. The Williamses were imprisonedafter a 1984 conviction for willfully failing to filereturns. In February, during a magistrate's routine initialpresentation of the false-1099 charges, Mr. Williams objectedto the proceedings so persistently that the magistrate hadhim gagged.   The other defendant in custody is Graigory David Olson.Officials say that the indictments against the two fugitivesare sealed.   Last week, the grand jury added to the indictments newcharges that the defendants filed false refund claims on taxreturns last fall. Mr. and Mrs. Williams claimed a refund of$136,384,080.10, Mr. Canon sought $29,004,625.24, and Mr.Olson filed for $159,146.96.   Reed L. Frost, a Farmington lawyer and part-time U.S.magistrate, received a 1099 for $16,167,005.29 from each ofthe Williamses, the indictments say. Musing generally overobsessive tax protesters here in the Four Corners plateaucountry, Mr. Frost says, &quot;We all need something that isimportant in our lives. I get the impression that this is acause in their lives, perhaps a moral issue.&quot;   Mr. Williams, an erstwhile Farmington real-estate man, andhis wife list a rooming house over a Main Street billiardparlor as their residence. But a nearby office behind theFrontier Barber Shop in a small one-story building is thecenter of their activities, and it may have yielded up to theIRS the secret of the 1099 scheme's origins.   Mr. and Mrs. Williams have been representatives of theNational Commodity and Barter Association, a Denver-basedorganization that advocates opposition to the federal incometax and that has engaged in running court battles with theIRS over a decade. At brief magistrate's hearings inAlbuquerque in March, an IRS investigator from Denver, BruceMason, testified that he had searched the couple's NCBAoffice last September. He said he found tax-protestliterature, copies of 1099s that the IRS service center hadreceived, a computer holding many names, and a variety ofoffice machines.   The investigator testified that he also foundvideocassettes explaining &quot;how to file 1099s against victimsthey don't agree with and how to submit them to the IRS toget their victims audited and any harassment that mighthave.&quot;   The IRS declines to say whether it has identified thesource of the videocassettes or to comment on whether theyare thought to be linked to the NCBA.   John Voss, the NCBA director, said in a telephoneinterview last week that he had been out of touch with Mr.and Mrs. Williams since at least the middle of last year andthat he hadn't heard about the Albuquerque indictments. &quot;That1099 thing is a new one on me,&quot; he said. &quot;There's nothing inour material about that kind of thing. It sounds like a kindof strange activity.&quot;   Here in Farmington, the glass door of the NCBA office islocked. On the wall just inside can be seen a big poster fora movie called &quot;Harry's War.&quot; The promotional pitch: &quot;The IRSwouldn't admit they made a mistake on Harry Johnson's taxesand Harry had no choice but to fight back.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>