<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910419-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>910419-0008.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>04/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   BUSH UNVEILED his blueprint to overhaul the nation'spublic school system.   The plan calls for voluntary national testing, thecreation of experimental public schools, parental choice ofschools and a social services corps to tackle problemsranging from malnutrition to drug abuse. Little new federalspending is involved in the proposal, which instead puts theburden on states, communities and educators. Democrats saidthey would work with Bush but accused him of waiting too longto address the issue.</LP><TEXT>   Nearly half of Washington state's teachers went on strikeafter the governor rejected pleas for higher pay, smallerclasses and more supplies.   ---   BAKER RETURNED to Israel for talks with Israeli andPalestinian leaders.   In his third Mideast peace mission in six weeks, thesecretary of state was to hold discussions today with PrimeMinister Shamir, who warned that any attempt to put pressureon Israel would be counterproductive. Meanwhile, Iraq turnedover to the U.N. information about its weapons, but U.S.officials claimed the disclosure was incomplete because itleft out nuclear material.   Iraqi and American officials slated a meeting in northernIraq to discuss ways to avoid accidental conflicts during theU.S. relief operation for Kurds.   ---   MOSCOW AND TOKYO FAILED to break a deadlock over disputedislands.   The impasse over the four islands, which the Sovietsoccupied at the end of World War II and which Japan says mustbe returned, cast a pall over Gorbachev's visit to Japan. Asenior Japanese aide said the dispute would have to beresolved before Tokyo gives the Soviets large-scale financialaid. In the Russian Republic, meanwhile, unions representing60 million workers scheduled a one-hour walkout next week topress economic demands.   Gorbachev is expected to meet today in South Korea withPresident Roh to discuss ways of reducing political tensionson the Korean peninsula.   ---   Researchers implanted a human gene into the lungs oflaboratory animals, an advance that may allow doctors toreplace defective genes that underlie several inheriteddiseases. The U.S. and French scientists said the techniquecould lead to a treatment for cystic fibrosis and hereditaryemphysema.   ---   The 1990 census missed more individuals -- bothproportionately and in absolute numbers -- than in 1980,undercounting the population by 2%, according to preliminaryfindings released by the Census Bureau.   ---   Soviet officials asked the Bush administration for $1.5billion in new federal credit guarantees for the immediatepurchase of U.S. corn and other commodities. The appealcleared up confusion over an earlier letter from Gorbachevthat had been interpreted as a request for $500 million innew credits.   ---   Air Force officials said the upper stage of an Atlasrocket carrying a Japanese broadcasting satellite tumbled outof control shortly after liftoff and was destroyed.Self-destruct commands were sent to the Centaur upper stagesix minutes after the rocket was launched last night inFlorida.   ---   The Bush administration made a second gun-controlconcession by signaling its willingness to ban somesemi-automatic assault weapons if Congress enacts certainprovisions of the president's crime bill.   ---   South Africa's president said he will propose legislationto form a standing commission on the factional violence inblack townships. De Klerk also announced plans for a two-daymeeting of government and political leaders next month todiscuss ways to end the fighting, but the opposition AfricanNational Congress rejected the idea.   ---   The IMF agreed to lend Poland about $2.5 billion to assistwith that country's transition toward a market economy. Thefunds include a three-year loan of $1.6 billion, $600 millionin contingency loans and $220 million to help offset theeffects of higher oil prices.   ---   Wrongful death claims were filed against the Navy by thefamilies of 37 sailors killed in a gun turret explosionaboard the USS Iowa two years ago, their attorney said. Theclaims, which total $2 billion, represent a challenge tolongstanding Supreme Court doctrine prohibiting such claimson behalf of American military personnel.   ---   NATO arms negotiators voiced optimism that Moscow seemsready to implement a historic treaty slashing conventionalweapons, opening the way to new discussions on reducing troopstrength. Some delegates in Vienna said a positive Sovietresponse could come within days at the 22-nation ConventionalForces in Europe talks.   ---   A Turkish Cypriot leader urged Greek Cypriots toacknowledge his community as a politically equal partner sothat negotiations can resume on reuniting Cyprus. Theprevious round of talks at the U.N. between the leader, RaufDenktash, and Cypriot President Vassiliou, representing GreekCypriots, broke down in March 1990.   ---   Salvadoran guerrillas attacked navy and police posts inthe seaside resort of La Libertad, and military officialssaid two of the rebels were killed. Negotiations are underway in Mexico on a cease-fire in the 11-year-old civil war inEl Salvador, which has claimed 75,000 lives.</TEXT></DOC>