<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910104-0129</DOCNO><DOCID>910104-0129.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Hospital Antitrust Verdict Is Reinstated   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Ann Hagedorn   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   MVL I.BNL LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)MEDICAL SUPPLIES (MDS)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENTS (RGU)BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   A federal appeals court reinstated a verdict against aFlorida hospital for violating antitrust laws by encouragingpatients and home health care providers to buy from itsmedical equipment supply business.   Defense lawyers in the case said the decision to reinstatethe $2.3 million verdict is a setback for hospitals that,faced with reductions in government reimbursements, havedepended increasingly on joint business ventures to generaterevenue.</LP><TEXT>   The case, involving Venice Hospital, a nonprofit, 312-bedhospital in Venice, Fla., is expected to prompt other medicalequipment dealers to file antitrust suits against hospitalsin other states.   A handful of similar cases already are pending around thenation but the ruling by the federal appeals court in Atlantais believed to be the first by an appeals court in such acase.   The appeals panel ruled that the hospital had violatedantitrust laws by conspiring to get home health careproviders to buy equipment from the hospital's joint venturecompany, Medicare Patient Aids Center. MPAC is jointly ownedwith Sammett Corp., a Fort Myers, Fla., company. Both weredefendants in the case and were held liable.   The suit was filed in 1985 by Venice Convalescent Aids, amedical equipment dealer in Venice. The company alleged thatits revenue dropped significantly after the hospital openedits own supply company. The trial judge overturned the juryverdict against the hospital. That decision was reversed bythe appeals panel.   William Kopit, a Washington attorney for Sammett and MPAC,said any hospital-related company has an advantage over itscompetitors. &quot;If that advantage is enough to establish anantitrust violation then hospitals with related businessesface an enormous risk,&quot; Mr. Kopit said. Mr. Kopit said hisclients have not decided yet whether to seek further reviewof the case.   Herbert Schwartz, a Melbourne, Fla., attorney for thehospital, said that more litigation can be expected from&quot;plaintiffs who don't want to have competition fromhospital-supported or subsidized businesses in towns wherethere was no competition before.&quot; Mr. Schwartz said hisclient would ask the appeals court to rehear the case.   But Christopher Kay, an Orlando attorney for theplaintiff, disputed Mr. Schwartz's analysis. &quot;We're notchallenging the right of hospitals to have joint ventures.We're challenging the way the hospital played the game. Itwas anti-competitive conduct,&quot; said Mr. Kay.   ---   CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY in New York is called a magnet forcorruption.   A 233-page report, released by the state's Organized CrimeTask Force, cited rampant evidence of extortion, violence,sabotage and price-fixing.   The industry has been infiltrated by gangsters and othercorrupt influences largely because it's so decentralized andinvolves so many contractors, subcontractors, labor unions,and city and state bureaucracies, the report says. Theculmination of four years of investigations, it calls forreforms of every stage of the business from the biddingsystem to corporate auditing requirements.   &quot;The industry's fragmented nature makes it fragile andsusceptible to corporate illegality and labor racketeering,&quot;said Task Force director Ronald Goldstock, at a newsconference in White Plains, N.Y. The report'srecommendations, he said, &quot;will make it possible for thefirst time in nearly a century to curb a pattern of predatorypractices.&quot;   Construction-related businesses, the report proposes,should be legally required to retain private firms to examinetheir procedures, contracts, and financial records.Government intervention in the private sector isn'tunprecedented, said Mr. Goldstock, citing the Securities andExchange Commission's requirement that securities firms hireoutside auditors.   To help liberate the unions from alleged gangsterdomination, the report calls for a state &quot;Office of UnionMembers Advocacy,&quot; where union members could reportsuspicious practices to an ombudsman without fear ofretaliation from union bosses. The office would &quot;be expectedto support investigations, review questionable collectivebargaining provisions and undertake litigation before thestate Department of Labor,&quot; the report says.   Also, the state law allowing lowest bidders to wincontracts should be changed, said Mr. Goldstock. &quot;Quality ofwork as well as the bid should be considered in the awards,&quot;he said, &quot;and there should be negotiation among those withthe lowest bids.&quot;   The investigations and report, requested by New York Gov.Mario Cuomo in 1985, cost about $500,000.   The cost of implementing its recommendations, said Mr.Goldstock, will be minimal in part because much can beaccomplished by reconfiguring existing agencies.   ---   ALTERNATIVE TO MANVILLE TRUST's revised payment plan isproposed.   At a hearing in federal court in Brooklyn, an attorney forabout 6,000 asbestos victims, proposed that most paymentsfrom the Manville Personal Injury Trust be delayed untilJanuary 1996. Theodore Goldberg said the delay would helpinsure there will be enough money in the trust to pay morethan 150,000 claims. A plan presented by court-appointednegotiators calls for payments to begin as soon as possible.   Mr. Goldberg only outlined his counterproposal. It woulddelay payments to all victims, except those who can showserious hardship, until it can be determined how much moneywill have to be dispersed. Mr. Goldberg is expected topresent his full plan Jan. 11.   Two weeks of hearings are being held to determine whethera plan for restructuring trust payments is fair to the trust,defendants and asbestos claimants. Federal Judge Jack B.Weinstein is presiding over the hearings that will continuetoday in Washington and move to New Orleans, San Franciscoand conclude in Brooklyn.   The trust was established in 1988 with about $2.5 billionin assets, but ran out of cash after underestimating thenumber of victims. Under the revised plan presented late lastyear, about $650 million will be paid out from dividendsearned from Manville Corp. common stock held by the trust.The plan also stipulates that the most seriously ill victimswould be paid first. Once the victims receive 45% of theclaims, payment would stop until all other victims received45% of their claims.   Mr. Goldberg said he was troubled by the possibility thatthe dividend payments might drain assets from Manville. Hesaid he feared that the trust would eventually be unable topay many claimants. He also said the two-tier payment plandiscriminated unfairly against claimants by paying seriouslyill victims first and that claimants should be able to voteon the plan.   Judge Weinstein seemed lukewarm to the counterproposal.   &quot;There are many families and plaintiffs who are suffering. . . and in desperate need of funds who won't be classifiedfor payment during the six-year period,&quot; he said.   ---   PAUL A. BILZERIAN'S conviction is upheld by federalappeals court.   Mr. Bilzerian, a major player in the takeover frenzy ofthe 1980s, was found guilty in 1989 of nine counts ofmarket-related crimes, including securities fraud, conspiracyto commit tax fraud, and filing false disclosure statementsto the SEC. Jurors found that he had amassed millions ofdollars in 1985 and 1986 by skirting securities laws inunsuccessful raids on Cluett, Peabody andamp; Co., H.H. Robertson andamp;Co. and Hammermill Paper Co., and in an undisclosedinvestment in Armco Inc.   The 41-year-old dealmaker and former chairman of SingerCo. was sentenced to four years in prison and fined $1.5million.   Mr. Bilzerian, who has been free on bail since thesentencing, could not be reached at his Tampa, Fla., home.His attorney also could not be reached.   In the appeal, Mr. Bilzerian's attorneys argued, amongother things, that his constitutional rights were violatedwhen the presiding judge denied him the chance to raise agood-faith defense without waiving the confidentiality of hisdiscussions with his attorneys.   The defense's strategy was to maintain that Mr. Bilzerianacted in the &quot;good faith&quot; belief of the legality of hisactions.   ---   CONGRESSIONAL PANEL must return papers to state officials,judge rules.   Citing the sovereign rights of states guaranteed by theConstitution, a Chicago federal judge ordered the U.S. HouseBanking Committee to return to Illinois bank regulatorsconfidential examination reports.   The state's reports concern the Chicago branch of BancaNazionale del Lavoro, an Italian bank whose Atlanta branch isunder investigation for making allegedly secret andunauthorized loans to Iraq.   Ruling that Congress has &quot;shamefully failed to . . .recognize the sovereignty of Illinois,&quot; Judge Brian BarnettDuff issued a preliminary injunction forbidding the FederalReserve System's Board of Governors from turning over any ofthe Illinois reports to the House committee.   Under an information-sharing agreement between the stateand the Fed, the Board of Governors may not turn overstate-provided information to any party without writtenpermission from the state agency that supplied it. TheCongressional committee subpoenaed the confidential documentsfrom the Fed's Board.   Judge Duff said the committee should have directlysubpoenaed the state, which could then fight the subpoenathrough channels provided by Congress.   A spokesman for House banking committee said the committeesubpoenaed the records from the Fed because it was easier andbecause the committee thought the Fed had the ultimateregulatory responsibility.   William Conaghan, who represents the state bankingregulators, said the state does not mind turning over thereports to the House committee, but would prefer a directsubpoena to insure confidentiality.</TEXT></DOC>