<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910107-0145</DOCNO><DOCID>910107-0145.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   Recessions Create Opportunities --   If You Break the Rules   ----   By Gideon Argov</HL><DATE>01/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><LP>   Late in 1989 -- well before the pundits began to declarethat a business slowdown was in the cards -- our firm'ssenior managers spent three days of intense discussion awayfrom the daily demands of the business. Lacking a crystalball, we did not know exactly what the future would bring. Wedid know, however, that sometime soon the longest peacetimeeconomic expansion of the century would come to a halt.   We also knew -- all too well -- that as an LBO, ourmanufacturing company would be more vulnerable than most toany economic slowdown. The crush of debt makes running an LBOakin to flying an aircraft extremely fast and low above theground; the terrain is not always flat, and an economicdownturn magnifies the difficulties. We decided then andthere to make contingency plans for a recession.</LP><TEXT>   In our discussions, I asked each of our business unitmanagers to use their years of experience to reconstruct howorganizations have failed in reacting to recessions. Theresulting &quot;myths&quot; spawned a simple list of action items thathave guided our thinking since that off-site meeting, andthat have enhanced our competitive position in this time ofuncertainty.   Myth 1: Share the pain by making cuts across the board.   Reality: This &quot;incremental&quot; philosophy is a recipe fordisaster. The truth is that recessions create windows ofopportunity that do not open during a time of economicexpansion. Especially in mature, slow-growth industries, adownturn can be a crucible that changes longstandingcompetitive balance within an industry. The key is tounderstand not only the impact of a recession on your ownsales prospects, but also on your customers and competitors.With that in mind, we chose to adopt diametrically opposedreactions at different business units.   At our surveying instrumentation company, we recognizedthat investing precious dollars in attempts to shift marketshare in a highly fragmented distribution channel would beprohibitively expensive. Thus, despite the fact that our costposition was already the lowest in the industry, we decidedto hunker down. In the last year, we have slimmed down thenumber of employees at that division by over 50%, and thebusiness remains profitable.   At our power and motion control company, we adopted atotally different strategy involving aggressive investment insales and marketing. To many of our competitors in thatbusiness, the segment we concentrate on is not theirprincipal business. We surmised that in a recession, some ofthese firms would disinvest in customer service and createfertile ground for our sales managers. That is exactly whathas happened, and our new regional offices -- staffed by someof the best salespeople in the industry -- have paid forthemselves in less than one year.   Myth 2: Delay all major projects involving discretionaryspending, both capital and noncapital.   Reality: This is analogous to burning your furniture inorder to stay warm. It may feel deceptively good for a while,but the long-term effects can be devastating.   It is true that some discretionary dollars can and shouldbe curtailed. Outside consultants, expensive meetings andsome trade shows are obvious candidates. Product development,however, takes on an added importance in a downturn. Thereason is obvious, but often overlooked: In a downturn,customers are more selective and more likely to stressprice-performance characteristics in choosing products. Undersuch circumstances, it is possible to break the inertialbonds of longstanding customer relationships and muscle in onlucrative new business. In the short term, this may seem likean expensive way to solicit new customers. However, any newbusiness that is so garnered will likely pay large dividendsonce business improves, and your new customers ramp up theirorders.   Myth 3: Hang on to any customer at any cost.   Reality: The rule here should be simple: If the potentiallong-term payback in increased business does not justify thecosts of servicing marginal customers, consider dropping someof these.   At our company, the notion of &quot;firing&quot; a customer was atfirst greeted with great suspicion. The idea that everycustomer somehow contributes toward one's fixed costs isdeeply rooted among managers. During a recession, however, itis doubly clear that in some cases a simple analysis of fullyallocated costs -- including a realistic application of SGandamp;A(sales and general administration) costs -- reveals that somecustomers are consistently unprofitable.   When the division president conducted this analysis at ourplastic molding operation, he was amazed to report that 70%of our volume and 100% of our profits were generated by 30%of our customers. Even adjusting for those smaller customerswho merited nurturing because of their longterm prospects, hesuggested a radical approach: &quot;firing&quot; over half of ourcustomers and simultaneously reorganizing the business so asto wring out overhead and SGandamp;A costs. As a result, thecompany will concentrate its efforts on servicing thosecustomers who are prepared to pay their way -- and guaranteeus sufficient sales volume -- and will be more profitable toboot.   Myth 4: Beat up on suppliers to obtain price concessions.   Reality: Such an attitude will only guarantee that as soonas business picks up, your suppliers will use the opportunityto get back at you by raising price. A more intelligentresponse is to use the recession as an opportunity toredefine supplier relationships.   Our humidity instrumentation company is a criticalcustomer to its supplier of sensors, a key component in theend product. Rather than concentrating on pricing issues, weused this past year to lock up this important technology witha five-year contract. In return, the supplier/partner hasagreed to scale down our minimum order requirement, enablingus to reduce inventories. In addition, it has agreed to grantus exclusive rights in Europe. This was a far more productiveoutcome than obtaining a (temporary) cut in price, and willinstead improve our competitive position over the long haul.   The common denominator in all these situations is to usethe opportunity of a recession to look at business with afresh -- and contrarian -- viewpoint. In our case, being anLBO made the need for such a reexamination all the morecritical. If you are able to buck the conventional wisdomwith creative, lateral thinking, you may find the currenteconomic environment more of an opportunity and less of athreat.   ---   Mr. Argov is president and CEO of High VoltageEngineering, a Boston-based manufacturer of industrialcontrols, instrumentation and electronic components.</TEXT></DOC>