<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910129-0056</DOCNO><DOCID>910129-0056.</DOCID><HL>   Blue-Collar Boon:   Hourly Auto Workers   Now on Layoff Have   A Sturdy Safety Net   ---   Corporate Benefits Give Many   85% of Pay for 3 Years,   Unlike in Past Recessions   ---   Cost Burden for the Big Three   ----   By Gregory A. Patterson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR GM F C</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)</IN><LP>   FLINT, Mich. -- The starkest symbols of the 1981-82recession were auto workers out of a job, out of money andout of hope. After exhausting their unemployment benefits andseeing their families reduced to poverty, thousands pulled upstakes to start anew far from the Midwest.   Now the nation and the auto industry are mired inrecession again, and Bruce Gardner is feeling the effectsagain. The veteran auto worker was laid off by General MotorsCorp. last month because of plunging demand for the ChevroletBlazer that he and 1,500 co-workers built here in Flint. Andbecause GM is consolidating some assembly plants in a hugecorporate downsizing, Mr. Gardner almost certainly won't becalled back to work until 1993.</LP><TEXT>   So is Mr. Gardner in despair? Hardly. His daughter willwear an expensive dress for this spring's high-school prom,he promises, and he will pay her bill at X-ray technicianschool this fall. &quot;If security is in money,&quot; the 41-year-oldMr. Gardner says, &quot;then I feel pretty secure.&quot;   For good reason. Thanks to the contract that GM signedwith the United Auto Workers union last fall, he will getunemployment benefits of $457 a week -- about 85% of hisregular take-home pay -- for up to three years. A decade ago,a worker with Mr. Gardner's job tenure could expect only 52weeks of benefits. And many got less because the auto makers'unemployment-benefit funds, which supplement state joblessbenefits, ran out of money.   But now these corporate funds are better financed. Morethan 100,000 Big Three workers laid off either temporarily orindefinitely will get the same amount as Mr. Gardner for justas long, unless, of course, they are called back to work orfind another job. The length and level of benefits, as wellas the number of people covered, are unparalleled in Americanindustry.   The agreement &quot;is probably the most extensive job-securityprogram in the free industrial nations,&quot; boasts Stephen P.Yokich, the UAW vice president who led the union'snegotiators. That smacks of hyperbole, but independentexperts essentially agree. &quot;This is clearly unprecedentedcoverage for a major union,&quot; says Harley Shaiken, a professorof labor studies at the University of California at SanDiego. &quot;What they won is very important, and it does providesome very real protection.&quot;   Another 22,750 American auto workers don't get thesebenefits, but they are faring well nonetheless. They work inthe eight Japanese assembly plants in the U.S., all of themnew since 1980. At these &quot;transplants,&quot; no-layoff policieskeep workers on the job even though some of the plants arerunning below capacity.   All this helps explain why, so far at least, theindustrial Midwest is weathering the recession much betterthan the Northeast or the West Coast. That's a sharp contrastwith the 1980s, which, for blue-collar America, weredreadful. Hundreds of thousands of people lost unskilled buthighly paid factory jobs as smokestack industries inAmerica's heartland squeezed down to size. Detroit's BigThree auto makers alone have gone from 750,000 hourly workersbefore 1980 to just 450,000 today.   But the income safety net now protecting those 450,000 isso elaborate that a couple of hundred workers whom GM laidoff in Flint in 1987, and who haven't worked since then,recently started getting another 52 weeks of nearly full payin addition to their previous benefits. In many ways, theauto industry's blue-collar workers now have more protectionthan the nation's white-collar middle managers. Althoughauto-industry managers typically receive severance benefitsif laid off, their benefits, unlike those for hourly workers,aren't guaranteed by a contract and generally don't run aslong.   Blue-collar auto workers get more protection, perhaps,than the companies can prudently afford. In the 1990 fourthquarter, analysts estimate, General Motors lost about $1.4billion, the largest quarterly net operating loss eversustained by a car company. Ford Motor Co. could report afourth-quarter loss as big as $500 million, analysts say, andChrysler Corp. will break even at best despite 18 months ofexcruciating cost cutting.   One big reason for the setbacks: The new contract'sunemployment benefits make labor, for the first time, a fixedcost. In essence, the auto companies are committed to payinghourly workers even if they don't work for extended periods-- a situation derided by some securities analysts andeconomists. &quot;Corporate welfare for able-bodied andable-minded individuals can only accentuate the problems andthe demise of uncompetitive companies,&quot; says David Littmann,senior economist at Manufacturers National Bank in Detroit.   Others take a less hostile view. For 45 years, says SeanMcAlinden, a University of Michigan labor economist,Detroit's auto makers made an implicit promise to workers:Though they might be laid off in a recession, they would berecalled when conditions improved. The permanent shrinkage ofthe 1980s changed that.   &quot;When you break an implicit promise that you've had for 45years, you have to pay,&quot; Mr. McAlinden says. &quot;Workers aren'twilling to risk these kinds of layoffs any more unless theyget {income} guarantees.&quot; At one GM parts plant, workersstruck for about a week last August over job-security issuesand forced the temporary close-down of some plants.   Mr. McAlinden's view is generally seconded by Mr. Gardner,the laid-off worker, who says he's sorry GM is losing so muchmoney. But he believes that workers such as himself shouldn'tbear all the pain of recessions, especially now that GM ispreaching teamwork and asking employees to help raise qualityand cut costs.   &quot;GM is asking us to give more effort, and this contractpays for that contribution,&quot; Mr. Gardner says. &quot;If GM saysthe workers are the most important thing, then they shouldtreat us like it.&quot;   Mr. Gardner knows the pain of recession first-hand, havingborne two long layoffs. In 1979, he was out for six months,then recalled just before his benefits ran out. In 1981-82,he was laid off 10 months. He got only six months ofsupplemental unemployment benefits and, because the &quot;SUBfund&quot; was low, just 75% of take-home pay instead of the 95%he was entitled to. And his wife wasn't working.   The Gardners were strapped. Unable to afford payments onboth their small vacation cottage in northern Michigan andtheir three-bedroom house in Flint, they sold the house andmoved to the cottage; it is in an area where living ischeaper, but lacked many of the larger house's amenities.   In early 1982, Mr. Gardner was recalled to work, but thefamily didn't have enough money or confidence to return toFlint. So for a year, he drove to work 220 miles round-tripevery day. Finally, in June 1983, the couple decided to sellthe cottage and buy a house in Flint. Now, Mr. Gardner isselling that house -- not because of economic hardship butbecause he and his wife are getting a divorce.   So, laid off again, Mr. Gardner spends many days hangingout with his buddies at the local union hall, a red-brickstructure near the factory. He also does volunteer work, someof it for an organization that prepares plans to respond tohazardous-waste spills. And to keep busy, he works withoutpay for a friend with a firewood business.   It's a more comfortable life than he had in 1981 and 1982,but it isn't very satisfying. &quot;The contract gives you money,and yes, you aren't bad off, but where's the dignity inlife?&quot; he says. &quot;I have to go out and search for that now.&quot;   Paid idleness affects different workers in different ways.&quot;Let them tell me I could retire tomorrow with full benefits,and I'd be gone,&quot; says Richard Pearson, chief steward at UAWLocal 7, which represents workers at Chrysler's now-shutteredassembly plant in Detroit's depressed east side. &quot;Any timeyou get something for nothing, it's good. This is somethingfor nothing. This is good.&quot;   Mr. Pearson is a 51-year-old who worked at Chrysler for 26years. He expects to return to work in 1992, when Chryslercompletes the plant it is building to replace the 84-year-oldfactory where he worked until it was closed last year. LikeMr. Gardner, this divorced father of three hangs out at hisunion hall, which has become a coffee house of sorts.   It also has become a place of mourning, on many days.Since the plant closed last February, 51 of his co-workershave died, a toll that officials of the plant'semployee-assistance department attribute in part to thestress of being out of work.   As the death toll mounted last fall, the union sponsored a&quot;Health Day,&quot; during which laid-off workers got freeblood-pressure and cholesterol examinations and were urged toseek professional help for their adjustment problems. Thecompany and union try to reduce the pressures by encouragingworkers to keep busy. For laid-off workers, Chrysler pays forcourses ranging from computer programming to truck driving.   That program has helped Jimmy Bishop, another laid-offChrysler worker, who has taken a lot of the courses. At 53years, he is a short, wiry man who can't sit still. He hasfixed everything around his house that needs fixing. Hereroofed the garage, retiled the basement and replacedwindows. He learned to drive an 18-wheel truck. But thelayoff still drives him nuts. &quot;When you're used to doingsomething every day, and then all of sudden it's stopped,it's almost like being in prison,&quot; he says.   But it's better than suffering the privation that manyauto workers endured a decade ago. Gladys Thedford, a Flintworker hit by the same GM layoff as Mr. Gardner, attests tothat.   The 44-year-old, childless divorcee says she still will beable to visit relatives in Alabama and Georgia while she islaid off over the next couple of years. And she won't have tosell her favorite toy, a fully paid-for 1985 Chevy Corvette,to meet her bills, including the $600 monthly payment on herranch house. The house, bought three years ago, is the firstshe has ever owned. &quot;If it weren't for this contract,&quot; shesays, &quot;I'd have a `for sale' sign in my yard right now.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>