<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900703-0134</DOCNO><DOCID>900703-0134.</DOCID><HL>   Workplace:   Rule Changes   For Pensions:   Who Gets What   ----   By Selwyn Feinstein   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   LABOR TAXES</CO><IN>CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><GV>INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)</GV><LP>   Once again, Uncle Sam is trying to tell companies how todesign retirement benefits that aren't slanted in favor ofthe bosses.   Job hoppers, mid-level executives and the young probablyare going to take it on the chin. Lower-level employees closeto retirement are apt to come out ahead. And executives atthe very top could well emerge unscathed.</LP><TEXT>   That's the opinion of benefit consultants who have poredover the 300-plus pages of proposed retirement-planregulations recently issued by the Internal Revenue Service.   The rules are designed to carry out a policy goal firstenunciated by Congress almost 50 years ago and rewritten bythe Tax Reform Act of 1986: Tax-favored retirement plans mustnot discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees.For 1990, that means those earning more than $85,485 a year,or $56,990 if they are in the top 20% of a company's earners.   The IRS has been working on the rules for three years.Benefit experts say many companies should have little troublecomplying with the proposed new regulations. Most other firmswill get by with what Donald E. Sullivan, a vice presidentand director of consultant Towers Perrin, terms &quot;tinkering.&quot;   Such tinkering almost certainly will mean somewhat richerpensions for older, lower-paid employees who are close toputting in for their gold watch.   On the other hand, at companies aiming to hold overallretirement costs where they are now, these boosts at thebottom could be funded by somewhat smaller packages foremployees with bigger pay checks and those who switch jobs.The highest paid certainly will be hit; the 1986 act puts alimit, $209,200 for 1990, on the earnings that can be used incomputing tax-favored retirement benefits.   Still, employers anxious to attract and retain topexecutives could move some of these lost retirement benefitsout of the qualified plans covered by the new IRS rules intoso-called nonqualified plans that, in most cases, are riskierunfunded corporate IOUs.   But there is a Catch 22 that could hit mid-levelexecutives. Another piece of federal legislation, theEmployee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or Erisa,dictates that only the highest-ranked managers may be offeredunfunded retirement plans, Mr. Sullivan says. All otheremployees must have pensions secured by squirreled-awaysecurities or cash. So, while top bosses could get backthrough unfunded plans whatever the new rules cost them,mid-level managers and professionals will have to contentthemselves with only the tax-qualified plans that theproposed regulations are likely to tilt in favor of the rankand file.   Just who gains and who gets hit and how much depends onhow companies rewrite their retirement-plan formulas toconform to the new rules and on how aggressively they pushErisa definitions to broaden the coverage of unfunded plans,says Ethan E. Kra, a managing director of William M. MercerInc., a benefits consulting firm.   For companies aiming to maintain their current retirementcosts, he says, the list of potential losers could includeanyone earning something more than $50,000 a year (a likelybreak point between those apt to get richer benefits underthe new rules and those likely to be cut) but less than$85,000 a year (the lowest salary level to which evenaggressive employers are likely to extend unfunded retirementplans).   At many companies, the losers could stretch to thoseearning as much as $120,000 a year. And even thehighest-ranked managers could be forced to bear some of thecost at corporations that decide now is not the time forrampant executive greed.   Substantial tax benefits are offered to companies thatplay by the new rules, known generally as the proposed401(a)(4) regulations (though far more provisions of theInternal Revenue Code are actually involved). A company incompliance can take a deduction on its income tax return forthe money it pays into a qualified retirement plan. Theplan's earnings aren't taxed, and workers aren't subject toany tax until they start receiving the benefits when theyretire or otherwise leave.   The nonqualified plans that Erisa allows for top managers,by contrast, would be taxable to workers immediately if anybenefits were vested and fully secured in a trustee's hands.But companies generally help their executives duck the taxliability until they leave by offering cashless promises thataren't backed by any secured trust.   The proposed 401(a)(4) rules and the other accompanyingnew regulations, which are scheduled to become fullyeffective next year but must be used as guidelines now, offercompanies seven &quot;safe harbors&quot; that the IRS says would &quot;letmost pension plans comply with little or no difficulty.&quot;   Most defined-contribution plans, where companies add aspecific amount or percentage of pay or profits to a worker'saccount each year, would fit into one of the safe harbors.Also fitting this class would be 401(k) savings plans withmatching employer contributions.   More problematic are defined-benefit plans, particularlythose tied to Social Security benefits, that promiseemployees a specific payment when they retire based on theirwages and years of service. At most major employers,defined-benefit plans are the principal retirement vehicles.   The problem arises because the IRS has denied a safeharbor for plans that promise workers a company-paid benefitminus a portion of what they will receive from SocialSecurity, the approach adopted by many firms.   Thomas C. Butterworth, a partner at consultant HewittAssociates, says companies generally believe this offset forSocial Security is fair because &quot;they contribute to SocialSecurity and want credit for it.&quot;   Social Security offset still is permitted, but companiesfirst will have to undertake some elaborate tests to confirmthat the nondiscrimination goal is met.   Companies with defined-benefit plans looking for a safeharbor have two other basic formulas for ensuring they aren'tdiscriminating in favor of highly compensated employees.   According to James G. Durfee, a Towers Perrin vicepresident, one formula allows an employer to promise apension based on pay minus a percentage of the average wagebase used in assessing Social Security taxes, all multipliedby years of service. The second permitted formula adds apercentage of the Social Security wage base to a percentageof pay in excess of Social Security wages, also multiplied byyears of service.   Frederick W. Rumack, director of tax and legal servicesfor Buck Consultants, says switching from the old formula toeither of the newer ones could hit job switchers hardestbecause the old pension tables generally permitted moregenerous payments to early retirees and job hoppers than thenew rules would allow.   Similarly, increases in the Social Security wage base overthe years could hurt younger workers, says Solomon A.Weinberger, a Mercer managing director.   Bottom-ranked workers could gain if companies establishminimum pension payments to conform to the newnondiscrimination rules or round up annuities for low-paidworkers.   But before settling who gets what, companies will have todecide how big a retirement load they want to carry andwhether it is to be more than, less than or the same as theyare spending now. And that will determine how much retireeswill see in future pension checks.</TEXT></DOC>