<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910131-0064</DOCNO><DOCID>910131-0064.</DOCID><HL>   Sluggish Agency:   Is Brady's Treasury   Up to Doing Its Job?   Many People Doubt It   ---   Bank Overhaul and Recession   Need a Forceful Secretary,   They Say, and He Isn't One   ---   A List of Missed Opportunities   ----   By David Wessel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BANKS (BNK)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The success of President Bush's ambitiousplan to restructure the banking system, outlined in his Stateof the Union address Tuesday night, will depend in large parton the strength and skill of the U.S. Treasury Department.But on Wall Street, on Capitol Hill and even inside the Bushadministration, many are wondering whether Nicholas Brady'sTreasury is up to the task.   The reason is that as the nation's economic problems havemounted over the past two years, the Treasury has oftenseemed asleep at the switch.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I'm concerned about what seems to me to be a weakening inthe numbers and depth of staff talent in the Treasury,&quot; saysPaul Volcker, the former chairman of the Federal ReserveBoard. Merton Miller, a 1990 Nobel Prize winner in economics,is even more pointed: &quot;I hope you will join me in my campaignto get an ambassadorship for Secretary Brady.&quot;   With a triple threat of war, recession and a ravagedbanking system now troubling the nation, strong leadershipfrom Treasury is more important than ever. &quot;We are in themiddle of a mine field,&quot; says Alan Stoga, managing directorof Kissinger Associates, a consulting firm. &quot;It's not clearwho, if anybody, has a map. That traditionally is one of theroles of the Treasury. It isn't playing that role.&quot;   Consider the following:   -- To an unprecedented degree, the Treasury has cededcontrol of tax policy to White House Budget Director RichardDarman. Neither Mr. Brady nor his top aides can cite a singleelement of the huge tax increase embodied in last year'sbipartisan deficit-reduction agreement for which the Treasurywas primarily responsible. And now President Bush, rejectingMr. Brady's advice and accepting that of Mr. Darman and WhiteHouse Chief of Staff John Sununu, is renewing his push forreducing the capital-gains tax.   -- The G-7 process established by former TreasurySecretary James Baker in 1985 to coordinate seven industrialnations' economic policies has atrophied under SecretaryBrady. He has shown a surprising lack of interest, eventhough rising interest rates overseas threaten U.S. economicgrowth. With more U.S. leadership, the current &quot;extremes ofJapanese and German interest rates might have been avoided,&quot;contends Anthony Solomon, a former Treasury undersecretaryand former president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank.&quot;We haven't pushed. Why? I don't know.&quot;   -- The Treasury single-handedly delayed the nomination ofa new member of the Federal Reserve Board for six crucialmonths. As a result, the administration's efforts to persuadeFed policy makers to ease credit rapidly were less successfulthan they might have been.   -- A long-promised plan for restructuring the corporateincome tax, originally promised last April, is still nowherein sight. Within the White House, the Treasury is sometimesdescribed as &quot;a black hole&quot; into which policy initiativesdisappear.   -- The Treasury's skills at dealing with a DemocraticCongress are thin. The department failed to persuade theCongress to appropriate additional money for thesavings-and-loan rescue before the legislators adjourned lastyear, thereby adding as much as $1 billion to the ultimateprice tag of the bailout. And the Treasury's full-court pressto yank jurisdiction for stock-index futures from theCommodity Futures Trading Commission failed last year in theface of bipartisan opposition, despite Mr. Brady's assertionsthat this switch was essential to assure stable markets.   Next week, the Treasury will unveil the most ambitiousplan for restructuring the banking system since the New Deal,a proposal to shore up the deposit-insurance fund, streamlineregulation and expand bank powers. Administration officialsterm reform of the banking system essential to the economy'slong-term health, but it isn't at all clear that itsproposals -- or even a reasonable facsimile -- will passCongress.   Mr. Brady is reassuring. &quot;Time and tide are with us,&quot; hesays. But other Treasury officials are already loweringexpectations. &quot;I'm confident we're going to be doing theright thing in proposing it,&quot; says Deputy Treasury SecretaryJohn Robson. &quot;But I can't tell you right today whether thewindow is open or not.&quot;   To be sure, Mr. Brady won praise early on for tacklingtough issues in a quiet way. His team addressed the Sandamp;Lproblem after years of neglect by Mr. Baker and helped push abill through Congress. And he and his aides forged a newapproach to the messy Third World debt issue.   But Mr. Brady had to return hat-in-hand to Congress lastyear to acknowledge that the Treasury, like many others,woefully underestimated the cost of the Sandamp;L bailout. Inaddition, the loudly heralded &quot;Brady plan&quot; to lighten thedebt burden on Third World countries has fallen far short ofinitial projections. Only Mexico and a handful of smallerdebtor countries are benefiting significantly.   Much of the criticism of the Treasury is directed at thelow-key leadership of the grandfatherly Mr. Brady, a60-year-old former investment banker who gets respect inWashington largely because of his close ties to PresidentBush.   &quot;Having a Treasury secretary of stature is reallyimportant at times of crisis,&quot; says Robert Lawrence, aBrookings Institution economist. If a financial crisisrequires someone &quot;to knock a lot of heads together, I'm notsure this Treasury secretary could do it,&quot; he adds.   Sidney Jones, assistant Treasury secretary for economicpolicy, comments that Mr. Brady &quot;is more of a presidentialadviser. He is called over there a lot for meetings,&quot; Mr.Jones adds, pointing through his window to the White Housenext door. &quot;He doesn't have a personal agenda. He is willingto forgo the traditional role of Treasury secretaries.&quot;   In fact, Mr. Brady eschews the controversy and visibilitythat Treasury secretaries from Alexander Hamilton to JamesBaker have courted as chief economic spokesmen for theirpresidents. &quot;I don't feel that to be the chief economicofficer . . . means that you have to stand out in front ofthe Treasury and beat your chest,&quot; Mr. Brady says in aninterview.   Mr. Brady's I-don't-care-what-they-think style makes himsomething of an enigma in Washington, but it suits him justfine. While others suggest that a more assertive U.S.Treasury secretary might, for instance, use the G-7coordination process to pressure the Germans to run a smallerbudget deficit and thus push down on interest rates, Mr.Brady defends his record. &quot;In spite of all the rhetoric,we've had a very good world economy,&quot; he insists.   But Mr. Brady's somewhat awkward expressions of gut faithin the U.S. economy sometimes lead observers to believe helacks the ability to build confidence in the government'seconomic management -- and confidence is critical in times oftrouble. &quot;I don't think it's the end of the world even if wehave a recession,&quot; he said on &quot;Meet the Press&quot; last month.&quot;We'll pull back out of it again. No big deal.&quot;   Asked by a CNN interviewer what will bring the U.S. out ofrecession, Mr. Brady replied: &quot;Things change. The tide comesin, it comes out. The moon goes up, it comes down.&quot;   Within Bush administration councils, Mr. Brady is knownfor expressing his instincts on issues but not for being ableto defend his positions under scrutiny. His antipathy towardthe futures markets grates on officials who ardently believethat unfettered markets generally work best.   Despite all the sniping, Mr. Brady's standing doesn't seemto have suffered with the one person whose opinion mattersmost: George Bush. Mr. Bush is surrounded by personallyambitious men, such as Mr. Baker, Mr. Darman and Mr. Sununu,and Mr. Brady stands out for lacking any ambition besidesloyal service to his friend. Perhaps for that reason, thepresident usually listens to him.   When Mr. Sununu made a last-minute bid to head off thereappointment of Robert Clarke, a hard-nosed regulator, ascomptroller of the currency, for instance, Mr. Bradypersuaded the president to reappoint him anyway. And Mr.Brady got the president to put the banking proposal near thetop of his domestic agenda.   Mr. Brady's relationship with the president protects thesecretary from the vitriolic criticism sometimes aimed atother Bush-administration officials by fellow Republicans.&quot;I'm not anxious to go on the record criticizing my man'sman,&quot; says Rep. Jim Leach of Iowa, a senior Republican on theHouse Banking Committee. And C. Fred Bergsten, aCarter-administration Treasury official now at the Institutefor International Economics, says, &quot;Everybody knows thatBrady is close to Bush and Bush isn't about to fire him.&quot;   But is having the president's ear sufficient? No, Mr.Brady's critics say.   &quot;The man at the top does have access to the president,&quot;says David Hale, an economist at Kemper Financial Serviceswho keeps close tabs on economic policy makers in Washington.&quot;But he can't manipulate the Japanese one-on-one like Bakerdid.&quot; Mr. Baker persuaded the Japanese to go along with ahuge depreciation of the dollar despite the consequent heavydamage to Japanese export industries.   Indeed, senior Republican senators privately say Mr. Bradycan't even do a very good job convincing them of theadministration's positions.   The delays in filling the Fed post are symptomatic. OnJune 7, Manuel Johnson, then the Fed's vice chairman, said hewas leaving the seven-member Fed board. As indications of aneconomic slowdown proliferated, the administration, includingMr. Brady, stepped up pressure on the Fed to cut interestrates. Yet Mr. Johnson's chair remained unfilled. Some WhiteHouse officials, aware that every voice at the Fed counts atsuch a time, grew impatient, but they couldn't even schedulea meeting with Mr. Brady to discuss nominees.   Mr. Brady says he was searching for an experiencedbusiness leader for the job -- someone, as he puts it,&quot;familiar with the workings of the day-to-day world.&quot; Thatquest apparently failed. Mr. Bush recently nominated FedGovernor David Mullins, a former official in the BradyTreasury, to the vice chairman's post and chose a White Houseeconomist, Lawrence Lindsey, for the vacant governor's seat.The pending resignation of Martha Seger will soon createanother vacancy on the board.   Mr. Brady insists that the Senate wouldn't have acted evenif the administration had sent up a nomination last fall. Hissenior aides say they were just too busy to focus on the Fedvacancy.   Busy at what?   Well, busy negotiating the biggest deficit-reductionagreement in history, they say. True, Mr. Brady joined Mr.Sununu and Mr. Darman as the president's negotiators fortalks with congressional leaders that began in May andstretched into October. Participants credit him with puttingout partisan fires that occasionally threatened the talks. Onthe rare occasions when Mr. Brady spoke, says Rep. LeonPanetta, a California Democrat who heads the House BudgetCommittee, &quot;he tended to try to moderate between Darman andSununu and to cool tempers.&quot;   But even Mr. Brady acknowledges that Budget DirectorDarman did the heavy lifting. The Treasury appears to havehad far less impact than usual on what turned out to be ahuge tax bill. &quot;Normally,&quot; Mr. Panetta says, &quot;when you'retalking about tax policy, you have a greater presence fromTreasury.&quot;   Even some Treasury officials marveled at the freedom Mr.Brady allowed Mr. Darman in tapping directly into theTreasury's Office of Tax Policy, a bureaucratic invasion thatMr. Darman never would have permitted when he was deputyTreasury secretary from 1985 through 1987. The only advantageof Mr. Brady's low profile is that he was spared the blameheaped on Mr. Darman and Mr. Sununu by people who detest thedeficit-reduction law.   If the budget was Mr. Darman's show, the continuing Sandamp;Lsaga has been Mr. Brady's. On that front, the Treasury failedin one of its most important missions last year: to getCongress to appropriate the money nearly everyoneacknowledged was needed to keep the cleanup going.   The result: A delay of at least three months in selling 18large money-losing thrifts, a delay that the Treasuryconcedes will cost at least $300 million and that outsideanalysts put at $1 billion or more. The only reason thethrift operation hasn't ground to a halt is that theTreasury, with congressional consent, is exploiting adrafting error in earlier legislation.   Congress, of course, must share the blame for the delay --all of it, Mr. Brady says. However, even some Republicansprivately say the Treasury bungled the job. By refusingcongressional demands that he testify personally, Mr. Bradyhanded some Democrats an alibi.   But he and his staff haven't any regrets. Says DeputyTreasury Secretary Robson: &quot;Our judgment was that sendingNick Brady up there was going to give them more excuses notto vote for it rather than less.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>