<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920304-0137</DOCNO><DOCID>920304-0137.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Critique:   Sinister Stamp Put on Elvis and NEA   ----   By Raymond Sokolov</HL><DATE>03/04/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><LP>   As a left-hander, I've suffered much pain and humiliationin a largely right-handed world, but nothing like the virtualdeath blow delivered by Stanley Coren in, &quot;The Left-HanderSyndrome&quot; (Free Press, 308 pages, $24.95).   Mr. Coren, who teaches psychology at the University ofBritish Columbia (on the Left Coast, so to speak) believes instatistics that seem to show that left-handers almost neverlive beyond age 80. We die young, by today's standards, hesays, because we are neurologically damaged and thereforesuffer from diabetes, asthma and hay fever. Thus,left-handedness is a birth defect that leads to mortalillness. And I am a nearly dead white male.</LP><TEXT>   A death sentence, as Dr. Johnson said, concentrates themind wonderfully. And Mr. Coren's guarantee that I won't see81 has put a lot of things in a clearer light for me. Takethe the Elvis stamp.   The U.S. Postal Service is gearing up to produce an ElvisPresley commemorative. This ticked off Washington Postcolumnist Jonathan Yardley, who thinks The King is a poorchoice for such an honor. On Monday, Mr. Yardley dredged upevery revolting thing he could about The Pelvis'sdrug-besotted later years. Clearly Mr. Yardley is not much ofa rock fan and doesn't give Elvis's musical achievements thesame weight he would give the higher-browed work of suchswine as Richard Wagner or Ezra Pound.   Mr. Yardley is, of course, perfectly entitled to dissElvis and the Postal Service. Yet he misses a couple offundamental points. He is, of course, aware that the solerequirement of a commemorative honoree is that she or he havebeen dead for 10 years. But numerous alleged sightings of TheKing in recent months have convinced a growing throng ofAmericans that their singing idol is still among us. Even abrain-damaged lefty like me doesn't really believe it, butmany of our fellow citizens do. How will these people feelwhen they walk into a post office next month and discoverthat a federal agency wants them to vote on which of twoPresley images will join Benjamin Franklin and Louisa MayAlcott in the philatelic pantheon?   I think it will irk them. Some zealots of the Living Elvismay even perform acts of civil disobedience against thePostal Service for its sacrilege. Mr. Yardley could findhimself joined by some rude and unwelcome companions in thecrusade against the Elvis stamp. Come May, he will wish hehad looked at this matter from a higher plane, in the lightof Eternity, just as a left-hander with the chill of the endof days on his neck. I mean that Mr. Yardley will come to seethat the Elvis stamp, travesty or not, is only a small partof the aesthetic sinkhole that our Postal Service has become.This is my second point.   Our stamps, like our money, are drab and utilitarian.There are exceptions, of course, but if you compare thestamps most of us use most of the time with the everydaypostage of other countries (even Third World countries), youwill see what every stamp collector knows. The U.S. is aphilatelic backwater. So I think it ill behooves a man ofletters to pooh-pooh a federal agency's first clumsy stepstoward honoring a talented musician beloved by millions withan unconventional image ratified by a public vote.   Indeed, I am so impressed with Postmaster General AnthonyM. Frank's initiative in the Elvis matter that I think anenlightened president in an election year should widen hisresponsibilities to include all federal support of the arts.   As things stand, the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)is a shipwreck. Through some fault of its own, a basicallyhonorable outfit with almost no money to spend has beenHelmsified and Buchananized to the point where it cannot anylonger perform even the modest functions it was timidlycreated for. The trouble began when the NEA agreed to fundperformance artists and inevitably got besmirched withsweet-potato puree and other Gesamtkunstdreck that theperformance-art world likes to sling in the name of cultureand grant-getting.   The NEA also let some fairly foolish proposals in moretraditional arts areas slip by its screening process, settingloose a screaming process from legitimate critics andopportunists who probably hadn't been inside a museum sinceMiss Spence in sixth grade took them downtown to see themummies and the classical nude marbles (giggle, point).   So the president is getting blamed for using tax money tobuy blasphemous excreta and he shows he really is a stand-upTexan sort of country-music-loving guy by firing his bowedand beaten NEA chief. And that is the end of the NEA as apractical organization until after the election, or maybeforever.   The president can easily phase out the NEA and shift itsworthwhile functions over to the Postal Service. Instead ofthe art cronies who now fill the selection committees at theNEA and notoriously vote for their friends, art spendingwould be in the hands of federal civil servants with noprevious arts training, no prejudices, no arts ideology andan absolute minimum of connections in the arts establishment.The Postal Service also has at its disposal 40,000 potentialgalleries, well lit and dispersed uniformly throughout the 50states. Some of these post-office/art spaces are large enoughto double as concert halls and auditoriums. And the walls ofeven the humblest post offices offer a rich opportunity formuralists.   Much of this vital new program could be administered bylocal postmasters responsive as few others to the heartbeatof the grass roots. But inevitably, Postmaster General Frankwould be called upon to supervise arts spending with nationalor international implications. It is crucial that he, orwhoever does end up running federal arts policy, not abandonthe many sober and brilliant projects that NEA even nowsupports. A splendid example of such an unimpeachable use ofpublic money is the grant made to the Boston Museum of FineArts for &quot;Fra Bartolommeo, Master Draughtsman of the HighRenaissance.&quot; These masterpieces have been brought fromRotterdam and elsewhere and will be giving Americans a chanceto see intimate works from the hand of an undeservedlyneglected genius (in Boston until April 12; at Fort Worth'sKimbell Art Museum, May 9 to Aug. 2; and at the MorganLibrary in New York, Sept. 11 to Nov. 29).   Left-handers, especially, should seize the opportunity,while they still can.</TEXT></DOC>