<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910412-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>910412-0116.</DOCID><HL>   A Real-World Model for America's Schools   ----   By George H. Richmond</HL><DATE>04/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   In September 1967, I found myself in a fifth-gradeclassroom in Brooklyn, staring down 33 ferocious10-year-olds. Despite my best efforts to teach my students toread, write and compute, the going was slow, the resultsdisappointing. I felt the frustration a physician feels whena dying patient refuses medication that could have saved him.While riding a bus home after one of those frustrating days,I began searching for a solution.   Public schools have important similarities with communistmodels of society. Both are fundamentally totalitarian. Bothdevote enormous amounts of energy and resources to control.Both subordinate the civil liberties and economic interestsof the people they purportedly exist to serve to the state.Both view private initiative, private property andprofit-seeking as sources of conflict, inequity andalienation. And both narrow the choices citizens have to one:one party, one point of view, one make of car and one makeand choice of school.</LP><TEXT>   I decided to set my students free: free to generate aprivate sector, transact business in the open marketplace,organize and operate organizations, produce goods andservices, save and invest, change leaders by ballot, andredress excesses and correct inequities that occur in anysociety.   I printed money, opened a store stocked with items popularwith 10-year-olds, and created the job of classroom aide. Ipaid these aides to do minor administrative and housekeepingchores. To these, I added jobs that engaged students inwriting and publishing newspapers, stories, books andmagazines. Later, several of these jobs were used to launchunsubsidized ventures in which students employed their peers.   Next I designed a real-estate simulation, calledMicro-Economy, that introduced real property and createdmarketplaces for land, labor and capital. I marked offtwo-dozen 2-foot-by-2.5-foot lots on shelves on the perimeterof the room and informed my students that if they purchasedthese lots and constructed model houses on them, they wouldbe entitled to collect rent from anyone who landed on theirproperty. Motivated by the exquisite pleasure of collectingrent, students bought lots and built cardboard houses onthem.   Now quick to respond to opportunity, several studentsstarted companion businesses. One child formed a materialssupply company; it turned throwaway materials fromneighborhood stores into products model builders could buy.Two students created a joint venture that made improvementsthat raised property assessments and rents landowners couldcharge.   When disputes arose, I encouraged students to form agovernment. A constitutional convention led to the creationof a legislature, courts and an executive branch. Thisgenerated jobs for politicians, police, accountants, judges,tax collectors and lawyers. The mix of private and publicinstitutions came to be called a Micro-Society. Activityincreased. Opportunities to succeed multiplied. Soon childrenbegan to see themselves in a new, brilliant light.   Of the many success stories, perhaps the most poignant wasRamon's. A shy, frail child, Ramon showed little of theathletic or physical prowess of his peers. These shortcomingsmade him a low-status member of the group. However, Ramon hadone talent that set him apart: He could add, subtract andmultiply. That talent counts for little in traditionalclassroom societies that are based on muscle, but counts fora great deal in a Micro-Society. Ramon opened the firstMicro-Society bank, accepting deposits from his peers andlending them to his customers. The difference between theinterest paid and collected made Ramon rich.   As the Micro-Society evolved, Ramon emerged as a leader ofthe new, burgeoning commercial sector. One day, Ramonapproached me with a problem. He was having troublecollecting some debts. When I asked him if he wanted myassistance, he shuffled his feet and shook his head. &quot;No,&quot; hesaid, &quot;I want Emilio {the oldest, biggest and toughest kid inthe class} to do the collections.&quot; Muscle went to work forbrains.   Ramon's experience, and the experience of hundreds ofstudents in subsequent programs and Micro-Society schools,taught me a lesson in school reform. Most public schools havelost sight of their economic purpose and political function.The schools students attend have been disconnected fromemployers and employment, and by extension from theproduction process. As a result, employers find themselvesbeing pressed by the state to hire dropouts and graduates asif employment were a charitable donation. The Micro-Societyconcept remedies this by bringing the real world into theclassroom and by encouraging public schools to allow parentsthe option to enroll their children in a school that offersthem an in-depth experience in democracy and in a free andopen market economy.   In 1981, Lowell, Mass., the cradle of America's IndustrialRevolution, launched the first Micro-Society School in thenation, based on my book &quot;The Micro-Society School: A RealWorld in Miniature&quot; (Harper andamp; Row, 1974). Although theundertaking occurred in response to court-ordereddesegregation, the K-8 school quickly established a loyalfollowing that grew because parents saw their childrenblossom, teachers found their work more exciting andmeaningful, and students were motivated by theresponsibilities of being free. Together they achieved testscores and attendance rates that match those of suburbanschools. Today, Lowell's Micro-Society School finds itselfwith a long waiting list.   A second Micro-Society School (P.S. 19), serving gradesK-6, is operating in Yonkers, N.Y., in response to anotherdesegregation order. The school serves a largely Hispanic newimmigrant community, and Yonkers is using the Micro-Societyconcept to promote racial harmony, encourage citizenship,speed language acquisition, and lay a foundation for theemployability of the students who are enrolled. As part ofthat effort, the school district is erecting a building withspace and equipment suited to the school's unique program.   Micro-Society schools are also in the design stage inNewburgh and Utica, N.Y., and in Kansas City, Mo., allcommunities trying to bring about voluntary desegregation.   However, an elementary and a middle school alongMicro-Society lines were approved in concept by Baltimore'sboard of education in November without the inspiration of acourt order. The impetus for these two schools has come fromleading employers involved in the local chapter of JuniorAchievement, which want the school system to prepare acompetent future work force, and from the community'sminority leadership, which hopes the program will speed theeconomic and political transformation of the city'sunderclass into a new and vibrant professional class.   Micro-Society Schools have developed in communities wheregovernment has been forced to give the public the right tochoose and in school systems compelled to offer a set ofeducational options. Given options, people may choose betweeneducational settings that expand political freedom andeconomic independence and those that limit them. Parents wantschools that function for their children. They want programsthat relate what their children do to real life, providematerial incentives and intrinsic rewards, engage children inmeaningful work, and build on America's traditions andvalues. Most can't get what they want because they don't havea real choice.   In a democracy, it is government's duty to give citizens achoice, but choice isn't much good unless there are liveoptions.   ---   Mr. Richmond is a writer and educator who lives inPhiladelphia.</TEXT></DOC>