<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900518-0197</DOCNO><DOCID>900518-0197.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   It's Time to Talk About the S-Words Too   ----   By Martin Feldstein</HL><DATE>05/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   LABOR TAXES</CO><IN>CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BEVERAGES (BVG)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   For the past five years the political taboo againstdiscussing tax increases has made it impossible to negotiateany serious reduction in the budget deficit. Now that a taxincrease is on the table, a significant budget deal looksquite likely. It's time now to consider adjusting the futuregrowth of Social Security benefits as well.   Only by considering Social Security benefits as well astaxes can the negotiating process produce a serious and fairlong-term plan to eliminate the budget deficit. And extendingthe Gramm-Rudman process to include parallel automaticadjustments to taxes and Social Security benefits could bethe centerpiece of a reformed budget process that limitsspending increases and guarantees an eventual budget balance.</LP><TEXT>   The budget deficit has been stuck at $150 billion a yearsince 1987. The Office of Management and Budget's newestimates confirm what private analysts have been saying fora long time. Without tough budget action, the deficit will beas high next year and will continue to be at least $100billion a year in the future, keeping real interest rateshigh and depressing our national rate of investment inproductivity-increasing plant and equipment.   But even the new OMB estimates make no allowance foraccumulating a real Social Security trust fund. Instead, allof the projected Social Security surpluses are devoted tooffsetting deficits elsewhere in the budget.   Social Security should instead be removed from theordinary budget and the surpluses accumulated to financefuture benefits when the baby-boom generation begins toretire. By 1996, such a safeguarding of the Social Securitysurpluses would add $140 billion to the annual budgetdeficit.   Combining this Social Security accumulation with theprojected budget deficit implies that the appropriatedeficit-reduction goal for 1996 is about $250 billion. Withthat much to be done, it's important to have a long-termplan. The budget negotiators should be aiming for $50 billiona year of reliable deficit reductions over each of the nextfive years. A new Gramm-Rudman framework could ensure suchreductions by adding automatic adjustments in tax revenue andSocial Security benefits to the current across-the-boardsequestration cuts. Unlike the current talk about cutting$100 billion in 1991 alone, such a gradual and predictablemultiyear reduction would not upset the pace of year-to-yeareconomic expansion.   It is impossible to achieve such reductions by spendingcuts alone. The substantial reduction in defense spendingthat now appears to be justified by the current militaryconditions can make a major contribution to deficitreduction. But even a massive 20% cut in current real defensespending -- reducing defense outlays to the lowest share ofGNP in more than half a century -- would provide less thanone-third of the needed $250 billion a year.   Nondefense spending other than Social Security andinterest on the national debt will exceed $500 billion by1996 if there are no changes in existing programs. That muchspending should provide opportunities for substantialsavings. But although I have my favorite list of cuts, I'mnot optimistic about the amount that Congress will accept.And many of the savings in existing programs will undoubtedlybe used to fund increased spending on an array of programsthat the public feels has received too little support duringthe past decade.   Turning to taxes, opinion surveys show that raising excisetaxes on alcohol and tobacco would meet relatively littleopposition from an increasingly health-conscious public.Doubling the 16-cents-a-pack tax on cigarettes and adding adollar in tax to the price of a six-pack of beer and a bottleof wine would yield about $15 billion a year in revenue. Anextra 10 cents a gallon on gasoline would reduce airpollution and add $10 billion a year to revenue.   The combination of major cuts in defense and nondefenseoutlays and the general increase in excise taxes would alsohave an important favorable effect on the government's annualinterest bill. Even without any fall in interest rates, thegradual reduction in annual deficits would cut the projectednational debt by enough to knock $30 billion off thegovernment's 1996 interest outlays. And if the smaller budgetdeficits bring the interest rate down by one percentagepoint, the additional interest savings would be $25 billion ayear.   But even with all of these outlay cuts and revenueincreases, the annual deficit in 1996 would still be about$75 billion. What should be done to fill this remaining gap?   A simple and fair way to fill the remaining deficit gapwould be to modify the indexing of both the Social Securitybenefits and the personal income tax. A basic approach wouldbe to adjust benefits and tax brackets by the excess ofinflation over 2% instead of by the full inflation rate asrequired by current law. With a 4.5% inflation rate, benefitsand tax brackets would be raised by 2.5% instead of the full4.5%. Even if lower-income beneficiaries and taxpayers areexempted and each individual is limited to no more than acumulative 10% adjustment, this inflation-minus-2% rule fortaxes and Social Security would shrink annual deficits by $70billion in 1996 and beyond.   Although most politicians have been understandablyreluctant to suggest any modification of Social Securitybenefits, any program of deficit reduction that can bedescribed as fair must include a slowing of the growth ofSocial Security outlays. Ways and Means Committee ChairmanDan Rostenkowski recognized this when he proposed a totalfreeze on Social Security benefits as part of his own 1991budget plan.   Unlike most other government transfer programs, the vastbulk of Social Security benefits go to individuals who arenot poor. Indeed, benefits are higher for those who have hadthe highest earnings during their working years and who aretherefore most likely to have substantial private pensions.Full adjustment of Social Security benefits for inflation hasbecome increasingly unfair after a decade in which averagewages have failed to keep up with inflation. Since 1975, realwages per worker have fallen more than 10% while real averageSocial Security benefits per retiree have increased by nearly20%.   Modifying the adjustment of income-tax brackets by thesame inflation-minus-2% rule would raise the growth of taxrevenue by about the same amount that it cuts the growth ofSocial Security outlays. There is also enough ambiguity inthis tax change to satisfy most politicians: Theinflation-minus-2% rule raises revenue without a tax increaseand reduces benefit outlays without lowering anyone'sbenefit.   The inflation adjustment of income-tax brackets and SocialSecurity benefits also provides a good way to expand theGramm-Rudman automatic mechanism to keep the proposed budgetdeclines on track. If the deficit is greater than the targetlevel in some future year, the traditional Gramm-Rudmanspending cuts could be supplemented by a reduced inflationadjustment to benefits and tax brackets.   The narrow range of budget categories that are now theonly eligible items for the Gramm-Rudman sequesters hasimplied such draconian reductions in individual programs thatCongress and the administration have preferred to use phonynumbers to avoid painful real deficit reductions. Broadeningthe range of automatic deficit cuts to include tax and SocialSecurity adjustments would make Gramm-Rudman more effective.   President Bush has emphasized that he regards a reform ofthe budget process to be an important goal of this year'snegotiations. A two-year budget cycle and some form ofenhanced rescission authority would help to make the budgetprocess more rational. But expanding the Gramm-Rudmanfail-safe procedure to include the inflation adjustments toboth tax brackets and Social Security benefits is the bestway to achieve declining budget deficits and to make certainthat broad and fair reductions in the growth of spending arethe centerpiece of that deficit reduction.   ---   Mr. Feldstein, former chairman of the president's Councilof Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard.</TEXT></DOC>