<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900820-0052</DOCNO><DOCID>900820-0052.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Going to War in the Kingdom of Oil</HL><DATE>08/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Karen Elliott House will find few to disagree with hersuggestion of &quot;No Appeasement of Iraq&quot; (editorial page, Aug.7). However, it is difficult to see how her reasoning orprescriptions would contribute to peace and stability.   In justifying unilateral military action, she suggests theU.S. has &quot;simply to pursue its own interest -- the free flowof oil at acceptable prices.&quot; Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwaitlargely to ensure his definition of appropriate price andsupply levels for oil, as he defines them. How can wedistinguish U.S. military action in service of our definitionof appropriate price and supply levels from Saddam Hussein's?</LP><TEXT>   Surely, the more important reason for resisting Saddam'saggression is that it threatens the region with instability,and creates yet another dangerous precedent of a violation ofsovereignty. It therefore makes sense to resist it in amanner that preserves, and if possible promotes, the valuessought to be vindicated. A unilateral U.S. military responsewould galvanize Arab nationalist sentiment into a relativelyneutral posture, an unstable prospect. A multilateralresponse, which Ms. House scoffs at, would allow for thedevelopment of a regional consensus around the sharedinterest in resisting Iraqi domination. It also would enjoylegitimacy as a reflection of the world community's interestin world order, rather than being perceived as onesuperpower's unilateral pursuit of its economic interests.   Amit A. Pandya   Washington   ---   For a number of years, I've enjoyed Ms. House's insightfularticles on the Middle East. This one continues herexcellence. The phrase &quot;superpower amity has little effect onregional enmity&quot; should be copyrighted.   Her article, coupled with the one of Messrs. JeffreyBirnbaum and Andrew Pasztor in the same issue, should be readat the National Security Council and other agencies. It ishoped that there will be collaboration with the U.S.S.R. Whatan opportunity if Soviet naval units could enforce theblockade at Iskenderun.   David W. Peck Jr.   New York   ---   Ms. House was breathtaking in her ability to get to theheart of our country's Middle Eastern quandary. Years ofwaffling and positioning have left the U.S. in a serious bindwith little room to maneuver.   Might I suggest you consider reprinting several thousandcopies of Ms. House's article and delivering them to ourpolicy makers in Foggy Bottom, Capitol Hill and the WhiteHouse?   Paul M. Ganz   Redford Township, Mich.   ---   Ms. House's comments raise more questions than theyanswer. Where does &quot;military intervention&quot; stop short oftotal occupation of the Arab world? You can't just punch thebully once and stop the fight.   If the U.S. intervenes, is Ms. House volunteering as aninfantry rifleperson, or are we to send &quot;them&quot; to fight andbe killed? How does the cost in U.S. lives and dollarscompare with the increased cost of oil? If we had not let theLuddites in our midst scare us away from clean nuclear powerwe wouldn't be so vulnerable now.   Stuart L. Faber   Cincinnati   ---   When Israel bombed Iraq's nuclear facilities in 1981,seriously forestalling Hussein's quest for nuclearcapability, the act was condemned around the world, andIsrael's warning that Hussein would use every means possibleto threaten other nations was rejected.   Now, it's clear Israel's foreboding was right on themoney. Imagine a Hussein with a nuclear arsenal. It's a scarythought. But we don't have to face that scenario, for now atleast, thanks to Israel.   David Feifel   Toronto, Ontario   ---   It's hard to believe Ms. House argues for using the U.S.military to enforce an &quot;acceptable&quot; price for oil. Troopsshould be used to protect freedom, not to extract priceconcessions from trading partners.   Far better to develop an alternate supply. There is reasonto believe research into high-technology areas such as laserfusion or even biotechnology could yield a significantdiscovery within three years.   Carl Whitney   President   Saturn Research   Petaluma, Calif.   ---   Wow] To use a British expression, Ms. House is wonderfully&quot;bloodyminded,&quot; with phrases such as &quot;dictator took control .. . of the West's economic destiny in the 1990s.&quot; Really?Then she comments about Hussein's &quot;ability to dictate worldoil prices.&quot; How? Then she says our efforts are &quot;too little,too late.&quot; All in three paragraphs.   Then Ms. House also decries our healthy aversion tobloodshed, ignoring the fact that healthy aversion alsoexists among the young people of Iraq, especially those whofought in the war with Iran (one of three being a womantoward the end). She ignores economic history, too -- that atone time Saudi Arabia was producing 12 million barrels a day,and so was the Soviet Union, and that since that time,Western consumption has dropped dramatically, and othersources of crude have risen dramatically. Saudi Arabia stillcan produce 12 million barrels a day, and the Soviet Unioncan make almost half that amount available for hard currency.   This administration's careful building of political andeconomic blocks to put a real wall around Iraq, backed by areal military wall, has been strategically adept. But wecannot stimulate Hussein's imagination to understand inadvance the result of a B-52 bombing raid on Iraq's principalcities, nor can we pre-demonstrate the devastating effect ofour jet fighters on his old Soviet tanks, which are requiredto stop in order to fire, and whose diesel tanks sit exposedbehind the turret. Unfortunately, he and, sadly, some of hispeople, may have to find this out the hard way. But manypeople will resent Ms. House's rush to this gory undertaking,and will admire President Bush and his colleagues for theirrestrained patience.   Peter Whiteford   Houston   ---   Iraq's brutal occupation of Kuwait dramatically andominously points up another unwanted legacy of the Reaganadministration, which dismantled or disregarded many of theenergy-conservation programs intended to reduce the need forpetroleum after the oil crises in 1973-74 and 1979.   His administration cut billions of dollars from theplanned spending on crude oil for the strategic petroleumreserve; it eased the government's fuel-efficiencyrequirements for new cars; it cut back a variety of programsintended to encourage conservation and development ofalternative energy sources such as solar power; it failed totake the necessary leadership in 1986 urging the adoption ofa fuel tax.   Alvin F. Friedman   Morton Grove, Ill.   ---   My initial reaction is to say, &quot;Thank you Saddam Hussein.&quot;This brutal megalomaniac may have done the U.S. a big favorin the following areas:   1. Reminding Congress that we cannot take all of thebudget cuts from defense.   2. Reminding Congress that we need our defense reductionsmade with world strategy in mind and not the pork barrel.   3. Reminding us that we still need to project forces on aworld-wide basis.   Amaury Piedra   Bellvue, Wash.   ---   The Bush administration's outrage at Iraq's invasion ofKuwait loses its moral force when it is remembered that justa few months ago President Bush ordered the invasion ofPanama, and a few years ago the Reagan-Bush administrationordered the invasion of Grenada. Iraq has used the Panamarationale of replacing a corrupt leader.   International lawfulness cannot be advanced whensuperpowers set a tone of acting as they please. Thesuperpowers must show the way by practicing a respect forinternational law and for the sovereignty of nations and byworking to strengthen international organizations like theUnited Nations and the World Court.   Richard Barsanti   Western Springs, Ill.   ---   Ms. House says it without obfuscation: We will conduct warfor the &quot;free flow of oil at tolerable prices.&quot; Before wesend our young men to kill and die there, full disclosure isin order so that mothers and fathers who get visits from amajor will know why their sons died. That was not a luxurygiven the parents of the 58,000 dead in Vietnam.   The analogy of Kuwait and Munich limps badly. SaudiArabia, Qatar, Kuwait, the Arab Emirates and Oman were thecreations of England and France for their own economic andstrategic reasons in the early part of this century. Theyestablished as these countries' leaders sheik families whorule with little or no respect for democracy or human rights.They are in power through the corruption of vast wealthshared by few Arabs in that part of the world. Americanpolicy makers know this but continue to use the sheiks fortheir own strategic purposes.   The average Arab knows the U.S. is the enemy of his land,his resources and his religion. The West uses this part ofthe world for its own purposes, starting with the forcing ofits foreign surrogate, Israel, onto Arab soil.   All the talk about Iraq establishing a &quot;puppet&quot; governmentin Kuwait may not be true. There are more than 100,000Palestinians there who were treated as serfs with no rights.And many Kuwaitis may be pleased at the expulsion of a vainand corrupt family of sheiks.   Here is a suggested headstone for the U.S. servicemen whomay die in Arab countries:   Here lies PFC Harvey Anybody   Killed in action on the U.S. Enterprise in the PersianGulf   He died courageously for his country's   Free flow of oil at reasonable prices   Requiescat in Pace   Peter J. Riga   Houston</TEXT></DOC>