<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910523-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>910523-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Boy Scouts Can Bar Gay Man as Leader   ----   By Amy Stevens and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   AET AGII DJ FG LABOR MTC Z.ZIN U.CUA</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>BUILDING MATERIALS, CONCRETE, GLASS, PAINT (BLD)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)FULL LINE INSURANCE (INF)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><NS>LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)CONNECTICUT (CT)ILLINOIS (IL)MARYLAND (MD)MISSOURI (MO)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NEW YORK (NY)SWITZERLAND (SZ)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)</RE><LP>   The Boy Scouts of America can bar a gay man from becominga scoutmaster because of his sexual orientation, a Californiajudge ruled.   Superior Court Judge Sally Grant Disco said that forcingthe Boy Scouts to make the man a scoutmaster would hinder theorganization from promoting its view that homosexuality iswrong. She based her decision on the First Amendment right ofmembers of an organization to associate freely and &quot;getacross its preferred message in its preferred way.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Judge Disco wrote: &quot;The issue, of course, is not whetherthe defendant's view is correct, or enlightened, or even bestcalculated to achieve the organization's broader goals.&quot; Her18-page opinion relied heavily on a 1984 U.S. Supreme Courtruling that requires courts to balance freedom of associationagainst a state's interest in ending discrimination.   Judge Disco distinguished the Boy Scouts from thebusiness-oriented club that lost its battle to exclude womenin the 1984 Supreme Court case. She said the group hashistorically prohibited known homosexuals from assuming staffpositions and expressly requires members to pledge to be&quot;morally straight.&quot;   Her decision apparently applies only to privateorganizations that promulgate explicit guidelines abouthomosexual behavior or other &quot;expressive views.&quot;   The ruling runs counter to a nationwide trend expandingthe legal rights of gays to work with young people. Gayrights advocates said that prejudice about homosexuals'fitness as role models has been particularly intransigent andthat eradicating it should have been given more weight in thejudge's analysis.   William Rubenstein, director of the Gay and Lesbian RightsProject of the American Civil Liberties Union, said:   &quot;The idea of gay men working with children confrontspeople where their homophobia is most acute. Before thisdecision, courts were more and more able to get beyondstereotypes. It sounds like this court has abdicated itsfunction of being a neutral arbiter.&quot; The ACLU of SouthernCalifornia brought the case against the Boy Scouts on behalfof Timothy Curran.   Jon Davidson, who represented Mr. Curran in court, saidthat he plans to appeal the ruling because it underminesstate civil rights laws. &quot;What good are anti-discriminationstatutes if all it takes to ignore them is to claim that webelieve certain people are inferior and it would interferewith our expression if we were required to admit them?&quot; hesaid.   Prior to the decision in Los Angeles, no court had ruledon whether youth-oriented groups could discriminate againstgays in their admissions policies. The other major scoutingorganization, the Girl Scouts of the USA, doesn't have apolicy about lesbian members or leaders, and &quot;doesn'tinvestigate their personal beliefs,&quot; a spokeswoman said.   Two years ago, a gay man wasn't allowed to participate inthe Washington chapter of the Big Brothers/Big Sisters ofAmerica because of his sexual orientation. His suit againstthe group was settled, but the episode triggered an ill-fatedattempt by some members of Congress last year to allowvolunteer organizations in Washington to exclude gay people.   Courts have started to rule that gay people can't bediscriminated against when seeking employment as teachers,coaches and guidance counselors. Longtime judicial resistanceto adoption by homosexuals also has been wearing down.   In March, a federal court in Kansas ruled that a highschool could not refuse to hire a man as a teacher because ofhis perceived &quot;homosexual tendencies,&quot; and a Florida statejudge struck down a law against gay adoption. New Hampshireremains the only state to prohibit homosexuals from adoptingchildren.   ---   INSURERS MUST PAY asbestos litigation costs of policyholders, court says.   The Illinois Supreme Court ruled that the terms ofcomprehensive general liability policies require insurancecompanies to reimburse asbestos manufacturers and insulationcontractors for the costs of defending asbestos propertydamage cases.   Whether insurers have a duty to reimburse policyholdersfor asbestos litigation is an issue in courts in nearly everystate. With hundreds of millions of dollars at stakenationwide, the Illinois case had been closely watchedbecause no other top state appeals court has ruled on theissue. Lawyers for insurers and policy holders say it islikely that other state courts will rely on the Illinoisdecision as a compelling authority.   In the Illinois suit, the USFandamp;G Corp. of Baltimore,contended that it only has a duty to pay legal costs in caseswhere its policy holders were being sued for property damagewhich involves tangible injury to buildings. Asbestoscontamination results only in economic loss due to thediminished value of buildings, it argued.   Five other former insurers of policy holder WilkinInsulation Co., of Mt. Prospect, Illinois, joined the suit.They are Commercial Union Insurance Co., Argonaut InsuranceCo., Argonaut Midwest Insurance Co., Aetna Casualty andamp; SuretyCo. and Zurich Insurance Co.   Wilkin Insulation is defending itself in numerous asbestosremoval actions, said its attorney, Craig Mielke. The companyclaimed that contamination is the same as damage.   The Illinois high court ruled that &quot;an insurer has a dutyto defend its insured if any theory of recovery allegespotential coverage.&quot;   The court did not rule on whether insurers have a duty toreimburse policy holders for damages paid to plaintiffs whosuccessfully sue for asbestos removal. James Horstman, anattorney for Commercial Union of Boston, Massachusetts, saidthat is the &quot;big money issue.&quot; He added that &quot;there is apossibility that the insurers will ask the court toreconsider or clarify&quot; its decision.   USFandamp;G spokeswoman Kerry Burch-Deluca said, &quot;We feel theprecedent is unfortunate for the insurance industry.&quot; But sheadded that the company does &quot;not believe {the decision} willin any way have a substantial impact on the company.&quot;   ---   LIBRARY RULES regulating homeless people areunconstitutional, court rules.   A federal judge ruled that a New Jersey public library'sregulations, including a &quot;hygiene&quot; test used to bar ahomeless man, were unconstitutional.   Judge H. Lee Sarokin in Newark ruled that some regulationsof the Joint Free Public Library of Morristown and MorrisTownship violated the First Amendment right to information,were unconstitutionally vague and overbroad.   &quot;This is a victory for the homeless against arbitrary andvague regulations that may be applied to them and not toothers,&quot; said Bruce Rosen, the court-appointed attorney forthe homeless man, Richard R. Kreimer.   Eric Schnurer, a Philadelphia attorney who filed afriend-of-the-court brief for the American Civil LibertiesUnion, said the case is important because there is &quot;anincreasing tendency&quot; to restrict access by the homeless topublic spaces.   A class action suit has been filed in New York against thecity's police commissioner and department seeking aninjunction prohibiting police from enforcing a state lawbanning begging in public spaces. Last year, a federalappeals court in New York ruled in favor of the TransitAuthority in a suit that sought to overturn a ban againstbegging in subways.   The New Jersey case stemmed from two suits by Mr. Kreimer,a 41-year-old Morristown man who said that he had beenrepeatedly harassed by library staff and the police over thecourse of two years because he is homeless. His suit againstthe police will be heard in June.   In his decision, Judge Sarokin said the library's policyviolated the First Amendment because it isn't narrowlytailored to &quot;serve the significant government interest&quot; offostering a quiet atmosphere in the library conducive to theright of receiving and reading written communication. He alsosaid a provision barring &quot;patrons whose bodily hygiene is sooffensive as to constitute a nuisance to other persons&quot; isvague.   Clifford Starrett, attorney for the library and libraryofficials, didn't return phone calls.   ---   JOHN LENNON FILM didn't violate privacy rights of backupband, judge rules.   A now-defunct band known as the Elephants' Memory Bandbacked up the late Mr. Lennon and his wife, Yoko Ono, at twoconcerts in 1972. In their suit, filed in New York statecourt in Manhattan, the band members sought damages over thefilm &quot;Imagine: John Lennon,&quot; because they never grantedpermission for their performance to be included in the 1988movie.   Under New York state privacy law, a person's picture orname can't be used for commercial purposes withoutpermission. But state Judge Harold Baer Jr. ruled thatdespite the Lennon film's commercial aspects, it was mainly anewsworthy documentary that is exempted from the privacy law.   &quot;The question of what is and isn't within thenewsworthiness exception is a vexing one. However, it isclear that the mere fact that the publisher of the image oruser of the name will profit from its activity isn'tsignificant,&quot; Judge Baer said in his decision. &quot;It is thecontent of the publication rather than the motive of thedefendant that determines whether the publication isnewsworthy or a trade usage.&quot;   The 106-minute video includes conversations recorded withMr. Lennon, as well as musical performances -- includingabout 40 seconds of a song in which the band members can beseen.   The judge rejected the band members' claims that the filmwas mainly entertainment. The judge said the film wasnewsworthy because of the importance of Mr. Lennon to themusic world. Mr. Lennon, a former Beatle, was killed in 1980.   The band members also are suing Ms. Ono over &quot;JohnLennon-Live in New York City,&quot; a film released in 1986 aboutthe 1972 performances. The movie includes appearances by theband members and identifies them. Judge Baer cleared thoseclaims to go to trial.   The band members' attorney, Thomas A. Holman, of the NewYork firm Lefrak Newman andamp; Myerson, said fraud claims stemmingfrom the 1972 concerts also will go to trial. &quot;The bandmembers were misled into believing that the concertperformances were for charitable purposes only,&quot; Mr. Holmansaid.   Mr. Holman said no decision has been made on whether toappeal Judge Baer's decision regarding &quot;Imagine.&quot; He said theparties are currently in settlement negotiations.   ---   FORMER SEARLE EXECUTIVE wins libel verdict against DowJones andamp; Co.   A jury in state court in Chicago awarded $2,250,000 incompensatory damages to Robert A. Crinkley, a formerexecutive vice president of the medical instruments group ofG.D. Searle andamp; Co., now a subsidiary of Monsanto Co., St.Louis.   Mr. Crinkley, 67 years old, filed the suit in 1977, 11months after an article in The Wall Street Journalerroneously stated the reason for his resignation. Dow Jonesis the publisher of The Wall Street Journal.   Mr. Crinkley contended in his suit that he was unable tofind high-level employment because of the damage to hisreputation caused by the article. The verdict is compensationfor Mr. Crinkley's lost wages, mental anguish, and the injuryto his reputation.   Joseph Michael O'Callaghan, a Chicago attorney for Mr.Crinkley, said his client sent out over 400 resumes tocorporations and management recruiters after the articleappeared. Mr. O'Callaghan said that neither the reporter norhis editors attempted to verify the accuracy of theinformation with Mr. Crinkley.   Michael Conway, a Chicago attorney for Dow Jones, said thecompany hasn't decided whether to appeal the verdict. But hesaid that the company had acted in good faith by running acorrection the day after the article appeared.</TEXT></DOC>