<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910730-0117</DOCNO><DOCID>910730-0117.</DOCID><HL>   The Seven Blind Summiteers   ----   By Gary Kasparov</HL><DATE>07/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- To no one's particular surprise, the Londonsummit did not bring President Gorbachev any ready money.Before their meeting in London this month, not one of theleaders of the G-7 countries made any promises about aid tothe Soviet Union. Does this signify that the West's policiestoward the Soviet Union are finally beginning to becomerealistic? One would very much like to believe so, but aproper analysis of the situation gives scant grounds for suchan evaluation.   Let us begin with the fact that the G-7 leadersunanimously expressed their solidarity with Mr. Gorbachev'sactions and promised him their full support in carrying outreforms. From the concluding declaration, it can be assumedthat the possibility of Western aid has not been buriedforever, but has merely been put off until a more appropriatemoment.</LP><TEXT>   Perhaps the only disagreement among the G-7 leaders liesin the severity of the conditions put to Mr. Gorbachev forgaining access to Western money. But does the list of Westerndemands have any priorities? Does the Kremlin have to beginradical economic and political reforms, or will the cessationof aid to Cuba and the handing over to Japan of the fourKurile Islands it seized in World War II be enough to bringMr. Gorbachev dollars and yenthus removing his incentives toease the Soviet peoples' suffering?   Speaking of reforms, it is time to clarify the terminologyused by Western Sovietologists and politicians. What reforms,already introduced or soon to be introduced by Mr. Gorbachev,are we talking about? After all, if the ideological facadeand ecstatic enthusiasms are discarded, it becomes clear thatduring his 6 1/2 years in power, Mr. Gorbachev has notcarried out a single constitutional reform aimed at theelimination of the totalitarian state. All the measures hehas undertaken constitute merely a liberalization of thecommunist regime in order to save the collapsing economy -- atask that could not be solved under the social and politicalconditions that existed earlier.   The few steps toward democracy and a free market have beenmade under the unceasing pressure of democratic and nationalmovements. It was the wave of popular resentment, in the formof strikes and huge demonstrations, rather thanbehind-the-scenes maneuvers by the West, that forcedGorbachev andamp; Co. to make concessions.   Alas, many in the West simply cannot appreciate how muchthe mentality of the Soviet population has changed. Sovietsdo not wish to live any longer under the oppression of thehated Gorbachev regime or to continue to pay for Westernillusions about Mr. Gorbachev and his reforms.   When Mr. Gorbachev announced his reforms in London, theG-7 leaders saw them only as insufficient; they didn'tquestion their philosophical underpinnings. The basis of Mr.Gorbachev's proposed reforms was the anti-crisis program ofPrime Minister Valentin Pavlov, the same &quot;reformer&quot; who onJuly 1, just days before the summit, issued a decreeintroducing new customs tariffs. This was aimed directlyagainst the development of a market system. The atmosphere ofmutual understanding that reigned during the meeting enabledMr. Gorbachev to increase his foreign policy capital, whichstill remains his trump card in political battles within hisown country.   Thus the London summit did not become the &quot;politicalhumiliation&quot; of communism, as it should have. The West, afterenduring with honor all the trials of the Cold War, has beenunable to develop a strategy equal to the rapid changestaking place in the world today.   As if disregarding the inevitability of the historicalprocess, the West claims new diplomatic agreements with thedying Soviet communist regime as victories for itself. Theballyhoo raised in the West around the Strategic ArmsReduction Talks is inexplicable to me.   The Start treaty, which Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev willsign tomorrow, has suddenly become the cornerstone ofSoviet-American politics. In the leadup to Mr. Bush's visitto Moscow, the discussion of two or three technicalities inthe Start treaty overshadowed the outrages of Black Berettroops in the Baltic states, the genocide of Armenians inAzerbaijan, and the central government's manipulation oflocal hatreds in the rebellious republics.   But all the titanic efforts made for the concluding of theStart treaty have no practical expediency. What was the pointin negotiating with the Soviet government when it is clearthat the new democratic government of the Russian republic isready to accept much more radical arms reductions? If thecommunists remain in power, the record shows all too well howthey will fulfill their obligations.   Issues such as the Start treaty have diverted the Westfrom addressing the urgent problems of the communist world.In not keeping pace with the processes of change in theSoviet Union, the West stubbornly clings to the mirage of thestatus quo.   This is as true in Yugoslavia as in the Soviet Union.Earlier this month, calls by Western politicians to respectthe territorial integrity of Yugoslavia gave Belgrade aconvenient justification for naked aggression againstindependent Slovenia. Of course, the West was not slow incondemning this military venture, but only after theSlovenian defense forces, offering unexpectedly powerfulresistance to the regular army, utterly dispelled the Serbiangenerals' hopes of a military victory. Here a cynicalquestion is in order: What would be the reaction of the Westif a Tiananmen Square massacre were to be repeated inLjubljana? Would the striving for &quot;political stability&quot;really outweigh the spilling of the blood of new innocentvictims?   Unfortunately, Western politicians do not wish toacknowledge that the basic cause of the tragedy in Yugoslaviais not Slovenian or Croatian separatism, but the die-hardobstinacy of Serbian communists who are prepared to risk acivil war for the sake of maintaining their own power. It isworth mentioning that a similar conflict in Czechoslovakiadid not lead to bloodshed: The democratic government in thedominant republic was able to neutralize the Slovakiannational communists without resorting to armed force.   If the &quot;Yugoslav week,&quot; which so shocked the West, were tobe repeated in the Soviet Union, there could be tragedies ona quite different scale. Mr. Gorbachev already has sent inthe army several times to keep breakaway regions in theSoviet empire, with bloody consequences. If the West were togive its unconditional political support to the communistleadership, there is no telling what he might do.   By taking a firm and consistent stand based on traditionaldemocratic values, the West -- particularly the U.S. -- is ina position to prevent events in the Soviet Union fromdeveloping in the most tragic way. But for this to occur itmust be remembered that discussions aimed at improvingKremlin-American relations will not bring the Soviet peoplesa single step nearer to a civilized society. Historicalexperience demonstrates that if the West allows itself to bedazzled by the brilliance of the Kremlin stars, theinevitable result is an impasse, the escape from which willprove costly to the whole of mankind.   ---   Mr. Kasparov, the world chess champion and head of theMoscow region branch of the Democratic Party of Russia, is acontributing editor of the Journal.</TEXT></DOC>