<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900906-0156</DOCNO><DOCID>900906-0156.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   FDA May Face a Raft of Claims   Over '89 Chilean Fruit Embargo   ----   By Bruce Ingersoll   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B12</SO><CO>   LATAM KO CTR HNZ Z.NES IRE</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CONTAINERS andamp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)</IN><GV>FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The Food and Drug Administration faces a possibleavalanche of damage claims from Chilean fruit growers andexporters who argue that the agency erred last year infinding cyanide in two grapes and then embargoing all fruitshipments from Chile.   The anticipated claims will rely heavily on a new reportcommissioned by the Chilean Exporters Association, whichconcludes that the grapes couldn't have been injected withcyanide in Chile but were contaminated in the FDA'sPhiladelphia laboratory after being picked out of an enormousshipload of grapes.</LP><TEXT>   Yesterday, an agency spokesman dismissed that finding as&quot;preposterous&quot; and reiterated the agency's position that thecontamination &quot;occurred either in Chile or the hold of theship.&quot;   The embargo, imposed March 13, 1989, at the peak of thefruit-shipping season, cost the Chilean government andprivate sector an estimated $333 million, according to thereport. At the same time, losses for U.S. importers and otherbusinessmen totaled $40 million to $60 million.   As many as 300 Chilean exporters representing 5,000growers and 50 U.S. importers are expected to file notices ofclaims against the FDA before the statute of limitations runsout next March. If the government rejects the claim or failsto respond within six months, the claimants can sue the FDAunder the federal torts claim law.   &quot;If each entity files, you'll have a mountain of paper,&quot;said David Holzworth, a Washington attorney for some majorU.S. importers.   To simplify things, Foster Wollen, a partner in theWashington office of Shearman andamp; Sterling, said he is lookinginto the possibility of a class action. His firm's Chileanclients include Compania Sud Americana de Vapores S.A., amajor steamship line, and a federation of fruit-growergroups.   To many Chileans, the unprecedented U.S. action was anaffront to their national pride. From the outset, thepopulace has been highly skeptical of the U.S. version of theso-called Great Grape Scare. Last week, the president ofChile appointed a special panel of five lawyers toinvestigate the matter as a prelude to a concerted effort tocollect damages.   The Chilean government would prefer to negotiate asettlement with the U.S. One possible approach would be toinvoke the bilateral Bryan Treaty of 1914, which provides forthe formation of an international commission to settledisputes between Washington and Santiago.   &quot;The mere filing of a notice isn't necessarily anaggressive, warlike action,&quot; said Mr. Wollen. Instead, hesaid it puts claimants in a position to take legal action ifdiplomatic initiatives fail.   Any allegations of negligence against the FDA will likelyrest on the new report, which summarized months of researchat the University of California at Davis, underwritten by theChilean exporters. One of the key findings is that othergrapes in the crate containing the two contaminated grapesshould have been tainted, too, if somebody in Chile hadindeed injected them with highly volatile cyanide. But theFDA reported finding no other contaminated grapes.   Another finding is that none of the grapes injected withcyanide in the California experiments developed the whiterings that led to the detection of the two suspect grapes.What's more, additional experiments show that cyanidedissipates very quickly due to its extreme volatility. Forthe two grapes to contain as much cyanide as the FDA reportedfinding, they would have had to contain more cyanide thanthey could possibly hold at the time of their discovery onthe dock, about nine hours before the FDA lab tests werefinished.   &quot;The clinical evidence rejects virtually any possibilityof contamination of the grapes in Chile or on the ship or atthe port of Philadelphia,&quot; the report said. &quot;On the contrary,the laboratory results only support the hypothesis that thegrapes were accidentally or intentionally contaminated insidethe FDA laboratory in Philadelphia.&quot;   But a study to be released soon by the General AccountingOffice is expected to conclude that the FDA handled theaffair properly for the most part and that its lab procedureswere adequate. In the past, FDA officials in Philadelphiahave rejected the notion that the grapes could have becomecontaminated while in FDA hands.   ---   SOFT-DRINK BOTTLERS' cooperatives upheld by federalappeals court.   The Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed a lowercourt's ruling that a cooperative formed by Coca-Colabottlers to make their own plastic bottles doesn't violatefederal antitrust law.   Sewell Plastics Inc., an Atlanta bottlemaker, had filedsuit in Charlotte, N.C., in 1986 against Coca-Cola Co., 34Coke bottlers and Southeastern Container Inc., a bottlemakingcooperative, alleging the cooperative engaged in unfair tradepractices.   The appeals court ruling, which upheld the lower court'sdismissal of the suit, also allowed a counterclaim againstSewell to proceed. In the countersuit, Sewell, a unit ofConstar International Inc., Chattanooga, Tenn., is accused offiling its suit for the improper purpose of trying to forcethe bottlers to stop buying from the cooperative and returnto purchasing from Sewell. An attorney for Sewell couldn't bereached for comment.   Jonathan Jacobson, an attorney for the defendants, saidthe appellate ruling is significant in upholding the rightsof bottlers to form cooperatives.   Noting that soft-drink bottlers form cooperatives forvarious purposes such as buying sugar and making cans, Mr.Jacobson said an adverse decision would have meant &quot;all thebottling cooperatives would have been in trouble.&quot;   ---   LEAN CUISINE ADS were lean on facts about Weight Watchers,judge rules.   Weight Watchers International Inc., a unit of H.J. HeinzCo., had filed a lawsuit accusing Stouffer Corp., which makesLean Cuisine frozen foods, of running misleading ads. Theads, which ran in Parade magazine in 1987 and 1988, promotedLean Cuisine dishes as substitutes for Weight Watchers' ownline of diet foods.   In federal court in Manhattan, Judge Michael Mukaseyordered Stouffer, a Nestle S.A. subsidiary, not to run theads again. The judge ruled that the ads could confuseconsumers into believing that Lean Cuisine is either endorsedby or related to Weight Watchers. He also ruled that a 1989ad gave false information comparing Lean Cuisine to WeightWatchers products.   Although Judge Mukasey barred Stouffer from resurrectingthe ads, he stopped far short of the action sought by WeightWatchers. The judge ruled against awarding any damages, andhe said Stouffer couldn't be prohibited from accuratelymentioning Weight Watchers in Lean Cuisine ads.   A spokesman for Stouffers said the company considers thedecision a victory because it allows Stouffers to promoteLean Cuisine as an alternative to Weight Watchers' own brandof low-calorie food. He said the ads, which will begin soon,will comply with Judge Mukasey's order.   Weight Watchers had claimed that any use of its name inthe ads would be a trademark infringement.   ---   CONNECTICUT MUST NEGOTIATE with an Indian tribe seeking toopen a casino, the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appealsruled. The court ruled that Connecticut illegally refused todiscuss the request of the Mashantucket Pequot tribe. Thetribe wants to offer &quot;Las Vegas nights&quot; casino gambling onits reservation in Ledyard, Conn. Under federal law, thetribe must reach an agreement with the state before addingsuch activities. Connecticut refused to discuss the proposal,claiming that state law prohibits such games of chance. Thefederal appeals-court panel, however, ordered the state tonegotiate in good faith on the request.   ---   INTEGRATED RESOURCES INC. received a 60-day extension onits &quot;exclusivity period,&quot; the time in which only it canofficially propose a reorganization plan under Chapter 11 ofthe federal Bankruptcy Code. The exclusivity period was tohave expired Sept. 11. Integrated, a former real estatesyndicator that has been operating under bankruptcy-lawprotection since February, had sought a 120-day extensionfrom U.S. Bankruptcy Court Judge Howard C. Buschman III, inNew York.   ---   Martha Brannigan and Wade Lambert contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>