<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900813-0150</DOCNO><DOCID>900813-0150.</DOCID><HL>   The Mideast Conflict -- Brotherly Hate:   Gulf Crisis Underscores   Historical Divisions   In the Arab `Family'   ---   Stress Caused by Iraq Attack   Renews Region's Grudges   And Shifts Some Alliances   ---   Is Arafat on a Banana Skin?   ----   By Geraldine Brooks and Tony Horwitz   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   Libya's Col. Moammar Gadhafi certainly wasn't about totake the risk.   Arriving at the airport in Casablanca last summer for anArab League summit, the colonel eyed a traditional welcomingplatter of camel's milk and dates, picked up one date as ifto eat it, then slipped it into his pocket. Few of the otherArab kings, presidents and emirs arriving on the tarmac wereinclined to risk the untested food.</LP><TEXT>   When Arab leaders gather to demonstrate brotherhood, theparadigm is Cain and Abel. Jordan's King Hussein travels witha private chef, and not just because he's a picky eater. Hewas 15 when he watched a Palestinian gun down his grandfatherat the Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem. But bodyguards andfood-tasters are no bar to florid proclamations that &quot;thegreat Arab heart beats as one.&quot;   In speaking of the ties that bind them, Arabs constantlyinvoke the image of family. The current Gulf conflict, theysay, is a squabble between brothers, best settled behindclosed doors. &quot;Fraternal Iraq&quot; was how Egyptian PresidentHosni Mubarak referred to Baghdad at last Friday's summit inCairo -- before ordering his own troops in to protect SaudiArabia. Saddam Hussein depicts his midnight raid on Kuwait asreuniting an Arab family shattered by colonialism.   To Western ears, such cant sounds cynical. But to manyArabs, it resonates back 1,000 years, to a lost age whenunity and greatness were indeed real. Dreams of Arabbrotherhood also feed on the resentment bred duringintervening centuries, when foreign armies, from theCrusaders to the Israelis, humiliated Arabs and carved uptheir land.   Saddam Hussein's action has exposed these fault lines inthe region, just as revolution in Eastern Europe has laidbare old feuds between nations and ethnic groups. When thesand settles on the current Gulf crisis, these historicaltensions will remain, leaving the Arab world in greater fluxthan it has been since World War I. &quot;Saddam,&quot; saysPalestinian political scientist, Sa'eb Erakat, &quot;may haveopened the gates of hell in the Middle East.&quot;   The very notion of a monolithic Arab nation has alwayscontained elements of Western simplification, Arab fantasyand Israeli propaganda (20 hostile nations encircling thetiny Jewish state, like Indians attacking a wagon train).While there have been flashes of modern accord -- in the1960s, under the charismatic leadership of Egypt's GamalAbdel Nasser -- the Gulf flare-up shows how deep thedivisions go. A short list of Arab hates reads like anadaptation of the Tom Lehrer song, &quot;National BrotherhoodWeek&quot;: The Iraqis hate the Syrians, the Yemenis hate theSaudis, the Jordanians hate the Kuwaitis -- and everybodyhates the Jews.   Such enmities are inevitable in a culture so vast andvaried. Arab territory spans five time zones and is home tosome 185 million people; Casablanca is closer to Boston thanit is to Oman. Kuwait has a per capita income of $23,000;Yemen's is about $500.   Most Arabs are Moslem, but there also are some 10 millionChristians, including the Iraqi foreign minister, Tariq Aziz,and the radical Palestinian leader, George Habash. At asynagogue in downtown Baghdad, Jews still gather in prayer,and there are thousands of Jews in Yemen, Syria and NorthAfrica. Ethnically, the region includes blue-eyed Berbers,black Nubians, Kurdish tribesmen and fair-haired Circassians.   At its most basic, to be Arab means to speak Arabic. Butwhile the classical, written tongue of the Koran is uniform,dialects are so varied that an Iraqi talking to a Libyan isroughly like a Scottish shepherd speaking to a Mississippifarmer. Palestinians living in Tunisia often speak to theirneighbors in French, just to be understood.   For Westerners, time spent in the Arab world leavescontradictory impressions: There is the impoverishedPalestinian family that piles a guest's plate with thechoicest morsels; and then the handless corpse of a pregnantnurse, butchered by fellow Palestinians who said shecollaborated with Israel. There are evening strolls along theTigris River in Baghdad, where the only danger is stumblingon an embarrassed couple kissing; and then the stench of thedesert battlefield as trucks driven by heedless Iraqisoldiers grind tread marks into a mass of fresh Iraniancorpses.   A language that gave the world algebra also has bequeathedit the word &quot;assassin,&quot; which originally referred tohashish-eating fanatics who murdered Christians. &quot;Infidel&quot; isone of the most common words in the Koran, never far fromanother noun, &quot;hellfire.&quot; To die in holy war -- which SaddamHussein has called on fellow Arabs to wage against Iraq'senemies -- is to gain quick entry to heaven. Yet the chancesof being murdered in the Arab world are 30 times less than inAmerica.   Saddam Hussein epitomizes the dark side of the Arab world,one which the West has too often taken for the whole. TheIraqi president doesn't make any secret of his attachment toguns, torture and poison gas. His speeches are riddled withreferences to plucked eyes and chopped limbs. Asked whatSaddam Hussein would have become had he been born into amiddle-class American family, one Iraq expert responds;&quot;either a surgeon or a mafia don.&quot;   James Zogby, head of the Arab American Institute, likensSaddam Hussein's appeal to that of the black Americanpreacher, Louis Farrakhan. Both speak to &quot;a very angry, veryalienated constituency,&quot; he says. Continuing the ghettoanalogy, he says that for many Arabs, Saddam Hussein &quot;is thebaddest brother in town. He's tough, he's strong and nobodyowns him. Many people like that.&quot; Unfortunately, in Mr.Zogby's view, &quot;Saddam is a loose cannon, not a savior.&quot;   The Arab anger President Hussein has tapped, and the dreamof a potent and united Arab world, finds its roots in theMiddle East of the 7th Century. Before Allah revealed Islamto a Mecca camel merchant named Mohammed in 610, the term&quot;Arab&quot; referred only to the scattered tribes of the Arabianpeninsula. But in the century that followed, the prophet'sdisciples burst out of Arabia on camel and horseback, drivingeast into India, and northwest as far as central France.Moslem conquests continued for centuries; pirates fromAlgiers even came ashore in Iceland. Though roughly one-sixthof the world's population is Moslem, only one out of fiveMoslems is Arab.   Between roughly 750 AD and 1050 AD, the Arab domain wasbigger than the Roman Empire at its peak. While Saxons andFranks fought over feudal Europe, scholars in Damascus, Cairoand Baghdad translated Aristotle, and Arab doctors developedan inoculation against smallpox. Ibn Battuta, the Arab MarcoPolo, traveled 73,000 miles in the 14th century withoutventuring much outside the Dar al-Islam, or House of Islam.   For Moslems of this period, nation and race wereunimportant; the only distinction that mattered was thatbetween believers and infidels -- the sole importantdistinction for many Moslems today. Europeans, according to a10th century Arab geographer, were &quot;more like beasts thanmen.&quot; Europe, of course, was contemptuous of Arabs as well;in Dante's Inferno, Mohammed occupies the eighth circle ofhell, not far from Satan.   The Arab world's golden age ended in feuds and foreigninvasion: first by Crusaders, then by Mongols and then byOttoman Turks, who by the mid-16th century had made most ofthe Arab world its vassal. It is this era of Arab history,and the European domination that followed, that created manyof the tensions being played out in the Gulf today. Hauntingmonuments to past glory are everywhere: the pillars of theQueen of Sheba's temple in Yemen, the ruins of Babylon inIraq, the soaring mosques of Cairo. Writes the Arabist, W.C.Smith: &quot;The Arab sense of bygone splendor is superb.&quot;   So is the sense of betrayal. If Arabs seem uneasy at thesight of U.S. troops landing in the desert, it is becausethey have every reason to distrust the West. During World WarI, Arabs were victims of one of history's most blatant doubledeals. The ruler of Mecca, great-grandfather of Jordan's KingHussein, offered to help the British against the Turks inexchange for Arabian independence. His sons set off with T.E.Lawrence on the military adventures so romantically depictedin the film, &quot;Lawrence of Arabia.&quot;   In secret, however, Britain and France crafted a scheme tocarve up the Arab world between them. In the end, France(which already held much of North Africa) took what is nowSyria and Lebanon while Britain added the newly createdmandates of Palestine, Jordan and Iraq to its holdings inEgypt, Sudan, Oman and Aden. Winston Churchill used to boastthat he created Jordan one Sunday afternoon with the strokeof a pen.   By World War II, Jews were pouring into Palestine, fleeingHitler. To Arabs, these Europeans looked like yet anotherwave of colonial usurpers. Arabs resisted the immigration ina conflict continuing to this day.   To appreciate how deeply the presence of Israel is felt,it is necessary only to turn on the television news in half adozen Arab capitals. The land mass that the rest of the worldknows as Israel often doesn't exist, either on maps or inofficial parlance. In some states it is the &quot;Zionist entity&quot;run by &quot;the terrorist Yitzhak Shamir.&quot; Although Jordanian andIsraeli farmers gaze at each other across the narrow JordanRiver, there isn't any phone, telex or postal contact betweenthe two countries.   After King Hassan of Morocco met with Israel's ShimonPeres, Col. Gadhafi of Libya donned a white glove beforegreeting the King, so he wouldn't touch what he consideredZionist-tainted flesh. Even now, as Arab troops face offagainst Iraq, Arabs acknowledge that a single Israeli bombingraid on Iraq would force Arab nations to rally behind SaddamHussein.   America's unwavering support for Israel pains Arabs,especially those who spent their student years in the U.S.&quot;We get to know Americans, how fair they are, friendly andwarm, and then we see all that fairness vanish when it comesto Israel,&quot; says U.S.-educated Saad Eddin Ibrahim, anEgyptian academic. Many Arabs see the Gulf conflict as yetanother example of the U.S.'s double standard. They say theU.S. is resisting Iraq with a resolve never shown during theIsraeli invasion of Lebanon and Israel's long occupation ofPalestinian land.   Arab discomfort with the West is cultural as well. Arabstudents often are repelled by the crime, drugs and relaxedsexual mores of the West, and are only too happy to get hometo the conservative certainties of their societies.   And certainties they are. According to the opening of theKoran, &quot;there is no doubt in this book.&quot; Islam has neverundergone a reformation. In Saudi Arabia, women aren'tallowed to drive and men are herded to prayer bystick-wielding police from the &quot;Committee for the Propagationof Virtue and the Prevention of Vice.&quot; Even liberal Egypt hasbanned a book by its Nobel Prize winner, Naguib Mafouz,because it indirectly questions Islam.   Mideast analysts have long focused on Islamicfundamentalism and the Arab-Israeli conflict as the big risksto peace in the region. But the current crisis wasn'tprovoked by either: It is about money and borders. So far,Islamic fundamentalists have divided along national lines; inEgypt, they have condemned Iraq, while in Jordan they havecheered it. However, all the fundamentalists deplore U.S.involvement in the region.   In addition to exploiting deep-seated anti-Westernfeeling, Saddam Hussein is trying to inflame class tensions,which have brewed ever since drillers first spurted oil ontothe Bahraini sands in 1932. That discovery would give rise tothe greatest transfer of wealth in human history -- fromindustrialized countries to desert bedouins. By the 1970s,Arabs who had eked out miserable lives on dates and camelmilk found themselves able to afford jetloads of fresh Mainelobster and prime rib steak. The Persian Gulf's small rulingfamilies were the greatest beneficiaries, and the Westwatched -- and worried -- as they amassed ever more capital.   The oil wealth divided the Arab world. In some cases, tinycity-states became the richest nations on earth while theiroverpopulated neighbors -- many with little or no oil --remained beggars. The rich countries, such as Kuwait,imported Egyptians, Palestinians and others to do their laborand invested much of their wealth in the West, breedingfurther resentment and class tensions.   It isn't surprising, then, that oil has arousedterritorial disputes as well. One reason Saddam Hussein'sland grab sent tremors through Middle East sands is thatborder disputes tend to proliferate here. Damascus stilldreams of a &quot;Greater Syria&quot; that encompasses territory nowbelonging to Lebanon, Israel, Jordan and Turkey. Yemen claimssouthern Saudi Arabia, and both Oman and Saudi Arabia believepieces of the United Arab Emirates rightly belong to them.The Emirates are so disunited that a map of the nation is acrazy-quilt of sheikdoms, some of which include pockets ofland inside their neighbor's boundaries. The map is alsoriddled with neutral zones and lines marked &quot;border disputed&quot;or &quot;boundary undefined.&quot;   Iraq shows how arbitrary colonial boundaries can be. Thenorth is populated by bitter Kurds, promised statehood thatnever materialized; the south by Shi'ite Moslems with stronglinks to Iran. And the area in between is home to SaddamHussein's ruling Sunni minority. President Hussein is so waryof his own countrymen that his ruling clique is composedlargely of relatives and friends from his small hometown ofTikrit.   Since the death of Egypt's President Nasser in 1970, theArab nations, including Iraq, have jostled for his mantle.Each of the major players feels it is the rightful heir toleadership. Saudi Arabia is custodian of Islam's holy places,Mecca and Medina, and owns the world's richest oilfields.Syria has led the struggle against Israel and has as itscapital Damascus, the world's oldest continuously inhabitedcity. Egypt has a population double that of any other Arabcountry and its capital, Cairo, is the traditional seat ofArab learning.   Now, Saddam Hussein is making his claim for power throughmilitary might; for added legitimacy, he says Baghdad was thehistorical capital of the Arab world and claims directdescent from Mohammed. He also publicly invokes the image ofNebuchadnezzar, best-remembered for sacking Jerusalem andenslaving the Jews.   In turn, Egypt's Mr. Mubarak, whose nine-year presidencyhas been characterized by cautious plodding, has emerged asthe decisive leader of the anti-Iraq camp. If Iraq is faceddown, Mr. Mubarak's unhesitating stance is likely to earn hima blank check from grateful Gulf regimes, and even firmersupport from the West.   Two of the region's great survivors, meanwhile, are introuble. The PLO leader, Yasir Arafat, is &quot;a man standing ona banana skin,&quot; according to an Arab political analyst.&quot;Arafat is a brilliant man, but we have a saying in Arabic:The slip-up of a brilliant man is worth a thousand deadlyerrors.&quot;   Mr. Arafat has sided with Iraq, and thereby placed himselfin double jeopardy. If Iraq is smashed, Egypt and the Gulfwill exact a huge price for Mr. Arafat's disloyalty. At thesame time, if Saddam Hussein somehow outlasts the huge forcesarrayed against him, his power and prestige could transformMr. Arafat into an Iraqi puppet; rather than deal with him onthe Palestinian issue, negotiators might well go over hishead to the Iraqi leader.   Jordan's King Hussein, who has deftly weathered 38 yearsof crisis-ridden rule, also is playing a dangerous game,using Iraq as a deterrent against Israel and Israel as adeterrent against Iraq. After initially siding with SaddamHussein, he now has edged toward the moderate Arab camp andrisks a rebellion by his own population, which is stronglypro-Iraq.   Syria's Hafez Assad, an archrival of Saddam Hussein, hasbeen drawn closer to moderates such as Egypt. Syria maybecome, if not a U.S. ally, at least less of an enemy than ithas been for decades. And Saudi Arabia's King Fahd, by makingthe tough decision to invite U.S. forces into his country,has shown some rare political forcefulness. The sedentarymonarch has long been plagued by orthopedic problems, andwhenever he failed to show up at heated Arab meetings, Arabwits blamed it on the King's &quot;weak knees.&quot; Because he has nowtaken a firm stance, the King also risks appearing as a U.S.lackey, calling in infidel troops to defend Islam's holyland.   But Saddam Hussein's call for a religious &quot;uprising&quot; inSaudi Arabia hasn't yet yielded much response, says AbdalaMeer Mosa, a Saudi Shi'ite dissident who usually opposes themonarchy. &quot;I don't think anyone is fooled by Saddam's `jihad'-- everyone knows he's a butcher, a torturer, and the way hecaptured Kuwait is something horrible.&quot; Mr. Mosa said evendissidents recognize that Saudi King Fahd had little choicebut to call for foreign help.   Still, some Arabs worry that U.S. forces, once in, willprove difficult to dislodge. They fear that Saudi Arabia willbecome one big U.S. base, garrisoned by Americans determinedto protect future oil supplies.   These sorts of fears -- and the splits they are causing inthe Arab world -- were apparent at Friday's hastily convenedArab summit, where just 12 of the 20 Arab League membersvoted to send forces to Saudi Arabia. Iraq, Libya, and thePLO rejected the proposal outright, while key states such asJordan and Algeria wavered in a meeting so acrimonious thatthe Kuwaiti emir stormed out and another member of the royalfamily fainted. At one point an Iraqi reportedly threw aplate of food at the Kuwaiti delegation. Now, with Arabtroops arrayed against each other on the Saudi border, thedream of brotherhood seems more distant than ever before.   Egyptians have long told a wistful joke about Arabdivisions. A trumpeter stands outside the Arab Leagueheadquarters in Cairo. Asked why he is there, the musiciansays, &quot;I'm supposed to blow my horn when Arab unity comes.&quot;   &quot;And how much are you paid?&quot;   &quot;Fifteen pounds a month.&quot;   &quot;That's nothing]&quot;   &quot;I know,&quot; the trumpeter says. &quot;But it's a lifetime job.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>