<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901228-0058</DOCNO><DOCID>901228-0058.</DOCID><HL>   Shaken Sheiks:   However Crisis in Gulf   Plays Out, Arab Chiefs   Face a Changed World   ---   They Have to Share Power   With Own People, Defend   Lands, Realign Their Ties   ---   Exploded: a `Fantasy Culture'   ----   By Geraldine Brooks and Tony Horwitz   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   Making his way uncertainly across the red carpet, KingFahd of Saudi Arabia clutched hands with the aged emir of AbuDhabi. A retainer eased the frail sheik of Kuwait into aplush leather armchair. As monarchs and ministers gatheredlast weekend for a Persian Gulf parley, all had the hurt airof men who had learned the hard lesson: Money can't buy youlove.   Perched atop 40% of the world's oil, the Gulf sheikdomshave long tried to purchase the loyalty of dangerousneighbors, of imported Arab laborers and of their ownsubjects. Saddam Hussein's tanks took three hours to shatterthis &quot;riyal-politik&quot;. Now, however the crisis ends, Gulfleaders face tasks that once seemed distant, evenunthinkable: sharing power with their people, providing theirown defense and realigning their ties with the Arab world.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Saddam has exploded our fantasy culture,&quot; says a seniorGulf official, seated in a palace of marbled halls andPersian carpets. &quot;A wealthy island in a sea of poverty cannotlive securely forever.&quot;   The future of these fragile oligarchies carries highstakes for America as well. Although gradual liberalizationin the Gulf seems likely, there also are rumblings of afundamentalist backlash. Gulf leaders could kick sand inAmerica's face by making up with Arab radicals and with Iran.And unless the Gulf mobilizes its defenses, the West may bedoomed to fight this region's battles indefinitely.   An Egyptian diplomat, Tahseen Basheer, once derided otherArab states as merely &quot;tribes with flags.&quot; Nowhere did theinsult cut deeper than in the principalities of the PersianGulf. Just a generation ago, this region was the Arabs'Appalachia -- isolated, indigent and clannish.   In 1948, when Edward Henderson arrived in Abu Dhabi tonegotiate the first oil concessions, the ruling sheik livedin a mud fort cut with arrow slits. &quot;In those days, therewasn't much to defend,&quot; says the Englishman, now an archivistin Abu Dhabi. &quot;The biggest pane of glass in the sheikdom wasthe windscreen of my car.&quot; The mud fort still stands, dwarfedby glittering towers of steel and glass.   But although oil has catapulted the Gulf states into the20th century, they remain insular societies wary of changeand of one another. Before 1960, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar andthe United Arab Emirates didn't exist as independent nations.Geographically, they are pimples on Saudi Arabia's vastdesert backside, and they fear domination by a Saudi regimeviewed as overbearing and religiously fanatical. The sixthstate, Oman, which once was a seafaring power with coloniesin Pakistan and Zanzibar, keeps its distance and its distinctidentity.   These fractious states are nonetheless kin, united by theoil beneath their sands and by their hereditary, dictatorialrule. The United Arab Emirates phonebook offers a window intothis feudal but intimate leadership. It opens with a sectionlabeled &quot;The Shaikhs,&quot; including listings for their beachpalaces, shooting ranges and, in some cases, palace bedrooms.The government pages that follow look almost like anafterthought; the same names appear at the head of most majorministries.   Ironically, it is Saddam Hussein, a far more ruthlesstyrant than any of the Gulf sheiks, who is nudging themtoward democracy. One Saudi regional governor, a brother ofKing Fahd, used to end debates with his subjects by barking,&quot;My family took this country by the sword]&quot; He isn't likelyto say that anymore.   Comments one Saudi businessman: &quot;He knows we can answer,`Yeah? Well, now George Bush has taken it by the sword, soyour family is no better than us and you better start dealingwith us.'&quot;   Kuwait's resilience in exile also has shown the importanceof popular support. If Kuwaitis hadn't stood by their deposedemir, who now has promised democratic reforms, the tinynation might well have vanished quickly.   The crisis has accelerated demand for open information,too. In Saudi Arabia, despite censorship so intense thatnewspaper crossword puzzles are edited to delete referencesto alcohol, Western influences get through. Cable NewsNetwork isn't permitted outside princes' palaces, but somecitizens hide satellite dishes inside rooftop &quot;water tanks.&quot;Many Saudis also watch Bahraini TV, which recently beganbroadcasting CNN, including uncensored reports on Israel, foran hour a night.   &quot;There was pressure before to keep such things off theair,&quot; says Bahrain's information minister, Tariq al-Moayed.&quot;But people are asking questions that have to be answered.There is no going back.&quot;   The way forward, though, is uncertain. Though denyingtheir citizens political rights, Gulf leaders have givenalmost everyone a stake in the status quo, with freeeducation, medicine and generous subsidies. The huge numbersof young people who study abroad almost invariably returnhome -- in a sharp contrast to most other Arab states.   The richest Gulf capitals, such as Abu Dhabi, areluxurious playgrounds, their causeways busy with white-robedmen in white Mercedes-Benzes, talking to each other on carphones. A conversation among United Arab Emiratesbusinessmen, over a lobster-claw dinner, quickly turns fromthe Gulf crisis to a debate over whether one man should givehis son $15,000 to enter a jet-ski competition.   &quot;People are too immersed in the Dolce Vita to want to risklosing it,&quot; says Aly Mahmoud, a veteran Egyptian journalist.   In Jidda, a young manufacturer felt inspired by the Gulfcrisis to pen a newspaper article calling for more freedom.&quot;But I'm writing,&quot; he recalls, &quot;and my hand starts shaking,and I think, `Are they going to take my factory away?'&quot;   With no real unions, political parties or freedom of thepress, Gulf citizens have few means of expressing dissent --short of demonstrations, which are anathema in close-knitsocieties averse to public conflict. When some Saudi womenrecently drove through Riyadh to protest an unofficial ban onwomen driving, the reaction was vicious. The Saudisformalized the ban and tolerated the circulation of pamphletsinciting harassment of the women and their husbands. Nor hasthe state quelled rising militancy among the religiouspolice, who recently broke into private homes to arrestpeople drinking alcohol.   Such actions have raised fears that a fundamentalistbacklash could spill across the region. &quot;I'm more afraid ofthe Saudis than I am of the Iraqis,&quot; says a senior officialin a neighboring state. &quot;You can always turn from Westernvalues to more Islam, but it's very hard to turn the clockback the other way.&quot;   Any change will almost certainly filter down from the top.But Gulf leaders don't seem ready for more than tentativesteps, such as vague promises in several states to set up&quot;advisory councils.&quot;   &quot;It is naive to apply here what you apply elsewhere,&quot; saysSheik Mohamed Bin Mubarak Al-Khalifa, Bahrain's foreignminister. &quot;The Gulf is not Scandinavia.&quot; Like officialsacross the region, he says change must be slow and conform tothe conservative, tribal nature of Gulf society. Officialsalso say the current crisis, like the Iran-Iraq war, is notime to talk about destabilizing moves.   But such arguments are dismissed by those wanting change.&quot;Why should people here be less able to adopt democracy thanelsewhere?&quot; asks Abdulnabi Al Sho'ala, a prominent Bahrainibusinessman. &quot;We don't need to reinvent the wheel.&quot;   One thing the Gulf probably should reinvent is its proudmilitary tradition. It was from the Arabian peninsula thatMohammed's horsemen charged forth. Here, too, Lawrence ofArabia found his best allies against Ottoman domination.   But urbanization and wealth have eroded the militaryethic. Though often blaming their weakness on sparsepopulation, the Gulf states combined have a native populationalmost equal to Iraq's and three times Israel's. Yet ratherthan mobilize this manpower, most Gulf leaders have opted forfancy weapons as well as for mercenaries from neighboringstates.   Politics aggravates the problem. Shia Muslims, distrustedby their Sunni Muslim governments, often are excluded fromthe army. Saudi Arabia, a nation of more than 10 millionpeople, keeps two competing armed forces numbering less than70,000 each; it fears that a strong military could stage acoup. Asked in November whether more young Saudis should jointhe armed forces, the interior minister, Prince Naif, saidthey could serve their nation in many other ways as well.   The swift arrival of almost 500,000 foreign troops sinceAug. 2 also has made native armies seem superfluous. &quot;Youthink I want to send my teen-aged son to die for Kuwait?&quot;asks a senior Gulf official. He chuckles and adds, &quot;We haveour white slaves from America to do that.&quot;   Relying on foreigners, though, is potentially explosive ina region only recently freed from colonial rule. When, in1980, Oman quietly entered an agreement with the U.S. thatallowed the pre-positioning of equipment and access toairstrips, it was harshly attacked by other Arab states --with Kuwait among the most vocal. And America's support ofIsrael makes a U.S. presence especially sensitive. In Riyadh,a young student named Maha regales a Western guest with thelatest &quot;news&quot; of Israeli atrocities: An American AIDS victimin Cairo, she says, has been recruited by Israeli agents tomolest and infect Egyptian children.   Maha also believes that Americans are in Saudi Arabia onlyto help Israel destroy Iraq -- a common theme on cassettescirculating in the kingdom. &quot;It is not the world againstIraq, it is the West against Islam,&quot; Safar al-Hawali, anIslamic scholar in Mecca, recently declared.   To deflect such criticism, most Gulf states are making ashow of beefing up their defenses. In the United ArabEmirates, 70,000 men have volunteered for basic training, andthe first batch of female troops now is being trained by U.S.servicewomen. The state also is filling the airwaves withimages of camouflaged soldiers and caftaned Bedouins marchingheroically across the sand.   &quot;There is some guilt, having other people do our work anddefend us,&quot; says Abdul Majeed Al Fahimi, a 29-year-old bankerwho recently volunteered for desert training. &quot;I neverthought the time would come when I might need to fight, too.&quot;   But Gulf forces, with the possible exception of Oman's,still are a long way from providing effective defense. In theshort term, ties to the U.S. and to regional allies such asEgypt are sure to increase. At last weekend's summit inQatar, Kuwait hinted that it wants a U.S.-led force in theregion for at least five years.   The Gulf's feeble defense is a symptom of a much broaderdisease: regional disunity. The few times Gulf states havedeployed forces have been to fight each other. In 1986, Qatarlanded troops and took hostages on a disputed coral island toprevent Bahrain from building a naval station there. In theUnited Arab Emirates, a shaky confederation of sevensheikdoms, the emirate of Dubai retains its own army andmoved tanks to the Abu Dhabi border when tension flared in1987. Five of the emirates have built their own internationalairports -- in an area smaller than Maine. A sixth is underconstruction.   Such feuding has repeatedly undercut the six-member GulfCooperation Council, or GCC. Formed in 1981, the council hasdrawn up bold plans for integration, only to have themflouted in practice. &quot;Our airlines can't even coordinatetheir schedules,&quot; says a Saudi GCC official, who adds that itcan take two days to get from Riyadh to Muscat, the Omanicapital. The GCC had its own rapid-deployment force,&quot;Peninsula Shield,&quot; before the American-led &quot;Desert Shield&quot;arrived, but it proved so impotent that local wags call theGCC the &quot;Gulf Capitulation Council.&quot;   Although Iraq's aggression may scare the Gulf states intoputting aside petty jealousies, it also has exacerbated oldtensions. Oman, long the odd man out in the GCC, annoyed itsneighbors in November by welcoming Iraq's foreign ministerand also by holding a lavish, nine-day celebration of itsnational day. Dubai, well out of Iraqi missile range anddesperate to distance itself from the conflict, issuesreports about business unaffected by &quot;the upper Gulfsituation.&quot; And the Kuwaiti refugees flooding intoneighboring states have stirred up their traditionalunpopularity. &quot;The Kuwaitis are too big for their robes,&quot; oneGulf official says. &quot;They had all that money, and still theycouldn't defend themselves.&quot;   One area where the Gulf states do seem united is in theirchanged relations with outside states. Nothing shows thevolatility of the region's alliances more clearly than therehabilitation of Iran and the excommunication of thePalestine Liberation Organization. Iran's ambassador to Qatarwas invited to some GCC summit sessions last weekend, anddelegates said Iran would be included in any new regionalsecurity plans. Bahrain's foreign minister recently visitedTehran for the first time in 10 years, and regular freighttraffic between the countries is due to start soon.   Such actions would have been impossible before the deathlast year of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, who used to callthe Gulf rulers &quot;puppets of the Great Satan.&quot; During theIraq-Iran war, Tehran was implicated in a coup attempt inBahrain and in bombings in Kuwait. It also has boycotted theannual haj pilgrimage ever since a shootout between Saudiforces and militant Iranian demonstrators in 1987.   Meanwhile, old allies, bankrolled for decades by the Gulfstates, are falling by the wayside. Customs officials inSaudi Arabia now seize biographies of PLO Chairman YasserArafat; the man himself is &quot;persona non grata&quot; in most Gulfstates. And what was once the PLO's largest source of fundinghas dried up. &quot;As far as the PLO is concerned,&quot; a Saudiofficial says, &quot;the check is in the mail.&quot;   Traditional bows to the Palestinian cause have becomerarer. Gulf journalists say articles on the intifada occupyonly about 20% of the news space they did before Aug. 2. On arecent day, the only Palestinian item in the Gulf News, whichis based in the United Arab Emirates, was a small story deepinside the paper, wedged between local reports headlined&quot;Sleeping Drunk Arrested&quot; and &quot;Two Hurt as Car Rams Camel.&quot;   Several Gulf states have expelled Palestinian workers orfailed to renew their visas. Jordanians, Yemenis and Sudanesealso are being nudged out, and the rifts with theirgovernments may linger on for some time. Gulf leaders now saythat instead of pouring money into the pockets of neighboringrulers, they will direct their aid straight to projectsaiding the people.   Many officials also speak openly about changing the PLOleadership. &quot;You don't spit on the hand that is held out toyou. This is what Arafat did,&quot; says Yahya Al-Sumait, Kuwait'sminister for housing. &quot;In my view, his turn is finished.There are many more highly educated, motivated, couthPalestinians than Arafat.&quot;   Arab leaders, though, have a tradition of kissing andmaking up after breaches that seem irreparable. And theGulf's growing closeness to the U.S. will probably force itsleaders to reaffirm their Arab credentials. &quot;Externally, wehave to avoid reacting `To hell with Palestinians, to hellwith Iraqis,' or we'll wake up and realize we've strandedourselves on a desert island,&quot; says Sulaiman Al-Mutawa,Kuwait's minister of planning. Gulf leaders also will want toavoid alienating radical Arabs lest the Gulf become a targetof terrorism.   Mr. Al-Mutawa, like the rest of Kuwait's government, nowworks out of a Saudi hotel room hastily converted into anoffice. The Kuwaitis, in exile, have been forced to thinkdeeply about their future and about the regional arrangementsthat failed them abysmally.   Likening the Gulf to the Soviet Union, Mr. Al-Mutawa sayschange will inevitably be costly: &quot;There will be heads thathave to be chopped. But in the long run, it will be to thebenefit of the area.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>