<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911212-0139</DOCNO><DOCID>911212-0139.</DOCID><HL>   Wear and Tear:   The Alps' Lofty Vistas   Now Often Include   Malls and Parking Lots   ---   Freeways, Acid Rain Also Dim   Mountains' Cowbell Aura;   But the Money Is Good   ---   Curb on Development Is Set   ----   By Ken Wells   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)MASS TRANSIT, BUS LINES, SUBWAYS, HIGHWAYS (TRA)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)</NS><RE>AUSTRIA (AU)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)ITALY (ITA)LIECHTENSTEIN (LS)SWITZERLAND (SZ)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   CHILCHERBERGE, Switzerland -- Alois Epp's ancestors stakedout a farm here in 1464, building a simple chalet with thegrandest of views. Above were flowering meadows, pinethickets and granite spires of the Alps' Windgalle range;below, the clear River Reuss winding through a checkerboardof forest and field.   After more than five centuries, though, the Epp family'spostcard perch has a rather different vista. A four-lane,traffic-choked freeway now shadows the river. A mass of raillines carries 300 trains a day through the narrow valley.Boxy warehouses and factories crowd lands that once heldHeidi-esque farms.</LP><TEXT>   And in the steep forests above, acid rain and smog aretaking their toll. Last year, a storm that might normallyhave uprooted two dozen trees knocked down acres of pinesweakened by pollution. The shrinking of the protectiveforests in turn invites avalanches, which could one day forceresidents to abandon Chilcherberge and its pastoral way oflife.   &quot;I'm on the knife's edge,&quot; says Mr. Epp, who lives almostas simply as did his ancestors 500 years ago, raising cattleand making cheese. &quot;I cannot tell you which way the knifewill turn.&quot;   His situation is symptomatic of the ills plaguing the Alpsacross its seven-nation range, stretching 650 miles fromFrance to the highlands of Austria and Yugoslavia. Thoughrelatively unspoiled through World War II, the &quot;green roof ofEurope&quot; now finds itself under stress from commerce andtourism, and under siege from industrial pollution.   The Alps still boast some of the world's most breathtakingscenery. And the skiing, tourism and Alpine freight trafficfeed untold millions of dollars, directly or indirectly, intothe local economies. But the price of this economic activityis a landscape marred by deforestation and erosion, a crushof roads and helter-skelter development, and the traffic andwaste of 100 million annual visitors. Acid rain has sickenedhalf of Switzerland's forests and 70% of those in theItalian, German and Austrian Alps, a United Nations studysays. Half of the Alps' native animal and bird species havedisappeared.   These problems, if not systematically addressed, portend&quot;slow death&quot; for the Alps, argues Monique Gautier, a Frenchenvironmentalist. Javed Ahmad, director of a Geneva-basedgroup called Alp Action, says the Alps &quot;are running out oftime.&quot;   After almost two decades of debate, the Alpine nations --Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Liechtenstein, Switzerlandand Yugoslavia -- last month signed an Alps treaty aimed atregulating growth and curbing development. But it may beyears before definitive regulations are accepted as law amongthe signatories. Meanwhile, the load heaped upon this ancientecosystem grows heavier by day.   As the high crossroads of Europe, the Alps highways arethe busiest mountain roads in the world, carrying about 15%of Europe's freight traffic and 20% of its passenger traffic.The number of trucks trundling over the St. Gotthard passbetween Switzerland and Italy has more than doubled in thepast decade, to about 700,000 a year. Thirty years ago, 1,500cars moved daily over Brenner pass, between Austria andItaly; now there are 50,000 a day. Last summer, when a stormflooded the highway and washed out a rail link, trafficbacked up for 70 miles.   Even traffic outside the Alps takes a toll. The autoexhaust from a London rush hour reaches the forests of theSwiss Alps, in the form of polluted air, within 18 hours,Swiss scientists estimate.   If the Alpine economy lives on tourism, its ecosystem ischoking on it. The Alps are blanketed by 40,000 ski runs and14,000 ski lifts, mostly built in the past 25 years. The skitrails of Austria alone, if placed end to end, would encirclethe globe.   Austria's tourist authority says the Alps will needsignificant new roads, hotels and resorts to meet projectionsthat the number of tourist days (one tourist staying one day)will rise to 600 million by the year 2000 from 400 millionnow. In France, officials swept aside environmentalobjections to bring the 1992 Winter Olympics -- and anavalanche of development -- to a cluster of tiny villages inthe relatively unspoiled Albertville region.   This mass tourism has clawed deeply into the Alps'aesthetic and cultural landscape. Off some well-traveledroutes in France, Italy, Germany and Liechtenstein, themountains themselves are all but hidden behind stretches ofshopping centers, condos, parking lots and revolvingrestaurants.   In Switzerland, Austria and elsewhere, miles of man-madeavalanche barriers form metal gashes on slopes once held inplace by forests -- now cut away for ski resorts. In someItalian resorts where the infrastructure has been overwhelmedby the crush of skiers, restaurants simply dump their garbagedown the slopes.   As the skiers move in, the locals tend to move out, sellout or find themselves strangers in their own communities. Atthe turn of the century, one in four Swiss lived in the Alps.Now fewer than one-tenth do, a statistic mirrored elsewhere.As farms dwindle, the Alps lose both a repository oftradition and a stabilizing environmental influence.Centuries-old grazing and mowing practices keep snows fromslipping off unprotected slopes, bolstering avalanchedefenses of surrounding villages.   &quot;Without the presence of the Alpine farmer, life in manyplaces of the Alps is literally impossible,&quot; says Hans-UeliMuller, a Zurich environmentalist.   Some who remain find life difficult for other reasons. The1,600 year-round residents of the high-altitude resort ofTigne in France's Savoie region, for example, find their townswollen during ski season to 35,000, a population that turnsover roughly once a week under the regimen of ski tours.   In a cafe in Bride les Bains, another small Savoie-regionspa town turned upside down to prepare for the Olympics inFebruary, locals sip espresso and contemplate tourism'simpact. &quot;The money is good, but the living is not so good,&quot;says one. As he speaks, a gaggle of elderly French touristsalights from a bus across the street, only to be engulfed ina cloud of chalky dust -- the town's signature in the recentconstruction frenzy.   Some see relief in the convergence of citizen-ledconservation efforts and the growing feeling by Alpinegovernments that collective action is necessary if the Alpsare to be preserved as both a natural wonder and a touristmecca. While the new Alps treaty takes shape, some interimmeasures have already been adopted. Switzerland long agobanned cars from some ski resorts. It was the first Alpinenation to adopt strict auto emission regulations. It also hastried to reduce traffic and pollution by pushing about 80% ofits Alpine traffic onto rails.   Austria plans to limit mass-resort development in favor ofsmaller but higher-quality resorts and &quot;soft tourism,&quot; suchas cross-country skiing and hiking. Germany and Liechtensteinhave announced curbs on ski development. France, pressured byconservationists, is considering a five-year moratorium onnew ski resorts.   Alp Action is among a growing number of conservationgroups urging pragmatic solutions to Alpine problems. Aidedby corporate sponsors, Alp Action is helping to replant Mr.Epp's ailing forests and working to reintroduce the Europeanbrown bear into Austria. Without efforts to preserve thenatural qualities that draw tourists, the Alps' touristeconomy is doomed, contends the group's chairman, PrinceSadruddin Aga Khan.   The prince's memories of the Alps, where he lived as achild, stir a passion to preserve them. He compares theserene beauty of the Savoie villages he knew 40 years agowith the &quot;urban center&quot; sprawl of many Savoie ski resortstoday.   &quot;They have merely transferred the problems of the city upto 6,500 feet,&quot; says Prince Sadruddin, a Geneva resident whoserves as a special United Nations envoy.   The conflicting desires for development and conservationconverge in and above Mr. Epp's Reuss Valley, where therewards of growth are now being questioned. A front-linewitness is Hans Murer, a game warden and former mayor of thecommune of Silinen, a cluster of Reuss Valley villages. Fortyyears ago, Mr. Murer's valley was a different place: cleanair, pastoral views and small villages of farmers, artisansand innkeepers who served the tradesmen passing betweenGermany and Italy.   But with the opening of ski resorts and an explosion inauto and truck traffic, the valley's winding, two-lane roadbecame a liability. As villages became burdened by dailytraffic snarls, Swiss highway planners persuaded villagers in1980 they needed a highway, which would take through-trafficoff village streets. Merchants and innkeepers were assuredthat higher traffic on the four-lane highway would mean newbusiness for them.   &quot;At the time, people were euphoric,&quot; Mr. Murer says. Buttheir joy is long gone. Traffic has more than quadrupled, to20,000 cars a day, but most of it passes the merchants by.Accidents are frequent, and when they occur, drivers leavethe freeway and detour through the villages, bringing backthe traffic jams. &quot;We are right back where we started,&quot; saysMr. Murer.   The problems are stirring Reuss Valley villagers toaction. Citizens are petitioning the government to considerbanning heavy trucks from the freeway, requiring them totransit the valley aboard rail cars. And citizens have joinedforces with Switzerland's Green Party to try to stop afederal effort to squeeze a high-speed rail line into thevalley's already crowded corridor.   &quot;There has been a tremendous change of opinion here,&quot; saysMr. Murer. But until tangible changes are made, people copeas best they can.   On a recent day, just north of St. Gotthard pass, amile-long line of cars inches toward a congested freewayramp. The tieup: A herd of Alpine cows, bells clanking, hassauntered down from summer mountain pastures en route to awinter home. Herdsmen use the road because, in the narrowvalley, there is no place else to go.</TEXT></DOC>