<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910204-0014</DOCNO><DOCID>910204-0014.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   U.S. Aides Await Bomb Damage Report   In Considering Early Ground Offensive   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and David Rogers   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Senior military officials, encouraged byearly signs that Iraq's Republican Guard troops are underincreasing stress, hope to know this week whether alliedbombing has damaged them enough to justify an early groundoffensive in hopes of shortening the war.   Military and intelligence officials say that, for thefirst time, some Guard units have broken radio silence,enabling U.S. intelligence to study their codes and deducethat they are under pressure. Spy satellite reports show thatat least a few Guard units are shuttling tanks betweenshelters and some troops are scrambling to find better hidingplaces from relentless allied bombing, including theferocious pounding during the past week from B-52 bombers.</LP><TEXT>   In addition, military officials said that the air campaignagainst the best Iraqi troops -- carried out partly byspecially equipped ground-attack F-15 jets -- has damagedfuel supplies and destroyed other underground storagefacilities.   A top congressional Democrat, House Armed ServicesCommittee Chairman Les Aspin, suggested that by midweekmilitary and intelligence officials should know much moreabout the remaining strength of Iraq's elite troops.Yesterday on NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press,&quot; Mr. Aspin said suchan assessment won't be made public. But, he added, it willgive war planners &quot;a better idea of how long this war willlast, because by that time we'll have a better idea of howthe Republican Guard units are holding up against thispounding they're taking from the air.&quot;   Administration officials stressed that the early hopefulindicators that the Guard troops are suffering are tooambiguous to offer much comfort. Based on these firstassessments, they estimate that no more than 15% of theGuards' dug-in tanks and other weapons have been destroyed --well short of the 50% destruction the military has hinted ithopes eventually to see from the air war. Some satellitephotographs received early last week showed numerous bombcraters, but dug-in armor is still visible. Radio trafficremains low, and the bombing doesn't appear to have totallydestroyed Iraq's elaborate undergound communications network,which is much tougher to intercept.   Thus, they are hoping this week will yield better evidencethat the air campaign is breaking the back of Baghdad's besttroops. If and when that evidence is in hand, officials said,the allies could start increasing the pressure on the groundsometime after mid-February.   By midweek, Mr. Aspin said, the 150,000 Republican Guardtroops will have suffered a full week of intense bombing. Atthat point, he said, &quot;Somebody in the administration will beable to . . . say this is where it looks like it's going, andthen we'll be able to guess how long before we need a groundattack, whether we need a ground attack, and really some ideaof how long this thing's going to last.&quot;   The next phase of the war, military officials said, islikely to feature several days of U.S. artillery bombardmentdesigned to flush Iraqi tanks and troops into the open.Squadrons of twin-engine Apache helicopters armed withrockets and laser-guided missiles will launch ground-huggingattacks against Iraqi armor three or four miles away. &quot;Oncehis tanks are on the move, the Apaches are virtuallyunstoppable,&quot; Chief Warrant Officer Reid Fail, one of thepilots expected to participate in the first attack missions,said in an interview last month.   Administration officials insist the calendar doesn'tcontrol the pace of the allied campaign, saying it will beguided only by the progress of target destruction. What'smore, Saddam Hussein still has cards to play -- includingterrorism and possible use of chemical weapons -- that couldderail the allied assault.   But Arab nations in the coalition are pressuring the WhiteHouse to wrap up the war by mid-March, when Muslim religiousobservances may give Iraq a tool to sow turmoil in theirnations. To do that, the allied push on the ground would haveto begin by late this month. And the military insists thatthe Republican Guard must be weakened before then.   &quot;It would be a serious mistake to think that the Iraqiarmy was in a state of disarray north of the border at thistime,&quot; said Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations forthe Joint Chiefs of Staff. &quot;The Iraqi army remains a capableforce, one that we can't take lightly.&quot;   In recent days, allied planes have been flying riskier butmore potent low-level bombing runs. Officials also said thatsome B-52 strikes over the weekend were specifically directedat the Republican Guard command.   The U.S. military announced the loss of five more aircraftover the weekend, including a B-52 bomber that crashed in theIndian Ocean on its way back to its base from a bombing runin Kuwait. The military said that there wasn't any evidencethe bomber had been hit by hostile fire. Pentagon officialsalso said yesterday that a Marine helicopter crashed due to&quot;noncombat&quot; causes. In addition, Reuters reported from SaudiArabia last night that a second Marine helicopter also waslost, again to noncombat causes. Two attack planes, an A-10and an A-6, were downed by Iraqi anti-aircraft guns, possiblybecause of increased lower-level U.S. bombing runs on Iraqitroops.   The U.S. command also said it has concluded that sevenU.S. marines in last week's ground skirmishes were killed by&quot;friendly fire&quot; when a missile from an allied aircraft strucktheir armored vehicle. An eighth marine, killed in adifferent incident, was probably killed by U.S. fire as well.   The military also sharply increased its count -- to 99from 31 -- of the number of Iraqi warplanes it claims havebeen destroyed on the ground. It said the number may rise to140 after further study of the rubble from blasted aircraftshelters.   In a further sign of the political tension being createdin the Middle East by the heavy allied bombing campaign, theState Department yesterday urged all U.S. citizens to leaveJordan as soon as possible. The department, reacting torising anti-Western and pro-Iraqi sentiment building inJordan, said it has &quot;sharply curtailed&quot; U.S. embassyoperations in the country, and officials said Americancitizens were being told to leave because the embassy'sability to help protect them was being cut back.   The military said recent Iraqi troop activity on theground has all but ceased, that the Iraqi navy has beennearly wiped out and that Iraq has stopped sending planesinto Iran. In addition, the total of Iraqi prisoners of warin allied hands topped 800. Over the weekend, Baghdad firedtwo Scud missiles at Israel and one at Saudi Arabia. TheSaudi-bound Scud was intercepted by a Patriot missile. Of thetwo fired at Israel, one landed in a remote area and thePentagon said that the second may have fallen short andlanded in Jordan.   Pentagon spokesmen are beginning to publicly boast ofprogress against the Republican Guard. &quot;We can tell we haveenormous damage in some cases,&quot; said Marine Maj. Gen. RobertJohnston, chief of staff to Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the U.S.commander in the Persian Gulf. &quot;We can tell by dead tankhulls.&quot; He added that, in one strike on the Guard, &quot;Wescattered about 300 vehicles and were able to bring themunder attack by some waiting attack aircraft and had fairlysubstantial kills.&quot;   Yesterday on ABC-TV's &quot;This Week With David Brinkley,&quot;Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said, &quot;We think we're makingsignificant progress in terms of the air campaign against{Saddam Hussein's} ground forces inside Kuwait and that areaof southern Iraq.&quot;   U.S. detection of Iraqi radio conversations is importantnot only for its content but also as a measure of discipline.Intelligence analysts believe that when a unit is understress and disoriented by the bombing, it will revert more tousing the radio, which is otherwise viewed as a last resortto avoid eavesdropping.   For instance, U.S. officials heard Iraqi tank commandersduring the fighting last week and apparently could tell thestress when they backed into their own minefield. When theU.S. dropped thousands of leaflets attached to balloons, theypicked up conversations of troops on the ground wonderingwhere the balloons were coming from.   But the best Iraqi units are still able to avoid the radiofor the most part, officials said. One obstacle for the U.S.has been the extensive underground communications systemrunning from Baghdad to Basra Province where the Guard isheadquartered.   The system has redundant features and is sophisticated.And it is believed to follow two major paths on either sideof the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers with multiple switchingpoints -- 34 on one side, 10 on another. Industry officialsdescribe major fiber-optic contracts covering the LowerEuphrates and Basra Province in the past decade, and thenetwork is an example of Hussein's investment in Westerntechnology to fortify his military position.   While the Republican Guard remains a target of militaryconcern, Iraq's continued missile attacks on Israel haveprovoked political pressure for the U.S. to be tougher in itsbombing of Baghdad. In an exchange that surprised fellowlawmakers, Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, a liberal pro-Israelsupporter who last month opposed a resolution authorizing theU.S. attack on Iraq, asked military briefers why the Pentagonwas being so &quot;prissy&quot; in its bombardment of the Iraqicapital. A spokeswoman for the Ohio Democrat said that itwasn't his custom to comment on what was said in a closedbriefing.   ---   Andy Pasztor and John Connor in Saudi Arabia contributedto this article.</TEXT></DOC>