<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901227-0086</DOCNO><DOCID>901227-0086.</DOCID><HL>   Don't Let the West Erect a New Iron Curtain   ----   By Robert D. Hormats</HL><DATE>12/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST CANDA</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><LP>   One year after the collapse of the old Iron Curtain in theEast, there is a growing risk that a new one will be erectedin the West.   The first great test of post-Cold War, East-West relationsis about to occur. The U.S. has just passed a new and moreliberal immigration bill. Germany, Austria and a number ofother European nations continue to absorb large numbers ofnew immigrants. But the West -- and especially Germany -- isnot prepared to cope with what is to come. Tough economicconditions in Eastern Europe, and serious disorder in theSoviet Union, could trigger a great new wave of humanmigration.</LP><TEXT>   Unlike the refugees of past years, most of whom left forpolitical reasons, today's emigrants are leaving primarilyfor economic reasons. Millions of them may flood out ofcountries suffering from insufficient food, housing and jobsinto those where conditions are better.   These refugees represent the loss of an enormous potentialresource for the countries they are leaving. The West shoulddevelop a strategy to work with the Soviet Union and thenations of Eastern Europe to find ways to induce many ofthese people to stay and contribute their energy to economicreconstruction. But it also needs a strategy to absorb thosewho choose to leave; they can inject a new vigor into our ownsocieties, as so many before them have done.   In 1990, the number of refugees heading west is likely todouble the million who arrived last year. Most refugees arecontinuing to go to Germany, whose constitution grantsautomatic citizenship to people of German ancestry. A numberof Soviet Jews are also beginning to settle there. Refugeeswill also settle in other parts of Western Europe and theU.S. A few, especially from Romania, are heading to moreprosperous Eastern European nations such as Czechoslovakiaand Hungary.   What has occurred so far could be dwarfed by new waves ofemigration. Romania has issued 2.7 million passports to itscitizens, many of whom are desperate to leave. The SovietUnion plans to enact legislation permitting its citizens totravel abroad. A bad winter and economic or political chaosthere could bring about a tidal wave of hundreds of thousandsor even millions of souls flooding into Germany, Poland,Finland, Austria, and beyond.   This would have profound political and economicimplications. Eastern European nations are alreadyexperiencing high unemployment and anemic growth.Collectively their import bills will increase by $6 billionin 1991, when trade with the Soviet Union and within theformer Communist Bloc will be denominated in dollars. AndEastern Europe will lose another $6 billion if oil stays atabout $30 a barrel.   The economic situation in Western Europe is considerablybetter. But there is growing resistance to paying theeconomic and social cost of resettling new immigrants;workers there are concerned about job displacement,particularly during an economic slowdown.   The influx of refugees has been raised as an issue inAustria, which has resettled 600,000 of them in the past fourdecades. In recent elections the opposition right-wingFreedom Party used the slogan &quot;Vienna must not becomeChicago&quot; -- by which the party meant Vienna should not havethe kind of ethnic mix typical of the American city. Theparty raised its share of the vote to 17% from 10%.   Germany has resettled nearly one million refugees sincelast fall. Concerns about immigration have become asignificant domestic political issue. The government isconsidering new tests to limit immigration from countriesjudged to be without political persecution, e.g. Poland. InFrance, resistance is growing to immigration of young NorthAfrican workers.   Although immigration is not as politically sensitive anissue in the U.S. as in Europe, America's new law, even withits emphasis on admitting skilled workers, also maintainstight limits on the number of immigrants.   Free emigration was a major objective of the U.S. duringthe Cold War. That goal was embodied in the 1974Jackson-Vanik legislation, which made continuation ofU.S.-Soviet detente contingent on Moscow's permittingincreased emigration. It was also a goal of much of WesternEurope. It would be a tragic irony of history if havingrealized the collapse of the Iron Curtain, and liberalizedemigration policies in the East, the West now severelyconstrains the access of Soviets and other Eastern Europeansto our nations.   However much aid the West provides, that aid is unlikelyto avert a major exodus from the East. Western Europe, theU.S., Canada, Australia and other large Western nations willneed to work out a coordinated approach to accept andproductively employ as many of those refugees as possible,and particularly those who for hardship, or politicalreasons, desperately need access to the West.   We should do this in part for our own economic reasons.Immigration is one key reason for America's success and forprogress in many other areas, Europe included. Neither theU.S. nor other nations should fear more of it. Instead theWest needs to find ways of helping refugees adjust quickly sothey can contribute their talents to promote economic growth.There are political reasons as well. There is fear of areturn to tougher political conditions in the U.S.S.R., forexample a rise of antiSemitism. Ethnic violence is rising inseveral nations of the region. Many citizens of the SovietUnion and members of ethnic minority groups in East Europewant to leave while they can; they should be able to do so.   Massive new migrations could result in a period ofprolonged instability. They could also trigger socialdissent, and nationalism, in the West. The West must beprepared to avert both with a major coordinated assistanceand absorption effort. Refugees are an enormous potentialeconomic resource. Putting up a new Iron Curtain deprives theWest of that resource and reduces our moral authority aswell.   ---   Mr. Hormats is vice chairman of Goldman, SachsInternational.</TEXT></DOC>