<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900622-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>900622-0089.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Bonn Offers Moscow Huge Credit,   Seeking to Ease Unification Jitters   ---   Pledge of $2.98 Billion   Made as Germans Ask   Political Concessions   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS (BNK)</IN><LP>   BONN -- West Germany's pledge to give Moscow a fivebillion-mark credit and Bonn's pursuit of Soviet politicalconcessions highlight the link between German dreams ofreunification and the Soviet Union's desperate need forWestern economic help.   West German Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher willbe seeking historic political concessions from the Sovietstoday in Berlin, in negotiations involving the two Germanysand the four victorious World War II powers. At the sametime, his government will be approving the five billion-mark($2.98 billion) bank credit to Moscow.</LP><TEXT>   It will be the largest single credit ever granted theSoviets, and the conditions are far better than commercialbanks are willing to give a nation grappling with seriousrepayment difficulties. The credit, managed by Deutsche BankAG, will be government-guaranteed and offered at marketinterest rates. The Soviets will have 15 years to repay aftera grace period that is still being negotiated.   Economics Minister Helmut Haussmann, who recently returnedfrom negotiations in the Soviet Union, believes the generouscredit terms will ease Soviet nervousness about theaccelerating pace of German unification. He also thinks theyhelp avoid a potentially dangerous isolation of Moscow fromthe Western world. His government views the credit as anemergency bridging loan until Chancellor Helmut Kohl canconvince his allies to join a more comprehensive program.   The Bush administration has been deeply skeptical aboutplans for direct Western aid to Moscow, although itreluctantly has begun to consider such proposals.   In a meeting with a small group of reporters in Washingtonyesterday, President Bush reiterated that he isn't likely toendorse any direct U.S. aid &quot;at this time.&quot; But, he also saidhe wouldn't discourage the allies from going forward withtheir own plans to prop up the Soviet economy. &quot;If some ofthe neighbors want to go forward, fine. I think that thatcomes under the heading of their business,&quot; the presidentsaid.   &quot;I noticed on my trip that the Soviets are adjusting tothe prospect of our monetary union on July 1,&quot; said Mr.Haussmann in an interview yesterday. &quot;The combined economiesof the Germanys will make us, by far, the most importanteconomic trading partner for the Soviet Union.&quot; With theSoviets determined to make the transition to a convertiblecurrency, he said, &quot;We must and we will put the Soviets inthe position to modernize their industry with Germanmachinery and capital goods.&quot;   The five billion-mark credit is part of a far broader andmore costly West German effort to reasssure Moscow that itcan count on a unified Germany to be its most importanttrading partner far into the future.   The steps already agreed to include assuring Moscow thatEast German companies will continue to deliver militarilyimportant goods, that Bonn will subsidize East Germancompanies to ensure they don't fail to fulfull obligations tothe Soviets, and that the West Germans will assume most ofthe payments East Germany has been making for the stationingof 380,000 Soviet troops and more than 100,000 dependents onEast German territory.   American officials say that the two-plus-four talksbetween the two Germanys and the four powers -- the U.S., theSoviets, the French and the British -- are slowly focusing onmore private negotiations between Moscow and Bonn.&quot;Two-plus-four is really becoming one-on-one,&quot; said oneWestern diplomat here. &quot;The game is really now between theGermans and the Soviets.&quot;   Yet West German officials insist that their economicassistance isn't an effort to buy unification, but rather ameans to find common ground with the Soviets, who still won'tabandon objections to a reunified Germany in the NorthAtlantic Treaty Organization unless they are satisfied with anew European security structure.   &quot;The issue isn't to throw money at them in an Ethiopianrelief program,&quot; says one foreign-ministry official here.&quot;The idea is to integrate them into the world economy andmake sure they do not feel isolated.&quot;   Nevertheless, the new credit raises concerns among someWestern officials that Bonn has been too ready to meet Sovieteconomic and political demands. They charge that ChancellorKohl is particulary anxious to get a deal, hoping to showvoters that he is the man who achieved reunification andarranged Soviet troop withdrawal. Mr. Kohl is preparing forthe first all-German elections at the end of this year.   Bankers in Western Europe complain that Bonn is pressuringEuropean commercial bankers to extend credits despite jittersabout the Soviet economy. &quot;It's a nice political gesture,&quot;said one British banker. &quot;But there are still giganticongoing problems that are bound to increase uncertainty andshort-term disorder.&quot;   Senior West German officials have been engaged in the mostnumerous and intensive meetings with Soviet counterparts theycan remember. Since the beginning of the year, ForeignMinister Genscher has met Foreign Minister EduardShevardnadze for nearly 40 hours of talks in eight cities,including more than seven hours of talks this week.   Economics Minister Haussmann's schedule has also beenfilled with Soviets. His staff was shocked when, during onesession, Soviet officials Nicolay Ryzhkov and MinisterPresident Ivan Selayev focused almost entirely on Moscow'sfears that monetary union would cause disruptions or higherprices for already-contracted East German deliveries.   Senior Soviet economic officials in Bonn this week had alaundry list of projects they wanted protected. Atop the listwas the production of satellite optics and guidance systemsprovided by the East German company Carl Zeiss Jena. Theseare thought to be used in the Soviet Union's nuclear defenseprogram.   The West Germans consented to fulfill all standingcontracts. &quot;The status quo will be protected,&quot; said Mr.Haussmann. &quot;East Germany can't immediately end its militarycooperation with the Soviet Union. . . . If the East Germanshave to deliver spare parts, they will.&quot;   Mr. Haussmann stresses, however, that West Germany haspromised its allies to expand its export controls to EastGerman territory. He says this poses less of a difficulty,now that the West is loosening export controls. He insists,however, that West Germany won't allow East German companieswho are supplying the Soviets to modernize their systemsusing Western technology to further upgrade these militaryproducts.   Mr. Genscher has already promised that a unified Germanywill pay -- in hard currency -- East German subsidies for theSoviet soldiers and dependents still on East German soil.Although estimates vary, two Bundestag members estimate thecost to the West German government for the second half ofthis year will exceed 1.3 billion marks.   These Bundestag members say another two billion marks arebeing set aside in a fund to help keep afloat evenunprofitable companies that have contractual obligations withthe Soviets through 1990 and perhaps 1991. Governmentofficials have assured parliamentarians that these subsidieswill disappear after three years.   &quot;I think that's wishful thinking,&quot; says Wolfgang Roth, theeconomic spokesman for the Social Democratic Party in theBundestag. &quot;The question is how you tell taxpayers they haveto pay for Soviets that they don't even want in theircountry. It's a problem, but what's the alternative?&quot;   At the East German Economics Ministry officials want to dotheir Bonn counterparts one better. State Secretary MartinDube says that they would allow the Soviets to move to theSoviet Union any company or parts of companies they considerparticularly sensitive. If the Soviets offer favorable-enoughconditions, they can even invite the workers along. He says50 of East Germany's 8,000 companies provide the Sovietssensitive military equipment.   Mr. Dube is vague about the details of how such a planwould be executed, and a Bonn spokesman denies that WestGermany has agreed to such a step.   Moscow's interest in clearing up even the smallest detailsof its relationships with German partners is obvious. EastGermany, its largest Warsaw Pact trade partner, provides 10%of its imports, and West Germany, its largest West Europeancounterpart, provides 6%. Together, however, both Germanysexpect their combined role to grow to more than one-fourth ofall imports because of new German bank loans and greaterproduction uncertainties in East European countries.   Some West Germans wonder whether they can afford such arelationship. West German officials have already appealedprivately to their bankers not to begin writing off badSoviet debts, for fear that such action might set off abroader panic.   &quot;There is growing contradiction between growing politicalinterests of cooperating with the Soviets and the escalatingeconomic difficulties of doing so,&quot; says Heinrich Machowski,an expert on the Soviet Union at the German Economic ResearchInstitute.</TEXT></DOC>