<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900410-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>900410-0081.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Firms Find India's Welcome Mat Frayed   ---   New Government Signals   Coolness to Foreign Investment   ----   By Anthony Spaeth   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   NEW DELHI, India -- After four months in office, PrimeMinister Vishwanath Pratap Singh seems more intent on undoinghis predecessor's legacy than on establishing a program ofhis own, analysts say. In the process, his government issending bleak signals to foreign investors.   Investigations ordered by the new government are puttingpressure on former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, his politicaland business allies, and even foreign companies that got tooclose to the previous administration.</LP><TEXT>   The Singh government hasn't withdrawn the welcome mat forforeigners that Mr. Gandhi put out in 1984. But its actions&quot;have not given outside investors reason to have muchconfidence,&quot; says a Western diplomat.   In the past four months, Mr. Singh's government has:   -- Launched investigations into the alleged payment ofbribes to Indians by Europe's Airbus Industrie consortium; ABBofors, an artillery-gun-making unit of Nobel IndustriesSweden AB; and Hawaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft, a West Germansubmarine manufacturer.   -- Rejected an investment application by Coca-Cola Co.that the Gandhi government was close to accepting last year.   -- Announced it would seek to void last year's $470million settlement by Union Carbide Corp. over the 1984Bhopal gas disaster.   -- Accused a Japanese group of paying illegal commissionsto a government corporation and withdrawn the companies'access to certain projects.   Some of the investigations could well expose dirty deals.Charges of corruption hobbled Mr. Gandhi and his party at thepolls last November. Mr. Singh, who ran as a &quot;Mr. Clean&quot;candidate, vowed to wipe out the perennial grime of Indianpolitics.   But analysts say the Singh government is starting to lookvindictive. And while the actions against foreign companiesdon't reflect any stated policies of the government or Mr.Singh, they do seem to reflect a change in attitude.   Mr. Singh has cabinet ministers who approve ofmultinational investments and those who condemn them. FinanceMinister Madhu Dandavate is a longtime socialist. Mr. Singhwas the architect of Mr. Gandhi's economic liberalizations,which encouraged foreign investment. But he comes from alanded-aristocratic background, where anti-business attitudesare common.   All of this, taken on top of India's traditional economicxenophobia, which Mr. Gandhi only dented, is bad news forforeign investors. &quot;There's a genuine reluctance on thisgovernment's part to entertain too much foreign investment,&quot;says a New Delhi-based foreign diplomat.   When Mr. Singh came to power in December, he made acareful effort to avoid the appearance of vindictivenesstoward his predecessor. It was a lesson he learned fromhistory. In 1977, when the Janata Party took control of thegovernment from Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, it arrestedMrs. Gandhi and appointed a commission to investigate heralleged abuses of power. The actions backfired: Mrs. Gandhiwas seen by many Indians as a martyr, and that helped herregain power in the 1980 elections. She was assassinated in1984 and succeeded in office by her son Rajiv.   When Mr. Singh took over from Mr. Gandhi, he said he wouldlet due process take its course and ordered a range ofinvestigations. The probe into the purchase of the guns andsubmarines, simmering scandals that helped turn the electionsin November, are making headway. In late March, a formercivil-aviation secretary and several middle-level managers ofstate-owned Indian Airlines were accused of taking bribesfrom Airbus Industrie in the purchase of 31 Airbus A-320s.   Indian newspapers have been cluttered recently with newsof Gandhi-era civil servants being investigated, charged ordismissed. And in the private sector, the government istrying to remove the Ambani family, closely connected withthe Gandhis, from the board of a large engineering company itacquired last year. This could signal an investigation intoall takeovers and stock issues of the past few years, whichcould shake the Bombay stock exchange, India's largest.   During the Gandhi years, India's stock markets boomed, asdid takeovers. The Gandhi government delayed bringingWestern-style regulation to the markets, preferring to keepcontrol through the Ministry of Finance and government-ownedbanks and financial institutions, which have largeshareholdings in many companies. As a result, most big stockdeals that took place in the past five years had approvalfrom New Delhi, analysts say -- and many might now bereversed.   If hard times have arrived for foreign companies in India,some have probably earned them with questionable businesspractices. In March, the government charged a Japanese group-- made up of such heavyweights as Sumitomo Corp., SumitomoHeavy Industries Ltd., Mitsui andamp; Co., Marubeni Corp., C. Itohandamp; Co., Mitsubishi Corp., Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. andNKK Corp. -- with making kickbacks to win two pipelinecontracts. Their punishment: None will get future governmentpetroleum contracts.   Union Carbide's four-year struggle to resolve the Bhopalcase seemed concluded in February 1989, when it settled withIndia for $470 million. But Mr. Singh made it a campaignpromise to reopen the case. The Supreme Court is now hearingarguments against the constitutionality of a Gandhi-era lawthat made the government sole representative of the victims.   Last month, the government rejected an investment proposalby Coca-Cola without giving any reasons. Analysts say it wasreacting in part to Mr. Gandhi's 1988 decision to allowPepsiCo Inc. to sell its soft drink in India. The Singhgovernment is also taking a second look at Pepsi's project.The U.S. Embassy in New Delhi warned the government thatcanceling an approved investment is more serious than denyingan investment application.   Pepsi has already begun selling snack foods and is tolaunch its soft drink this month. In Parliament last month, amember demanded to know if Pepsi had paid kickbacks to theGandhi government; a Singh minister said he was unaware ofany kickbacks. But he said the government was investigatingwhether Pepsi will be allowed to use its brand name, whichthe company had planned to do.   The wrangling over Coke and Pepsi is reminiscent of theexpulsion of Coca-Cola from India in 1977, which helped eraseIndia from the foreign-investment map for nearly a decade.Coke's problems with India began while Mrs. Gandhi was inpower, but the expulsion took place under the Janatagovernment in 1978. The expulsion was championed by GeorgeFernandez, once again a powerful minister, who has publiclystated he wants Pepsi thrown out.</TEXT></DOC>