<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910201-0020</DOCNO><DOCID>910201-0020.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Fighting Flares Again at Saudi Town;   Allied Planes Attack Big Iraqi Column   ---   Saddam Hussein Appears   To Seek Political Edge   In Ground Assaults   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Bob Davis   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   Fighting flared again early this morning in the smallSaudi Arabian city of Khafji in the latest of a series ofground encounters between Iraqi and allied troops.   Yesterday, allied troops were reported to have retakenKhafji, a coastal city just south of the border with Kuwait.But the renewed fighting today, according to press pooldispatches from Saudi Arabia, came as four Iraqi armoredbrigades were reportedly on the move about six miles north ofKhafji.</LP><TEXT>   Allied planes attacked a 10-mile-long Iraqi armored columnheaded into Saudi Arabia, according to wire service reports.The column, said to be as much as 1,000 vehicles long, wasattacked by B-52 bombers and A-10 anti-tank planes.   Yesterday, troops from Saudi Arabia and the small PersianGulf state of Qatar, supported by U.S. Marines, were said tohave cleared Iraqi soldiers out of Khafji after roughly a dayof Iraqi occupation. Saudi sources last night reported thattheir forces took about 400 Iraqi soldiers prisoner in theaction, a total that they said represented some 80% of theIraqi group that was attacked.   When coalition forces retook the city Thursday, anestimated 40 Iraqi soldiers were killed, as were 10 to 12Saudi soldiers, the sources said. The Saudi forces alsoclaimed to have rescued 12 American soldiers who had beentrapped in the city. There weren't any immediate reports ofAmerican casualties in the action.   U.S. officials had insisted yesterday that the Iraqiseizure of Khafji was militarily insignificant. They alsosaid Iraq was massing some additional troops to the west,near the Kuwaiti city of Wafra, but that Americanair-to-ground attacks yesterday appeared to be forcing thosetroops to disperse.   Still, Iraq clearly thinks the lunges into Khafji andseveral similar probes launched this week are usefulpolitical tools in the Arab world. Iraq'sgovernment-controlled press and television proclaimed thatSaddam Hussein personally had designed this week's groundcampaign. The official newspaper of Iraq's ruling Baath partysaid the fighting was &quot;the beginning of a thunderous stormblowing on the Arab desert.&quot; And Baghdad Radio reported thatSaddam Hussein spent Wednesday night, when some of the actionwas under way, at the war front.   Iraq appears to hope that even limited probes across theSaudi border can arouse support for Saddam Hussein in theArab world by showing that he is prepared to take theinitiative against the U.S.-led coalition of armies alignedagainst him. Jordan and Algeria, which are sympathetic toSaddam Hussein, immediately proclaimed the occupation ofKhafji as a significant victory. Iraq also may hope to shakethe confidence of Arab nations aligned with the U.S.   The battle over Khafji also was politically important tothe Saudis, who were eager to show that they could defendthemselves -- albeit with the help of tanks from Qatar.Underlining the political dimension in Saudi eyes, PrinceFahd bin Sulman, the vice emir of the country's EasternProvince, visited the press center yesterday at the DhahranInternational Hotel after the city was reported retaken. Heinvited all the journalists milling about to come to Khafji,and then walked downstairs to do a television interview to bebeamed to the U.S.   The U.S. military also sought to emphasize the Saudi role,but in the process caused itself some embarrassment.Describing the military action to retake the city, ArmyBrigadier Gen. Pat Stevens IV, first said, &quot;No Marine groundunits were engaged in Khafji.&quot; But no more than a hour afterhe spoke in Riyadh, unedited videotapes of the battle, takenby a pool cameraman, showed Marines hunkering down behind awall just outside Khafji, firing machine guns and artilleryshells at Iraqis in the city and boasting of killing enemytanks.   A spokesman for Army forces here tried to square Gen.Stevens' remarks with the tapes of the battle. &quot;I don't thinkhe intentionally wanted to lie,&quot; the spokesman said,suggesting that the general may have felt that only a largenumber of Marines, not a mere artillery unit, would qualifyas an &quot;engagement.&quot;   Indeed, the Marines and other U.S. forces were close by tohelp. Gen. Stevens said that in the past three days, alliedforces used 350 aircraft in operations near Khafji.   In a separate battlefield incident, an American womansoldier appears to have been captured. Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly,director of operations for the Pentagon's joint staff, saidtwo American soldiers, one a man and one a woman, were&quot;missing in combat.&quot; He wouldn't provide details because asearch was under way for them. But Iraq announced that it hadtaken female prisoners of war.   Also, an American AC-130 plane was shot down by Iraqiforces, military officials said. AC-130s are big,propeller-driven gunships equipped with cannons and otherlarge guns to support American ground troops or attack supplyand communications facilities and vehicles. Similar aircraft,called &quot;Puff the Magic Dragons,&quot; were used in Vietnam. Itwasn't clear precisely where the plane was shot down or howbig its crew was; the Pentagon won't confirm the loss of U.S.planes until it has time to search for crew members. Therewere reports, though, that 14 people had been on board.   Iraqi minefields remain a major obstacle for alliedforces, but the first ground fighting this week illustratesthe weapons are double-edged. In an incident Monday, an Iraqiarmored column became a target for U.S. planes after losingits way through an Iraqi minefield. And in fighting Tuesday,military officials said, an Iraqi column that was repelled byMarines suffered further casualties when it was forced backinto its own mines.   To the north, officials reported, Iraqi Republican Guardunits are now the target of round-the-clock bombing missionsby B-52s and F-15s.   Meanwhile, there were signs of diplomatic activity thatmay be aimed either at ending the fighting or ensuring thatIran stays out of it. Officials from Iraq, Algeria, Yemen andFrance all were in the Iranian capital of Tehran yesterday.France is aligned with the U.S. in the coalition fighting todrive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait, while Algeria has activelysought a ceasefire in the war. Yemen has been sympathetic toIraq.   A European diplomat insisted that the French official,Francois Scheer, secretary-general of the French ForeignMinistry, was in Iran partly to discuss a $1 billion loanmade to France by the Shah of Iran. The French governmentsaid Mr. Scheer wouldn't pursue any peace initiative, butmerely would &quot;exchange views&quot; with Iran.   Mr. Scheer may be in Tehran partly to see whether Iranwill keep its word and impound the Iraqi planes -- which nownumber almost 100 -- that have fled to Iranian airfields,apparently as part of an organized effort to save them fromallied bombing. Iran again criticized Iraq for sending theplanes and asserted that it hadn't been told in advance ofthe exodus.   In Tehran yesterday, Iran's foreign minister told an aideto Saddam Hussein that the Iraqi aircraft flown to Iran,along with their pilots, would be held for the duration ofthe war, according to an Associated Press report. Iran'sforeign minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, stressed that Tehranwould remain neutral in the conflict, according to thereport, which cited an Iranian news service announcement.   Iraq appears to be trying to lure Iran into the war on itsside. For instance, it asserted that U.S. warplanes haveflown over Iran on their way to bomb Iraq.   Iraq's effort to pull Iran into the war would be advancedif it could provoke Israel into the war. That would allowSaddam Hussein to proclaim that the war really is a struggleof Islamic states, such as Iraq and Iran, against the Jewishstate and its supporters. So far, Israel has resisted gettinginvolved despite Iraqi Scud missile attacks on it. But anIsraeli military official in Washington hinted that thenation couldn't refrain from retaliating against Iraq if itwere hit by chemical weapons. So far, all the Scuds have beenarmed with conventional warheads.   Admiral Abraham Ben-Shoshan, Israel's defense attache inthe U.S., said: &quot;I don't think that people can take achemical attack on Israel and say, `It's another event, asmall event, and for the sake of the coalition, let's keep itthat way.'&quot;   If a chemical attack were to hit Israel, he said, &quot;Youcannot complain that we reacted; I mean, you had enough timeto solve the problem.&quot;   The admiral conceded Israel isn't any more able to destroyIraq's missile launchers than the U.S. But he said Israelknows the Middle East better, and might be able to contributeto the effort.   It's widely assumed that Israel may be contemplating aspectacular raid, high on symbolic value, to humiliate SaddamHussein by penetrating deep into Iraq, perhaps even withcommandos, and hitting a specific target, such as missilelaunchers.   Israel would be aided in such an effort by new access ithas gained to &quot;real-time&quot; American spy satellite photos ofwestern Iraq, where the Iraqi missiles are based.   However, the U.S. so far is refusing to coordinate such anaction with Israel, Admiral Ben-Shoshan said, and has deniedIsrael the electronic codes necessary to assure that U.S. andallied jets flying over the war zone can identify Israeliplanes as friendly.   The increasing ground combat along the Saudi-Kuwait borderstill appears to represent probing more than preparation fora big ground battle, U.S. officials said. President Bush toldAmerican Jewish leaders that he isn't ready yet to orderAmerican forces into a ground war to drive Iraqi troops outof Kuwait, one of the leaders said after the White Housemeeting.   &quot;He is not anxious at this point to enter into a groundwar,&quot; said Shoshana Cardin, chairman of the Conference ofPresidents of Major Jewish Organizations.   The U.S. air war, meanwhile, may be advanced by apolitical development yesterday. British Defense Minister TomKing told Parliament that Britain has agreed to allow theU.S. to station some B-52 bombers on its bases for use in thewar. He said the B-52s, which the U.S. considers particularlyimportant for bombing Iraq's elite Republican Guard positionsin Kuwait and southern Iraq, would be stationed temporarilyat a Royal Air Force base at Fairford, England. The aircraftwould be armed with conventional weapons.   In addition, a Spanish radio report said that AmericanB-52s are using a base in southern Spain to launch raids onIraq, Reuters news service reported. The report said the U.S.began using the base about 10 days ago.   The U.S. won't say where the B-52s that have been bombingIraqi positions so far are based, although at least some arebelieved to be operating out of Diego Garcia, an Indian Oceanisland.</TEXT></DOC>