<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900709-0024</DOCNO><DOCID>900709-0024.</DOCID><HL>   Economic Summit (A Special Report): On the Agenda   ---   A Star Is Born:   Germany Is About to Play a Leading Role   On the Global Economic Stage, and the World   Anxiously Awaits Its Performance   ----   By Terence Roth and Mark M. Nelson</HL><DATE>07/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R15</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   FRANKFURT -- After two decades of grooming, Germany isready to take a leading role on the world economic stage.   The question now is how Bonn will play this role. Will itact as Germania Rex, the haughty leading man who hogs thespotlight and steals the scenes? Or will it become more of anensemble player, a willing partner of and respected spokesmanfor a more unified European Community?</LP><TEXT>   The answer appears to be that Germany will focus on Germanproblems. At least for a time, the risky merger between theEast and West German economies, put into effect last week,will dominate Bonn's fiscal and monetary priorities.   Chancellor Helmut Kohl is issuing assurances that Germanycan deal with the jolting union between a thrivingfree-market economy and a socialist economy. But Mr. Kohlalso has his heart set on political reunification inDecember. With West Germany's own treasury sapped by EastGerman support programs, Mr. Kohl is turning to his Westernallies to fashion a huge Soviet aid package to help winconcessions from Moscow on German unity. Just for starters,Bonn arranged a $3 billion credit for the Soviet Union lastmonth.   Bonn believes it's in a good position to ask for help.   For 20 years, Germany has been bolstering its status inworld financial markets. In May, it got a big boost -- onethat carries more prestige than West German officials maycare to admit. A major world body, the International MonetaryFund, designated West Germany and Japan to share second-placevoting power in the organization, putting them behind onlythe United States. Britain dropped to a share of third place,with France. The IMF ranking, which is based on a complexmeasure of a country's overall economic size in the worldeconomy, is the barometer used to determine the pecking orderin the Group of Seven, the informal banding together of theworld's leading economic powers.   The new rankings could end up creating, in effect, a Groupof Three within the G-7. Bonn's finance minister, TheoWaigel, likens this development to winning at the OlympicGames. West Germany and Japan shared the silver medal, hesays, while Britain and France split the bronze.   Mr. Waigel may be betraying more than Bavarian humor. Bythe end of the 1990s, a united Germany -- an economicjuggernaut in the center of Europe -- will undoubtedly tiltthe global economic scales further toward the Continent. Andmany senior financial officials in Europe say they expectGermany to flex its muscles in its new and more powerfulrole.   At the same time, that emerging role reawakens old fearsin Europe and even within Germany itself that an uncheckedGerman growth machine could -- as in the past -- become athreat to European economic and political stability. For thisreason, West German political leaders are trying to maketheir country's resurgence coincide with moves to enhance thepower and cohesiveness of the 12-nation European Community.   The time will come, most senior European officials say,when the U.S. and Japan must choose between coordinatingpolicy with the individual European states or with the EC asa unit. Most small countries in Europe hope that the EC, andnot Germany alone, will be the choice.   &quot;You can't have it both ways,&quot; says Onno Ruding, formerfinance minister of the Netherlands. He says the small ECnations already are highly dissatisfied with the exclusiveG-7 club, which excludes the smaller European countries. TheEC Commission president attends the summits along with theseven national leaders. Nevertheless, the smaller countriesfear, now more than ever, that Germany, Japan and the U.S.will end up calling most of the shots.   Publicly, West Germany is effusive in its commitment toEuropean economic and monetary union, including the eventualcreation of a common currency issued by a pan-communitysystem of central banks. This system is scheduled to startoperating by the late 1990s. Yet some West Germans,particularly the Bundesbank, the country's central bank,retain deep reservations about ceding national monetarycontrol to a new European entity.   &quot;It's not without misgivings that we view thepossibilities of attaining a cohesive monetary policy&quot; in theEC, says one monetary official, referring to divergentpolicies within the community on spending and inflation.   Moreover, after 45 years of playing a secondary politicalrole in Europe, many Germans say unification will let themshow the face of a new Germany. Proud of their country'seconomic and political achievements, they see no reason whythey shouldn't exercise power as other states do.   Thanks to strict fiscal policies and controls on inflationin Germany, the strong mark ranks as the world'ssecond-largest reserve currency, trailing only the U.S.dollar. Some 800 billion marks were circulating abroad at theend of 1989 -- funds that the Bundesbank claims &quot;anchor&quot; theEC's European Monetary System.   The Bundesbank's key role is further strengthened by theexchange-rate mechanism of the monetary system, whichrequires members to keep their currency fluctuations within anarrow range. In practice, because of the mark's stability,this means the Bundesbank already acts somewhat as a centralbank for other EC states.   But can that monetary stability survive the union of Eastand West German currencies? That's a point on which Messrs.Waigel and Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehl need toreassure both their fellow Germans and other EC membersbefore a united Germany can assume a stronger G-7 role.   Other European and G-7 nations already are concerned byspeculation that the Bundesbank will raise West Germany'sofficial interest rates by a full percentage point this yearto stem the expected inflationary impact of German monetaryunion, which took effect last week. U.S. officials, inparticular, fear a world-wide rate spiral if Germany acts in1990.   The inflation would result, many economists fear, fromWest Germany's replacement of the unconvertible East Germancurrency with highly spendable West German marks. The surgein the supply of marks could cause prices to rise. And by1991, the costs of unification could drive the combinedGerman budget deficit to as much as 100 billion marks (theequivalent of nearly $60 billion), increasing the country'sborrowing and possibly also fueling the inflationary spiral.   Economists observe that countries with widening deficitsusually hold weakened positions inside the IMF.   &quot;At first, Germany's position in the G-7 could actually beweaker, because Waigel and Poehl still face a lot ofuncertainties at home,&quot; says Heine Flassbeck, a monetaryanalyst at the German Institute for Economic Research in WestBerlin. It is one of five think tanks regularly advising theBonn government on policy.   But Bonn officials argue that absorbing East Germany'seconomy and work force could swell Bonn's gross nationalproduct by 15% and add one percentage point of real GNPgrowth annually as East Germany modernizes. The extra outputwould increase tax revenues without increasing tax rates,thus holding down the deficit, they say.   &quot;The transition period could take two to three yearsbefore East Germany begins recovering and German companiesbegin penetrating Eastern Europe. Then one might see a muchstronger Germany in international policy,&quot; says Mr.Flassbeck. He adds, however, that Germany will act carefully.&quot;Everybody in Bonn is sensitive to the fact that many of itstrading partners worry about the concept of a GreaterGermany.&quot;   Still, any changes in the G-7 won't be easy -- even if theEC, and not Germany, steers policy for Europe. Membership inthe G-7 is coveted by European nations. &quot;It's one of thestages on which Britain and France can still play roles asworld leaders,&quot; says an EC official. &quot;The reality may bedifferent, but as a symbol it is very, very important.&quot;   For this reason, former French President Valery Giscardd'Estaing says he doesn't expect the G-7 structure to changefor at least five years, even as Germany plays anincreasingly important role. But by then, the EC should havemoved considerably closer to its goals of economic, monetaryand political union.   &quot;There will always be a role for the individual memberstates in the Europe we are building,&quot; he says. &quot;Theimportant thing is that we share the same goals andaspirations.&quot;   ---   Mr. Roth, based in Frankfurt, and Mr. Nelson, based inBrussels, are staff reporters for The Wall Street JournalEurope.</TEXT></DOC>