<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910308-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>910308-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Tense Homecoming:   Returning Kuwaitis   Find Bitter Feelings   And Chaos at Home   ---   Many Who Stayed Behind   Question Old Ways, Seek   More Democratic Rule   ---   Elusive Emir in a Royal Funk   ----   By Tony Horwitz and Craig Forman   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   KUWAIT CITY -- When Hussain Marafie, a former member ofthe Kuwaiti parliament, returned home this week after sevenmonths abroad, he wasn't prepared for the earful he received.   Just hours after the first familial embrace, one of hisyounger brothers shouted, &quot;For every vote you get, we shouldget seven -- one for each month we were here under theIraqis.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   &quot;We don't want to hear any more big talk from you peopleoutside,&quot; another brother chimed in. &quot;We want bread.&quot;   Mr. Marafie, a businessman appointed to advise the Kuwaitigovernment-in-exile, sits staring at his conspicuouslywell-shined shoes. &quot;They're talking a different language,&quot; hesays.   Nine days after Kuwaiti tanks rolled victoriously into thecapital, euphoria is giving way to recrimination over whathappened here, and to sharp debate about what lies ahead.Kuwaitis who stayed here and suffered want to know why theirarmy proved so impotent, and why so many others fled.Emboldened by their experiences during the war, they areclamoring for reform of a government that they believe isfailing them once again, by remaining a power vacuum at atime when the country desperately needs leadership and aid.   The governmental paralysis is in blunt contrast to theactivity of Kuwait's allies. For over a week U.S., French andBritish troops have been clearing mines, pushing burned-outtanks off roads and helping flush out Iraqi soldiers stillhiding in the city. Western embassies have reopened, hundredsof foreign journalists have thronged to the capital and theBritish prime minister has paid a visit.   Yet most of Kuwait's ruling royal family -- including theemir, Jaber al-Sabahremains ensconced in a luxury hotel inSaudi Arabia. Kuwaitis who have met with the 62-year-oldemir, say he has been in a funk over the destruction of hiscountry.   Meanwhile, the family's promise to deliver emergency aidto the capital has foundered on bureaucratic obstacles. Morethan a week after the wealthy country was liberated, vitalamenities such as power and water are still unobtainable.Food also remains scarce, and some checkpoints continue to bemanned by civilian patrols who have taken the law into theirown hands by arresting Palestinians and others suspected ofcollaborating with the Iraqis.   Resentment among ordinary citizens is simmering. &quot;It tookthree days to win the ground war, but after eight days,Kuwait is still a mess,&quot; gripes Mohamed Wazan, a civilservant who hasn't received his salary since August. He ishardly placated by a tour of one of the city's few operatingmarkets. It offers little except bottles of vinegar, old bagsof pasta and beans, and assorted household goods.   Kuwait's peaceful and close-knit society doesn't appear indanger of tearing apart. But the tensions already surfacingsuggest that the emir, when he does return, will face asformidable a task in reuniting his country politically as hewill in rebuilding its shattered infrastructure.   &quot;We're ready to accept that he {Jaber al-Sabah} remains asemir -- as long as he brings in competent people,&quot; insistsKhalid Sultan, a prominent businessman and former member ofKuwait's dissolved Parliament. But for him, as for manyKuwaitis these days, good government can't be separated fromdemocracy. &quot;Competence is not decided by one man,&quot; he says.   Mr. Sultan's experience during the past seven months showsthe way in which resistance has toughened the 200,000Kuwaitis who remained inside the country, bolstering theirdesire for reform. U.S.-educated, and a member of one ofKuwait's wealthiest families, Mr. Sultan was arrested byoccupying soldiers in August while trying to apprehend anIraqi looting a neighbor's house. He was imprisoned for 29days; blindfolded, handcuffed, and tortured with electricshocks. When he returned, he helped fund and run anunderground cell that fed and protected Kuwaitis, and evencollected garbage.   The contrast to the disorganized effort now under way torestore order and amenities is striking. &quot;We were doingbetter without them,&quot; he says of returning governmentofficials.   Such criticism is being aired across Kuwait inneighborhood gatherings known as &quot;Diwaniyas,&quot; at whichKuwaitis have traditionally debated politics and made theirviews known to the royal family. Sitting cross-legged insideone ceremonial tent, a dozen businessmen and professionalsexpress their sense of betrayal and humiliation over whathappened on Aug. 2. First, their well-equipped army collapsedwithout a fight, then tens of thousands of Kuwaitis fled toSaudi Arabia, where they quickly received living stipends,rent and other subsidies from the exiled government.   &quot;This has given us a split personality in Kuwaitisociety,&quot; says Saleh al-Selmi, an investment manager. &quot;Thepeople outside still have an image of the beautiful Kuwaitthey left behind.&quot;   He and the others in the group believe that a stronger,more democratic Kuwait wouldn't have succumbed so quickly tothe Iraqis. But what worries them most is that the lesson ofAug. 2 hasn't been learned, and that the government isreverting to what Abdul al-Dawood calls the &quot;crooked way&quot; ofabsolute rule and nepotism.   The military command is essentially intact, and almost allthe government officials now returning are the same ones whofled seven months ago. &quot;We didn't suffer all this time tohave things be the same as before,&quot; says Mr. al-Dawood, anofficial with the Ministry of Social Affairs.   Discontent isn't yet so great that Kuwaitis question therule of the emir (though privately, many regard him as aremote figure, whose free spending and marriage and divorceof several dozen wives has given the country a bad image).   But for now, the emir still commands considerableallegiance-illustrated by the fact that Kuwaitis aren'tdismayed that he remains abroad. The capital isn't yetsecure, they say, and conditions in the city aren't yetcomfortable enough for their monarch.   But what they do demand is that the royal family make goodon its promise to hold parliamentary elections. Ultimately,the budding opposition hopes for a constitutional monarchyalong the lines of Britain or Denmark.   &quot;The emir is good as a figurehead, but he's not a forcefulcharacter,&quot; says the businessman, Mr. Sultan. He says thisallows &quot;nobodies&quot; lower down in the royal family to have freerein. Only through a Western-style system of checks andbalances, he adds, can competence be assured.   At the Diwaniya, the night's discussion ends with darkwarnings of what will happen if change doesn't come. Perhapsanother Saddam Hussein will once again be tempted to overrunKuwait. Or, it is suggested, Kuwaitis themselves may reassertthe skills they developed under Iraqi occupation, and engagein quiet resistance and civil disobedience. &quot;It's apossibility people will go to the streets,&quot; says Mahmoudal-Yahya, an official with the Kuwait Petroleum Corp.   Kuwaitis are making sure that the officials who havereturned get the message, particularly as regards the slowpace of rehabilitation. &quot;They have every right to be angry,&quot;says Sueleiman Mutawa, Kuwait's minister of planning and oneof the first officials to come back. &quot;Our recovery work wasvery well planned, until reality came.&quot;   Trucks full of food were dispatched immediately after thewar's end but were held up at the Kuwait border becausedrivers lacked proper permits from an absent Ministry ofInterior. The food later sat unpacked in Kuwait whileofficials argued over who should distribute it -- outsideorganizers or food cooperatives that operated covertly duringthe occupation. The latter group finally won out, only tofind that, by then, much of the bread in the shipment hadgone stale. Coordinated distribution of other foodstuffs hasonly just begun.   Political reform promises to be even bumpier. One of thegovernment's first steps after the war's end was to declarethree months of martial law, a move that suggests to oneKuwaiti official close to the royal family that royalbacktracking on promises of democratization may already havebegun. &quot;They say, `Now is not the time for democracy, weshould rebuild first,'&quot; the London-based official says.   At a news conference yesterday, Kuwait's Crown PrinceSaad, standing in for the absent emir, was not reassuring. Hesaid martial law could be extended if necessary, &quot;regardlessof what anyone might say about that.&quot; And he deflectedquestions about political reform, saying only that &quot;ourcountry is not a dictatorship. We follow democracy of mutualconsultation and we will continue to do that.&quot;   Some members of the oppposition, a loose coalition ofdemocratic and Islamic groups, also speak ominously ofheavyhanded efforts to suppress dissent. They say Kuwaitisecret police infiltrated the country several months ago,eavesdropped on Diwaniyas and threatened outspoken critics ofthe regime. Some even claim that a hit squad called &quot;Men ofJaber&quot; has been formed to silence opposition figures. Theirfirst alleged victim was a lawyer named Hamid Jiwan, who wasshot in the chest when he answered the door at his home lastweek. Interviewed in his hospital bed, Mr. Jiwan identifiedhis assailant as a young Kuwaiti, whom he assumes is &quot;againstdemocracy.&quot;   &quot;Wait until the Americans go, and then see what takesplace,&quot; says another opposition figure, who predicts furthershootings. He adds that the hit squad is the work of &quot;younghawks&quot; in the royal family intent on forestalling reform. Thecrown prince yesterday said there was no evidence of such hitteams, adding that, &quot;Our security establishment willimplement the law against such elements if they exist.&quot;   But Kuwait's past faltering steps toward democracy don'tbode well for the future. A National Assembly formed in 1938was dissolved by the then-emir after its first vote -- infavor of union with Iraq. An elected assembly begun in 1962was dissolved in 1976 and again in 1986 when opposition tothe monarchy grew. A watereddown assembly, mixing elected andappointed representatives, was formed just before Iraq'sinvasion of Kuwait. Political parties are still banned.   Some Kuwaitis also worry that Saudi Arabia, which hasplayed host to Kuwait's royal family for seven months, willpressure the emir to resist reform. The Saudi monarchy, muchmore autocratic and conservative than Kuwait's, has long eyedpolitical developments in neighboring emirates with anxiety,fearing that change could spread across the Arabianpeninsula. Already the Gulf crisis has spurred democracyadvocates within Saudi Arabia, and they could be expected toraise their voices still more if Kuwait moves rapidly towardparliamentary representation.   If change does come in Kuwait, one of the first demands ofdemocracy advocates is that the electorate be broadened.Currently, only adult males who can trace their ancestry inKuwait to before 1920 are eligible. This group comprisesabout 65,000 people, or roughly one tenth of the nativepopulation.   But one group that certainly won't be granted votingrights is the country's huge foreign population, particularlythe Palestinians.   &quot;They should settle their accounts and go home&quot; saysmeteorologist Abdul Hadi Marafie, offering a typical view. &quot;Idon't like to even see them at work or on the street anymore.I can't trust them.&quot;   The distrust stems from the aid some Palestinians gave tothe Iraqis. Kuwaitis say they informed on resistance figures,helped the Iraqis loot shops and bank accounts, and thenexploited the situation by jacking up prices at their shops(Kuwaitis, fearful of looting, generally kept their storesclosed).   Last week, the Kuwait office of the Palestine LiberationOrganization was gutted by unknown persons. Many Palestinianshave been arrested and some have been beaten. Several tanksand many police now ring the predominantly Palestinian areaof Hawalli, ostensibly to protect against outbreaks ofviolence.   For the 140,000 or so Palestinians still in the country(down from 400,000 on Aug. 2), the tension is dismaying.&quot;Idon't like Saddam, though I did like what he said aboutbuilding a strong Arab world,&quot; says Adil al-Hussein, aBethlehem-born merchant.&quot;For that, they {the Kuwaitis} wantto punish us. They want to blame somebody, so they blame us.&quot;   The Kuwaiti government already has said that the visas andwork permits of foreigners in the country will be reviewed.But here, politics may be at cross purposes withreconstruction. Before Aug. 2, Kuwaitis made up just over aquarter of the country's two million people, and only 14% ofits work force. Thousands of foreign workers will be neededto rebuild the country. What now seems likely is that mostwill come from the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia --on limited work contracts so that a huge and entrenchedforeign population won't develop again.   &quot;Maybe we will have to build a smaller Kuwait, without allthe luxury we enjoyed before,&quot; says Mr. al-Yahya, the oilofficial.   But Mr. Marafie, the returning businessman, doubts thatthose who have lived safely on the outside of Kuwaitunderstand how much has changed on the inside. He says theyjust &quot;want to wake up and find the Kuwait they remember onAug. 1 all over again.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>