<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910606-0046</DOCNO><DOCID>910606-0046.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Eli Lilly to Pay Costs of Doctors   Sued After They Prescribe Prozac   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   GAF LLY WNEWS</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)BUILDING MATERIALS, CONCRETE, GLASS, PAINT (BLD)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)GEORGIA (GA)INDIANA (IND)MARYLAND (MD)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Eli Lilly andamp; Co., the maker of the widely usedanti-depressant Prozac, says it will pay all legal costs forphysicians who are sued after prescribing the drug.   Lilly began making the offer last month in letters sent inresponse to doctors who contacted the company seekinginformation about its policy if they became involved inlitigation. The campaign, which could cost the companymillions of dollars, is believed to be unprecedented,representatives of other drug companies said.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;This is a public-relations controversy, not a medicalcontroversy. Doctors need to understand that we standsquarely behind the drug and their use of it,&quot; said EdwardWest, a spokesman for Lilly.   The letters are part of an aggressive legal strategy tocombat public-relations problems that emerged last summerwhen a Prozac user claimed the drug caused her to attemptsuicide. Lilly is also assisting prosecutors in criminalcases in which defense lawyers are arguing that their clientsshould not be held legally responsible for their crimesbecause they were taking the drug.   In response to the letters, the Church of Scientology,which has a history of deploring the use of psychiatric drugsand ran anti-Prozac ads this week in USA Today, calledLilly's offer &quot;gross and improper&quot; and asked the Food andDrug Administration to remove the drug from the marketaltogether.   A spokeswoman for the FDA said she could not commentbecause she had not yet seen the letter. In the past, theagency has said that no evidence has emerged so far showing acause-and-effect relationship between Prozac and suicidal orhomicidal behavior.   Despite the legal controversy, Prozac is still by far thebest-selling drug for depression. First released in 1987,sales doubled in 1990 to $760 million and are expected to topthe $1.1 billion mark this year.   Of the approximately 75 civil suits that are pendingagainst Lilly over Prozac use, only a small percentage namedoctors as defendants, according to Leonard Finz, a New Yorkproduct-liability lawyer who is representing several clientsin such suits.   Therefore, said Ronald Nordmann, a senior drug analystwith PaineWebber Inc., the company's aggressive stanceappears aimed at ensuring that doctors continue writing newprescriptions, which Lilly concedes have fallen in the wakeof the negative publicity about the drug.   In the letters, Lilly wrote that it would &quot;defend,indemnify and hold you harmless against claims, liabilitiesor expenses, arising from personal injury alleged to havebeen caused by Prozac,&quot; provided the doctor properlyprescribed the drug. The company also said that it wouldretain a lawyer to represent the doctor. Mr. West, the Lillyspokesman, said that several hundred letters have been sentout but that, to date, no doctor has taken the company up onits offer.   While most psychiatrists already have malpracticeinsurance, Lilly's offer provides extra protection for them.&quot;Physicians can never be sure that their policy limits willcover a catastrophic event,&quot; said Kirk Johnson, generalcounsel for the American Medical Association.   But Daniel Sigelman, an Atlanta lawyer specializing inpharmaceutical product-liability litigation, said plaintiffs'lawyers handling Prozac cases may object to Lilly'sarrangement in court.   &quot;I have serious reservations about this. It creates apotential conflict of interest because it raises the questionof whether the doctor will be able to give objectivetestimony about any warnings he received from the companyabout the drug,&quot; he said.   ---   MILKEN LAWYERS request junk-bond records from hundreds offirms.   In response to a lawsuit brought by thrift regulators,Michael Milken and other defendants in the case aresubpoenaing the junk-bond records of about 50 investmentbanking firms, banking and securities agencies in everystate, and more than 200 thrifts across the nation. Therequest seeks virtually every document the companies haverelating to junk bonds, going as far back as 1981.   The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. sued Mr. Milken inJanuary, accusing him of rigging the junk-bond market andblaming him for much of the savings-and-loan debacle. Butattorneys for Mr. Milken, former junk-bond chief at DrexelBurnham Lambert Inc., and the other defendants say thedocuments they have requested will show that the junk-bondmarket was legitimate and that thrifts knew what they weregetting into.   Mark A. Belnick, an attorney for Mr. Milken at the firmPaul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton andamp; Garrison, said, &quot;The FDIC hasmade sweeping charges that the high-yield market wasfraudulent in its entirety. . . . {The documents beingsought} give the boot to their expansive and, we think,baseless claim.&quot;   But Thomas Barr of Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore, the law firmrepresenting the FDIC, said the request will merely wastetime and money. &quot;The most important inference I draw fromthis enormous request is that Michael Milken has plenty ofmoney left. . . . If they want to spend their time chasingdown every possible angle and looking at every nook andcranny, that's their business.&quot;   Mr. Milken was convicted last fall of six felonies relatedto securities transactions and has begun a 10-year prisonsentence. He also agreed to pay fines totaling $600 million.   Mr. Barr predicted that the Milken request would turn uppiles of irrelevant documents. The subpoena calls for thethrifts to turn over all records of their junk-bondtransactions, their profits or losses in such transactions,as well as all information they have about the market andjunk-bond issuers.   The state agencies and investment firms are asked to turnover similar records and documents, plus any information theyhave about the 205 thrifts.   ---   POTENTIAL JURORS DISMISSED in Baltimore asbestos trialover fax snafu.   After three weeks of painstaking jury selection, 51prospective jurors were let go because defense lawyersinadvertently faxed a secret document about theirjury-selection strategy to plaintiffs' lawyers.   The case, with 9,000 plaintiffs, consolidates moreindividual cases than any other trial in history, lawyerssaid. Jury selection in Circuit Court for Baltimore City hadbeen proceeding at an agonizingly slow pace, because thetrial is expected to last six months. Plaintiffs contend thatasbestos insulation products manufactured by 10 differentdefendants is to blame for a variety of respiratoryillnesses, including emphysema and lung cancer.   The document was an analysis of prospective jurorsprepared by a psychologist hired by the defense team. Atemporary secretary for the San Francisco firm of Brobeck,Phleger andamp; Harrison, representing one of the defendants,mistakenly punched a speed dial number for a plaintiffs' lawfirm -- Greitzer andamp; Locks in Philadelphia.   That firm faxed the papers to Baltimore plaintiffs' lawyerHarry Goldman, who showed them to several other plaintiffs'lawyers. That, defense lawyers argued, tainted the selectionprocess, because the information disclosed was privilegedwork product belonging to the defense.   Plaintiffs' lawyers countered that disclosure ofconfidential material to an opposing party constitutes awaiver of the confidentiality, no matter how inadvertent.&quot;What we did was well founded in law,&quot; said Mr. Goldman.   Circuit Judge Marshall A. Levin said he would have agreedordinarily with the plaintiffs' legal argument, but that inthis case justice would be better served by starting overwith a fresh panel of prospective jurors. Brobeck Phleger, hesaid, did not take reasonable precautions to prevent themistake, but the mistake nonetheless threatened to taint theentire trial. It was &quot;a very close call,&quot; he said.   Jury selection will start over later this week or earlynext week, he said.   ---   GAF CASE won't be reheard by federal appeals court.   In March, a panel of the Second U.S. Circuit Court ofAppeals in New York threw out the stock-manipulationconvictions of GAF Corp. and former GAF executive James T.Sherwin, ruling that they didn't get a fair trial. TheManhattan U.S. attorney's office asked the appeals court fora rehearing before all the circuit's appeals judges, but thecourt turned the prosecutors down.   Now the U.S. attorney must decide whether to retry thecase. A new trial would be the fourth in the controversialcase. The first two trials were declared mistrials -- thefirst after a prosecutor inadvertently withheld a documentfrom defense attorneys, the second because of a hung jury.The third trial resulted in the convictions, which were laterreversed.   ---   NOTED: Ross Sandler, former transportation commissionerfor New York City, has joined Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue ashead of the 1,200-lawyer firm's New York environmentalpractice. Before his stint in city government, Mr. Sandlerwas a lead litigator for the Natural Resources DefenseCouncil. . . . Steven R. Lainoff and Thomas F. Wessel havejoined the Washington, D.C., office of the 264-lawyer Atlantafirm of King andamp; Spalding. Both partners come to the firm fromthe Internal Revenue Service, where Mr. Lainoff served asassociate chief counsel for international tax issues and Mr.Wessel as special counsel to the chief counsel.</TEXT></DOC>