<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911008-0061</DOCNO><DOCID>911008-0061.</DOCID><HL>   In-House Lenders:   Unlike Westinghouse,   Many Big Firms Claim   Healthy Finance Arms   ---   Those That Stuck to Basics   May Avoid the Write-offs   Of Those That Diversified   ---   Another Lesson in Leverage   ----   A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DATE>10/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   C CAT DE F GE IBM ITT MO T WX XRX</CO><MS>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)CONGLOMERATES (CGL)COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)HEAVY MACHINERY, FARM EQUIPMENT (MAC)OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)</IN><RE>CONNECTICUT (CT)ILLINOIS (IL)MICHIGAN (MI)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Even giant industrial companies aren't immune from the badloans that are still plaguing banks, savings and loans andinsurance companies. Yesterday, clobbered by huge losses atits financial-services unit, Westinghouse Electric Corp. tooka huge pretax charge of $1.68 billion and reported athird-quarter loss of $1.48 billion. The bad news came justeight months after the credit unit's earlier hit of $975million and raises a question about other giant companieswith big financial operations: Just how sound are they?   The question is sending tremors through the market.Predictably, Westinghouse stock dropped, but so did GeneralElectric's, whose GE Capital unit has so far escaped theravages of massive write-offs. But that may be noconsolation: As recently as a year ago, Westinghouse waspredicting a &quot;respectable year&quot; in 1991 for its financesubsidiary.</LP><TEXT>   Some unpleasant surprises may still be in store;Westinghouse itself didn't rule out more write-offs. But manyother industrial companies say they shouldn't be tarred bythe Westinghouse experience.   The companies fall into two broad categories: those thattook the plunge into the seemingly easy money of highlyleveraged real-estate and takeover deals; and those likeCaterpillar Inc. and Deere andamp; Co. that stuck to the basics offinancing purchases of their own products. They didn't plungeinto commercial real-estate lending -- which the bigPittsburgh electrical-products manufacturer entered,ironically, in an attempt to diversify out of its cyclicalheavy-manufacturing business.   Caterpillar and Deere are fairly typical of many largeMidwest manufacturing companies. Far from experiencingproblems like those at Westinghouse, their financial-servicearms have been reporting stronger results than theirrecessionpressed parent corporations. The reason is simple:They have been conservative and kept their lending close tohome.   Deere's financing arm, John Deere Credit Corp.,principally finances the sale of its farm, construction,forestry and lawn-care equipment; its other lending isrestricted to the purchase of recreational-vehicles and boatsmade by other companies. In the nine months ended July 31,John Deere Credit's after-tax earnings rose 4.7%, aided byhigher volume and a wider &quot;spread,&quot; the profit margin onloans. That's a substantially stronger performance than the82% plunge in earnings that the parent company reported.   At Caterpillar's Caterpillar Financial Services unit, thestrategy was similar. The unit finances the sale of theparent's earth-moving equipment and related gear, and itsonly other loans go to its dealers and customers. Thefinancing unit's after-tax earnings jumped 24% to $26.2million last year even though the parent's net dropped 58%.Nevertheless, Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. recently marked downthe financial unit's commercial paper to A-2 from A-1, alongwith that of Caterpillar Financial's parent.   The Big Three of the U.S. auto industry, which expandedtheir financial services in the late 1980s, present a mixedpicture. But the auto makers' finance units all have onecharacteristic in common: Although their finance subsidiarieshave diversified beyond auto lending, car loans remain by farthe major part of their business. Even Chrysler Corp.'sChrysler Financial -- which is the most diversified, withhalf auto and half non-auto loans -- nevertheless has keptits real-estate loans relatively unimportant compared withauto loans.   At Chrysler, in fact, the financial unit's operationsaren't hurting the parent company; just the opposite ishappening. Chrysler Financial's debt has been downgraded tojunk status because of the parent's problems. As a result,the financial unit's ability to raise money by sellingcommercial paper has almost disappeared. It has been forcedto turn to more expensive sources of funds, making it toughfor it to match other finance companies in offering customerslow loan rates. Chrysler Financial has attacked the problemby raising capital through sales of some of itshighest-quality assets.   General Motors Corp.'s big finance arm, General MotorsAcceptance Corp., is relatively conservative -- tooconservative, some GM marketing officials and dealers say.GMAC, with assets of $105 billion, focuses mainly on lendingto GM car dealers and to consumers. Last year, it earned $1.2billion.   That caution shows on its balance sheet. GMAC ended 1990with nearly $1.3 billion on hand to cover bad loans. Andwhile total charge-offs for bad loans jumped 13% in 1990 to$931.7 million, GMAC covered the amount by adding a total of$814.5 million to its provision for loan losses andrecovering $118.9 million from the sale of repossessed carsand other property.   GMAC has a real-estate financing unit, GMAC Mortgage Co.,but it puts relatively little of its own money into propertyloans, a spokesman says. In commercial deals, GMAC Mortgagetypically acts only as a broker, putting developers togetherwith investors but not risking its own capital. Most of GMACMortgage's direct lending is for home mortgages, but most ofthose loans subsequently get sold to other investors. &quot;Wedon't put loans in our portfolio, generally speaking,&quot; theGMAC Mortgage spokesman says.   Of the Big Three, Ford Motor Co. is having the worstproblems, for a reason similar to the Westinghouse debacle:ill-starred diversification. In 1985, Ford acquired FirstNationwide Financial Corp., a savings and loan operation, tohelp cushion it from the earnings swings inherent in thecyclical auto industry.   But late last year, just as Ford's profits wereevaporating, the auto maker had to inject an additional $250million in capital into First Nationwide. The thrift hassince posted a $27.4 million loss for the first six months ofthis year. It has been hurt by its commercial real-estateloans, especially ones made to rent-regulated apartmentbuildings in New York City, and its bad loans have soared to6.3% of its assets from 4.1% at the end of 1990 and 1.7% atthe end of 1989.   However, First Nationwide Chairman John Devine stillexpects the thrift to be profitable for this year and itsperformance to improve gradually over the next two years,barring unforeseen problems. &quot;I wish I could say theuncertainty is out of this business, but it isn't,&quot; he adds.   Other elements of Ford's financial-services thrust havefared better. The Associates, a Dallas-based consumer creditcompany, appears a clear winner. The Associates, one of thenation's top 10 credit-card issuers, is posting steadyincreases in earnings. In the first half, the unit earned$158 million, up 14% from a year earlier. Ford's largestfinance unit, Ford Credit, reported $425 million inconsolidated net for the first half, up 50%.   Compared with longtime rival Westinghouse, GeneralElectric's huge GE Capital unit &quot;is a different kettle offish,&quot; says Gary Wendt, the finance operation's chiefexecutive. Several Wall Street analysts agree that GECapital, with its 20 diversified businesses, has beensignificantly less vulnerable to changes in the economy.   In the second quarter, GE Capital's leveraged buy-outbusiness accounted for 11% of its more than $70 billion ofassets, compared with Westinghouse's 45% out of $10.3 billionin assets. Commercial real estate accounted for 15% of GECapital's assets, against Westinghouse's 35%.   Nevertheless, GE Capital's nonperforming assets rose to$2.2 billion in the quarter from $1.3 billion in the firstperiod. The increase reflected nonperforming aircraft leasesto Eastern Airlines and nonperforming commercial real-estateloans. However, GE Capital's nonperforming assets are a smallpercentage of the finance unit's total assets. Since then, GECapital has leased back the 10 Boeing 757s involved to USAir.And Mr. Wendt says that even excluding that deal, GECapital's non-earning assets are declining.   Other GE Capital businesses include auto and containerleasing, private-label credit cards, computer leasing,mortgage insurance and rail-car services. Mr. Wendt says theauto, container and credit-card businesses each will postprofit growth of about 25% or more this year. GE Capital as awhole will post &quot;double-digit&quot; earnings growth this year, headds.   International Business Machines Corp.'s big credit unitsays it's coming under some pressure because of broad U.S.economic troubles that are making its customers poorer creditrisks. But its average return on equity remains solid: 19.9%for the first half of 1991, on an annual basis, up from 19%in the year-ago period.   IBM Credit Corp. did show signs of strain in the 1991first half. It originated financing for $3.7 billion ofequipment, software and services, down 22% from a yearearlier, and its provision for receivable losses jumped to$84.4 million from $19.6 million. The unit blamed itsproblems on &quot;the continued uncertainty in the U.S. economyand its impact on the credit quality of American industry, abroad cross section of which is represented in the company'sportfolio.&quot;   Scattered doomsayers about IBM Credit have suggested thatit faces a long-term problem from the declining value of thecomputers it leases and then resells. They say the blisteringpace of technological innovation depresses the prices of oldmachines. For example, Bob Djurdjevic of Annex Research, inPhoenix, Ariz., argues that IBM doesn't sufficiently take allthis into account when it sets lease prices; he recentlywrote that this problem could be &quot;a ticking time bomb rollingloose on a deck of an already listing battleship.&quot;   However, an IBM Credit spokesman says the company believesit sets fair values on its computers.   At American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.'s ATandamp;T Credit Corp.unit, Irving Rothman, president of finance operation, saysthat last time Westinghouse Credit announced a major charge,his parent company got concerned and asked about the outlookfor its own finance unit. &quot;They wanted to know what was ourlevel of reserve and losses and risk,&quot; Mr. Rothman says. Andin the wake of the Westinghouse announcement yesterday, &quot;I amsure they will ask us again,&quot; he says.   Mr. Rothman happily says ATandamp;T Credit, which financesassets of its parent as well as equipment of other companies,isn't in the businesses that have hurt Westinghouse. Heacknowledges, however, that the equipment-leasing business&quot;is experiencing some pressure&quot; because of risingsmall-business bankruptcies and, as a result, the financeunit has increased its reserve for potential losses &quot;a littlebit.&quot; But he says ATandamp;T Credit expects to post &quot;comfortablegrowth&quot; this year.   ITT Corp. also has had some problems with itsfinancial-services unit, but a spokesman says that, unlikeWestinghouse's subsidiary, it has small exposure in realestate -- about 11% of ITT Financial Corp.'s grossreceivables of $10.37 billion.   &quot;Our problem has been in the consumer-loan area, where wehave been and continue to be negatively impacted by defaultson consumer loans. The level of bankruptcies continues torise, and loan volume has been severely impacted by thecurrent economic conditions,&quot; the spokesman says. For thesecond quarter, ITT Financial posted substantially loweroperating profit due to losses in consumer lending and lowvolume in commercial finance. The spokesman says ITTrecognized troubled real-estate and consumer loans early onand has taken substantial charges in those areas in the pastsix quarters.   Philip Morris Cos., whose trove of powerhouse brandsinclude Marlboro, Miller and Velveeta, also has escaped thetroubles plaguing Westinghouse. Although Philip Morris ownsPhilip Morris Capital Corp., one of the nation's largestfinancial-service units, it says it does no commercialreal-estate lending. It has shunned construction loans anddoesn't own mortgages on commercial properties.   The financial-services unit has focused primarily on saleand leaseback transactions, such as a research anddevelopment center for Hughes Aircraft. &quot;A huge portion ofour business is in sale leaseback transactions with leaseesor borrowers of investment-grade or better standing,&quot; aspokesman says. Last year, Capital Corp. earned $140 million,up 8.5% from 1989.   And some companies that did binge on risky lending are nowtrying to reform. Xerox Corp. has been aggressively movingout of the financing business. Last year, the Stamford,Conn., office-equipment maker, took one of its biggestwrite-offs ever, about $375 million, in connection with itsinvestments in VMS Realty Partners of Chicago. After that, itput up for sale much of its third-party financing and leasingoperations-representing about $2.2 billion, or about 40%, ofthe financial assets of its Xerox Credit Corp. unit.   Xerox still has large, far-flung financial-servicesoperations in investment banking and insurance, however. Thecompany once saw those businesses as a way to hedge theerratic cycles of the office equipment business.   But under Paul Allaire, who became chief executive lastsummer, Xerox has been sounding increasingly disillusionedwith financial services. In an interview last year, Mr.Allaire said Xerox will quit any financial-services businessthat doesn't promise an average annual return on equity of atleast 15%, and he warned: &quot;There aren't any sacred cows.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>