<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911120-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>911120-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Arms Control:   The Risk Now Posed   By the Soviet `Nukes'   Is One of Management   ---   The Red Army Has to Move,   Destroy or Store Weapons   While Preventing Theft   ---   Evacuating a German Bunker   ----   By John J. Fialka   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)</NS><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GERMANY (GE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   One day last spring, a heavily guarded military convoyemerged from the mists near Lychen, a resort town north ofBerlin. After dropping off its keys with a local mayor, thecolumn headed east toward home with its cargo: the terribleburden of an elite Soviet KGB military unit known as VK79.   Inside the Soviet trucks were dozens of desk-sized metalboxes, each containing a nuclear warhead for a Scud missile.Inside the warheads were explosive-wrapped globes ofplutonium, each capable of triggering a blast almost as largeas the one that devastated Hiroshima.</LP><TEXT>   For many military units, the Cold War is over. But fordetachments like VK79, it is more like the beginning of theend. The threat presented by its weapons lingers, becausethey are small, easily hidden, easily transported -- andsusceptible to theft.   Within the coming months and years, if all goes well,VK79's warheads will cease to exist. They are among some10,000 tactical nuclear weapons that George Bush and MikhailGorbachev have vowed to eliminate, in history's firstlarge-scale destruction of nuclear weapons (in the past,explosive parts of retired nuclear weapons have beenrecycled, not destroyed).   But Western experts have discovered that this &quot;if&quot; is avery big one. The rapidly unraveling Soviet Union lacks theresources to quickly collect and eliminate its share of theweapons, at least 7,000 warheads. Moreover, the 200 soldiersof VK79 don't seem to have the training or the experience tocope with terrorists, corruption, criminal gangs, coups,drugs and divisive politics -- all growing facets of theuneasy peace they found when they returned home.   &quot;They were oriented toward fighting a war,&quot; says WilliamM. Arkin, military analyst for the environmental groupGreenpeace and one of the first Americans to visit VK79'sabandoned German base. Inside the 10-acre camp, hidden deepin a pine forest, he found a citadel -- two undergroundbunkers surrounded by five barbedwire-tipped fences, someelectrified. Infantry trenches were arrayed around thebunkers, facing the probable direction of an enemy attack.   When Mr. Arkin, once a U.S. Army intelligence officer inWest Germany, entered the bunker, he came upon a familiarscene: a secret world of warhead bays, sophisticatedprotective systems and evidence of extreme spit-and-polishdiscipline much like that in U.S. bunkers.   But he also sensed a big difference. The fenced compoundsof U.S. nuclear storage sites, which dot the landscape inwestern Germany, are kept starkly illuminated and surroundedby open space. They were designed that way in the 1970s tocope with the more immediate threat of terrorists anddemonstrators. The Soviet bunker had none of these features.Its soldiers seemed prepared only for the terrifying openingscenes of a third world war.   Today it is the non-war threats that are most worrisome toguard units like VK79, or units of the super-secret U.S. Armyequivalent, the 59th Ordnance Brigade based in Germany. Ofall nuclear weapons, tactical ones are the most vulnerable,because they are small enough for an enemy or a terroristgroup to carry away.   Although a wide array of gadgets, including electroniccombination locks called &quot;permissive action links,&quot; are usedby both sides to secure nuclear weapons, a determined expertcan thwart them. The main defense is a tough managementsystem involving tens of thousands of technicians and guardsmaintained by the U.S. and what remains of the Soviet Union.&quot;It is their {the Soviets'} system of management that has tostay coherent. This is the one system that ought not tocollapse in the Soviet Union,&quot; warns Fred C. Ikle, a formerundersecretary of defense.   And it will have to stay coherent for a long time. A teamof Soviet nuclear weapons experts who recently visitedWashington said it may take 10 years and the equivalent of $2billion to collect and destroy the tactical nuclear weapons.The Russians said they were considering plans to build asystem of highly secured shelters to store about 15,000weapons, after retrieval from outlying storage sites andother republics. (Only ethnic Russians were assigned to elitenuclear weapons units, so the republics would be startingfrom scratch in the business of guarding nukes.) After theweapons are retrieved, they are to be disassembled and theirplutonium cores guarded in another type of shelter until theyare burned up as fuel in reactors or submarines.   Victor N. Mikhailov, deputy minister of the SovietMinistry of Atomic Power and Industry, worries that duringthe &quot;several years&quot; all this will take, &quot;what might happen isdifficult to predict.&quot; It would be cheaper and quicker, hetold U.S. weapons experts, for the Soviet Union to pack anumber of nuclear weapons in an underground tunnel andvaporize them with the searing blast from another nuclearweapon. &quot;To destroy 30,000 weapons you will need 15 to 30explosions underground,&quot; he calculated.   You also need money. During an informal meeting with U.S.senators, the Soviet nuclear experts suggested they neededU.S. funds to help build the storage and destructionshelters. But no such aid appears likely; Congress recentlykilled a provision in the defense budget that would have letthe Bush administration spend up to $1 billion to help theSoviets shift their economy away from a war footing. Sen. SamNunn (D., Ga.), one of the measure's authors, contends suchspending should be viewed not as aid but as &quot;a direct way toreduce a threat to U.S. security.&quot;   U.S. weapons experts will begin talks with the Soviets inthe next few weeks, an administration official says. The U.S.is prepared to offer &quot;technical assistance&quot; to help theSoviets destroy their weapons, he says, but he is unsure whatform it would take. &quot;We just don't know enough about their{nuclear weapons} system yet.&quot;   Even if the Soviets find funds for the destruction, therewill be further difficulties: The system for accounting forthe weapons must be perfect on both sides. Any missingnuclear device could provoke a crisis. But tough accountingraises another touchy problem: secrecy. Both sides stillworry that a mutually verified destruction process wouldreveal their bomb designs.   Complex problems are nothing new to U.S. politicians andofficials who have spent many sleepless nights worrying aboutthe ultra-secret business of managing tactical nuclearweapons. While other nuclear weapons were safely stored inremote silos, in hangars or under the sea, tactical ones havehad to be kept in densely populated Central Europe.   Now much of this tension shifts to the Soviet side, where,in many cases, newly created managers and politicians mustquickly learn the unforgiving nature of the mission ofguarding the nukes. For the Russians, and the emerging rulersof the other Soviet republics, their job for months to comewill be, in many respects, like the work of U.S. soldiersguarding the bunkers in what was West Germany.   Living close to danger and chaos came with theirterritory. There was always a Catch-22 aspect about what theydid. U.S. Army nuclear artillery shells had to be housedwithin 15 miles of the East German border to be effective inwartime. That meant they were always in imminent danger ofbeing overrun by Soviet forces before they could be used.Moreover, because they had to be stored in populous areas,threats of terrorist attack and political demonstrations wereconstant. The situation was a fertile one for moraleproblems. They began with the generals and ran to thelowliest guards in bunkers.   The presence of some 10,000 nuclear warheads that the U.S.Army pumped into Europe during the 1970s forced the Sovietarmy to spread out its armored formations so they couldn't beannihilated during an attack. But they also painted the U.S.Army into a corner; its strategy became &quot;use them or losethem.&quot; Former Army chief of staff Gen. Edward C. Meyerrecalls that in the 1970s, &quot;the mission was delay, delay --then nuke. Every war game we played came to the point whereyou had to resort to nuclear weapons.&quot;   While the policy was clear, the matter of carrying it outhaunted those in the nuclear bunkers. Since bunkers would betargets, at the first hint of preparations for an enemyattack, the mission was to load up the warheads and get themout in the field. That would take 10 hours, says a formercommander of an Army nuclear ordnance company, who adds: &quot;Iknew we would never get the first weapon out before we'd allbe dead.&quot;   The actual protection and care of the warheads was left tocarefully selected technicians, soldiers in their early 20s.The U.S. Army went to great lengths to keep technicians andguards happy, with everything in the bunker designed for&quot;stress avoidance.&quot; The insides of U.S. bunkers are paintedin soft pastels (as is the bunker vacated by the SovietVK79). There is a great deal of busywork. Walls, hardware andfloors are always kept freshly painted. &quot;A clean bomb is ahappy bomb,&quot; says a U.S. Army manual.   The Army also developed field manuals full of euphemismsto keep the average 22-year-old from thinking too deeplyabout his mission. For instance, troops nearest the nuclearblast wouldn't die from radiation burns and endless vomitingin their foxholes, but rather would sustain &quot;immediatepermanent incapacitation.&quot;   As the commander of a nuclear bunker, says the former U.S.officer, who asked not to be named, &quot;I was at the absolutemercy of the lowest dog in the unit. All he had to do isscrew up and my career was gone. In the nuclear business, youhad to be more perfect than perfect.&quot;   But perfect was hardly the word for the U.S. Army inEurope in the 1970s. The troops were plagued with drug,alcohol and morale problems, some of them a hangover fromVietnam. Nuclear units were no exception. In the officer'sunit of 256 men, he says, there were almost 50 courtmartials, many for drug use.   By 1990, it was the Red Army that had severe moraleproblems. Soldiers in Germany began deserting and sellingstolen uniforms and even weapons to get money. Moscow thisspring ordered a hasty withdrawal of most nuclear units fromGermany, up to two years ahead of time.   Mr. Arkin, the Greenpeace investigator, says the VK79 unitappeared equipped to handle every military contingency. Therewas a thick layer of earth on the roof and foot-thick doorsto protect against direct hits. There were hundreds of gasmasks, chemical protective suits, and an elaborate airconditioning and airlock system designed to thwart chemicalattacks. He found a camouflaged loading dock and a timetableshowing when U.S. satellites would pass overhead.   Unlike other departing Soviet units, which stripped theirbases to the walls, VK79 had left in a hurry, abandoning muchof its expensive equipment. &quot;I guess the one thing theyweren't prepared for was peace,&quot; he concludes.   (See related article: &quot;The Way to Destroy A NuclearWarhead Is Very Carefully&quot; -- WSJ Nov. 20, 1991)</TEXT></DOC>