<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910204-0152</DOCNO><DOCID>910204-0152.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Keep Saddam's Big Brother at Arm's Length   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>02/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   Success by the Bush-Baker foreign policy team inorganizing a world-wide coalition against Saddam Husseinclearly ranks as a diplomatic achievement of the first order.The next question is whether that achievement will make iteasier, or harder, to secure a just and permanent Mideastpeace after the war is over. A case can be made that it willbe harder.   If that is so, the U.S. would be wise to start looking forways now to narrow participation in the peace process, toreduce the number of conflicting goals and objectives. A goodrule would be to limit the peace talks to the majorparticipants in the war, plus Israel and Jordan, the twocountries that have the most to lose if the &quot;peace&quot; merelylays the groundwork for further Mideast strife.</LP><TEXT>   Such an approach would raise one immediate question: Howto keep the Soviet Union on the sidelines? Someone -- quitepossibly in the U.S. State Department itself -- willimmediately want to know why the U.S. should pursue any suchobjective. Haven't the Soviets supported the internationaleffort to get Saddam out of Kuwait? Was that not a major steptoward U.S.-Soviet comity? Why should the U.S. even think ofkeeping the Soviets on the sidelines?   The answer is that a brief moment of harmony does notproduce a symphony. There is no reason to believe that theSoviets want a Mideast peace enforced by a continuing alliedmilitary presence in the Gulf. They will be making thatincreasingly clear in the weeks and months ahead. Yet, alliedoccupation of Iraq offers the best prospect for long-termpeace.   Efforts by the Soviets to expand their influence in theMiddle East since World War II have mainly been disruptive ofWestern peace efforts. Gamal Abdel Nasser, the Arab strongman of the 1960s, was equipped by the Soviets and encouragedto conduct his ill-fated effort to crush Israel in 1967. ThePalestine refugee camps -- those squalid breeding grounds forracial hatred -- have remained in place thanks in part toSoviet influence in the U.N. PLO and Gadhafi terrorists havereceived Soviet training and weapons. Iraq became a regionalsuperpower thanks in large part to weapons and support fromthe Soviets. Syrian and PLO depredations in Lebanon have beenconducted under the influence of Soviet military and KGBoperatives.   Sometimes these efforts have backfired. One reason AnwarSadat and Menachem Begin agreed to peace talks in the 1970swas that both feared Jimmy Carter seriously intended toinvite the Russians into the Mideast talks, raising the riskof a Pax Sovietica subjugating both. The Russians armed thePLO so well that not only Israel, but Jordan and Syria aswell, became frightened of its power. Although the Russianshave gained very little from their Mideast schemes, theregion itself has suffered as a consequence. This is hardlyan argument for inviting them to come back and try again.   But surely the U.S. must always consider the Russians, itwill be argued. They are a superpower. Saying yes to that,however, is not the same as saying that their goals should beaccommodated, especially when they are subversive to Westerninterests and there are means available to thwart them.   It is quite true that the U.S. cannot afford to neglectthe Soviets. With five million men under arms and their greatarray of warplanes, warships, missiles, nuclear warheads,tanks, rocket launchers and chemical and biological weapons,they are indeed a military superpower. Reports that the RedArmy has fallen apart under the pressures of economicdecline, military defeat, withdrawal from occupiedterritories, refusals to serve, desertions and generally lowmorale should be treated cautiously. Even though the Sovietmilitary does have problems, armies usually do as they'retold to do, as we have been witnessing in the Baltic states.   The argument that the Soviets cannot be ignored is merelya truism. The real question is how they should be treatedunder present circumstances. It seems clear, after the Balticexperience, that they need to be looked upon with morerealism than was the case while the Central European fringeof their empire was crumbling in 1989 and 1990. The CommunistParty and the powerful military units that support it haveshown themselves willing to use brute force, when it can bedone at relatively little cost, to try to prevent thesystem's collapse. To that end, Mikhail Gorbachev last Fridaydeployed &quot;law and order&quot; forces on the streets of Sovietcities, thus creating a kind of martial law no doubt meant tointimidate the party's opponents.   His Mideast emissary, Evgenii Primakov, certainly is nofriend of the West. He told a Western TV reporter recently heconcluded that Saddam Hussein was an honorable man afterhaving spent a great deal of time with the Iraqi before theoutbreak of hostilities. This Saddam soulmate was a topchoice of the Soyuz group of Soviet hard-liners to head theforeign ministry after Eduard Shevardnadze resigned. Mr.Shevardnadze, who had worked with U.S. Secretary of StateBaker to create greater U.S.-Soviet harmony, quit preciselybecause the hard-liners were gaining ascendancy.   Mr. Gorbachev gave the job to Alexander Bessmertnykh, alongtime fixture in the Soviet Embassy in Washington. Thatwas a sign that the Soviet president hopes to continuesoothing Washington while he takes harsh measures againstwould-be democrats in his own country. His efforts bore somefruit last week when Mr. Bessmertnykh persuaded SecretaryBaker to join him in a communique that seemed to be easingthe pressure on Saddam. It suggested that a mere promise bySaddam to pull out of Kuwait, plus some moves in thatdirection, would suffice to bring about a cease-fire. TheWhite House later asserted that the communique didn't meanthat at all and that the U.S. still demands massive andimmediate withdrawal.   What that episode showed was the potential for Sovietmischief-making against Western efforts to restore truestability in the region. Clearly stability is not possible solong as Saddam remains in power, with a substantial militaryforce still intact. Yet Mr. Gorbachev is endeavoring, withinthe constraints of his efforts to stay on good terms with theU.S., to act as Saddam's friend in court. Were Saddam notsuch an unwilling client, the Soviet president would behaving more success.   From that, it follows that there cannot be a stable peacein the region if the Soviets succeed in their present aims toprotect Iraq from military occupation and to preserve it as aclient state. U.S. and allied losses in the Gulf will havebeen largely in vain if, after the war, a new supply ofSoviet arms pours into Iraq in preparation for yet anotheradventure by some new Iraqi strong man. Given the fact thatthe U.S. now has a major presence in the Gulf, this can beprevented. But preventing it will require a tougher Sovietpolicy than the U.S. has now.</TEXT></DOC>