<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900606-0162</DOCNO><DOCID>900606-0162.</DOCID><HL>   A Blueprint for Public Education   ----   By John E. Chubb</HL><DATE>06/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><LP>   The past decade has been the most ambitious period ofschool reform in the nation's history. But evidence of schoolimprovement -- e.g., in test scores and dropout rates -- isalmost impossible to find.   How can government work so hard to solve a problem yetmake so little progress? The conclusion Stanford Prof. TerryMoe and I reached -- after analyzing more than 20,000students, teachers and principals in a nationwide sample of500 schools -- is that government has not solved theeducation problem, because government is the problem.</LP><TEXT>   The public education system functions naturally androutinely, despite everyone's best intentions, to burdenschools with excessive bureaucracy, to discourage effectiveschool organization, and to stifle student achievement.Efforts to improve schools are therefore doomed unless theyeliminate or sharply curtail the influence of theinstitutions that cause the schools' problems in the firstplace.   We consequently propose a new system of public educationthat will not be governed directly by politics but will becontrolled indirectly through markets -- through schoolcompetition and parental choice. Markets, we found,discourage excessive bureaucracy and promote more effectiveschools. Because states have primary responsibility forpublic education, the best way to establish a &quot;choice&quot; systemis for states to withdraw authority from existinginstitutions and vest it directly in the schools, parents andstudents -- as follows:   The state will be responsible for setting criteria thatdefine what constitutes a &quot;public school&quot; under the newsystem. These criteria should be minimal, roughlycorresponding to the criteria many states now use inaccrediting private schools -- graduation requirements,health and safety requirements, and teacher certificationrequirements. Any group or organization that meets theseminimal criteria must then be chartered as a public schooland granted the right to accept students and receive publicmoney. Existing private and parochial schools (as long astheir religious functions are kept separate) will beeligible, and their participation should be encouraged,because they constitute a ready supply of often-effectiveschools.   School districts can continue running their presentschools, but they will have no authority over any of theothers that may be chartered by the state.   The state will set up a Choice Office in each district,which, among other things, will maintain a record of allschool-age children and the level of funding -- the&quot;scholarship&quot; amounts -- associated with each child. Thisoffice will directly compensate schools based on the specificchildren they enroll. Public money will flow from fundingsources to the Choice Office and then to schools.   The state must pay to support its own Choice Office ineach district. Districts may retain as much of their currentgoverning apparatus as they wish, but they have to pay for itout of the scholarship revenue of those children who chooseto attend district-run schools.   As it does now, the state will have the right to specifyhow much, or by what formula, each district must contributefor each child. Our preference is for an equalizationapproach that requires wealthier districts to contribute moreper child than poor districts do and that guarantees anadequate financial foundation to students in all districts.   Scholarships will also take into account specialeducational needs -- arising from economic deprivation,physical handicaps, and other disadvantages -- that can bemet effectively only through costly specialized programs.State and federal programs already appropriate public moneyto address these problems. These funds should take the formof add-ons to student scholarships. At-risk students wouldthen receive bigger scholarships than the others, making themattractive clients to all schools -- and stimulating theemergence of new specialty schools.   Each student will be free to attend any public school inthe state, with the scholarship -- consisting of federal,state and local contributions -- flowing to the school ofchoice. Most students will probably choose schools close tohome, but districts will have no claim on their ownresidents. To the extent that tax revenues allow, everyeffort will be made to provide transportation for those whoneed it, especially the poor and those in rural areas.   To assist parents and students in choosing among schools,the state will provide a Parent Information Center withineach local Choice Office. This center will collectcomprehensive information on each school in the district, anddistribute and collect applications. Its liaisons will meetwith parents to help them judge which schools best meet theirchildren's needs.   Schools will make their own admissions decisions, subjectonly to nondiscrimination requirements. This step isabsolutely crucial. Schools must be able to define their ownmissions and build their own programs, and they cannot dothat if their students are thrust on them by outsiders. Theymust be free to admit as many or as few students as theywant, based on whatever criteria they think relevant.   Schools will set their own &quot;tuitions.&quot; They may choose todo so explicitly, say, by publicly announcing the minimumscholarship they are willing to accept. They may also do itimplicitly by allowing anyone to apply for admission andsimply making selections, knowing in advance what eachapplicant's scholarship amount is. In either case, schoolsare free to admit students with different-sized scholarshipsand to keep the entire scholarship that accompanies eachstudent they admit. That gives schools incentives to attractstudents with special needs, since these children have thelargest scholarships.   While it is important to give parents and students as muchflexibility as possible, we think it unwise to let themsupplement their scholarships with personal funds. Suchadd-ons threaten to produce too many inequalities within thesystem, and many citizens would regard them as unfair.   The application process must guarantee each student aschool, as well as a fair shot at getting into the school hemost wants. We suggest the following. The Parent InformationCenter will be responsible for seeing that applications aresubmitted by a given date. Schools will then be required tomake their admissions decisions within a set time, andstudents who are accepted into more than one school will berequired to select one. Students who are not acceptedanywhere, as well as schools that have yet to attract enoughstudents, will participate in a second round of applications,after which unaccepted students (there should be few) will beassigned to schools by the Choice Office.   The state must grant each school sole authority to set itsown governing structure. A school may be run entirely byteachers or even a union; may vest all power in a principal;may be built around a committee that guaranteesrepresentation to the principal, teachers, parents, studentsand community members. Or it may do something completelydifferent.   The state will also do nothing to tell the schools howthey must be internally organized. It will not setrequirements for career ladders, advisory committees,textbook selection, in-service training, preparation time,homework, or anything else.   Statewide tenure laws will be eliminated, allowing eachschool to decide for itself whether to adopt a tenure policyand what the specifics will be. This change is essential ifschools are to have the flexibility to build well-functioningteams of professionals. Some schools may rely solely on payand working conditions to attract teachers, while others mayoffer tenure as a means of compensating and retaining theirbest teachers.   Teachers will continue to have a right to join unions andengage in collective bargaining, but the bargaining unit willbe the individual school or, as in the case of the districtgovernment, the organization that runs the school.   The state will continue to certify teachers, butrequirements will be minimal. Individuals should be certifiedto teach if they have a bachelor's degree and if theirpersonal history reveals no obvious problems. Whether theyare good teachers will be determined in practice, as schoolsdecide whom to hire, observe their own teachers in action,and make decisions about merit, promotion and dismissal.   The state will hold the schools accountable for meetingthe criteria set out in their charters, for adhering tonondiscrimination laws, and for making available to thepublic, through the Parent Information Center, information ontheir mission, their staff and course offerings, standardizedtest scores (which we would make optional), parent andstudent satisfaction, and anything else that would promoteinformed educational choice.   The state will not hold the schools accountable forstudent achievement or other dimensions that call forassessments of the quality of school performance. When itcomes to performance, schools will be held accountable frombelow, by parents and students who directly experience theirservices and are free to choose.   These changes have nothing to do with &quot;privatizing&quot; thenation's schools. The choice system we outline would be atruly public system -- and a democratic one.   Nothing in the concept of democracy requires that schoolsbe subject to direct control by school boards,superintendents, central offices, departments of education,and other arms of government. Nor does anything in theconcept of public education require that schools be governedin this way. There are many paths to democracy and publiceducation. The path America has long been treading isexacting a heavy price -- one the nation and its children canill afford to bear, and need not.   ---   Mr. Chubb, a Brookings Institution fellow, is co-authorwith Terry M. Moe of &quot;Politics, Markets, and America'sSchools&quot; (Brookings, $10.95). A related editorial appearstoday {see: REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Teachers vs. Kids-- WSJ June 6, 1990}.</TEXT></DOC>