<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900817-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>900817-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Comeback Story:   Reborn Ohio Industry   Is Clean, High-Tech   And Shock-Absorbent   ---   Innovative Firms Along I-271   Are Better Able to Survive   Oil Crisis and Recession   ---   Lawns Replace Smokestacks   ----   By Thomas F. O'Boyle   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   KEI</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)</IN><LP>   INTERSTATE 271, Ohio -- Just a decade ago, an oil shockand looming recession could have knocked Ohio on its back.   But this is a different Ohio. Here in the industrialheartland, industry has a new look.</LP><TEXT>   Smokestacks are nowhere to be found. Instead, the scenealong this manufacturing artery east of Cleveland is one ofendless suburban sprawl: smokeless industrial parks, asubiquitous as the McDonald's arches that surround them.   And while there is obviously concern about the crisis inthe Persian Gulf, there has been little disruption of theindustry that goes on here behind neatly manicured lawns.&quot;Ohio is a lot more resilient than it once was,&quot; says RonaldM. Rebner, chief financial officer of Keithley InstrumentsInc. Barring war in the Middle East, he says, his company andothers &quot;will just absorb the higher oil costs and keepmarching forward.&quot;   Randall W. Eberts, an economist at the Cleveland FederalReserve Bank, says that's not just bluster. &quot;Manufacturinghas come roaring back,&quot; he says, and because of sharplyhigher productivity, the new manufacturing jobs &quot;may provemore secure in the next recession than the ones theyreplaced.&quot;   Ohio's new industrial landscape is a good example of agrowing kind of American industry that relies more onefficiency, creativity and pluck than oil and a surging U.S.economy. And Keithley Instruments, just off I-271 in nearbySolon, is a good place to start a driving tour of thatlandscape.   The company, which makes equipment used in laboratories tomeasure electric current, has raised its manufacturingproductivity 50% in the past three years by attacking the wayit designs products.   Design and production engineers, who once ignored eachother, now work together in teams, simultaneously designing aproduct and the process to make it. One result: The 36fasteners that assembly-line workers once had to screw in orbolt to one product have been slashed to two.   Mr. Rebner motions to the window in his ground-flooroffice and the pretty lawn beyond. &quot;How we've been able toshift from all those people who used to work in the steelmills to this I don't know,&quot; he says. &quot;But there's no waythis is the Rust Belt.&quot;   Keithley is one of hundreds of companies that have sprungup along I-271 and the highways crisscrossing it aroundCleveland. Like their industrial forefathers, these newcomersstill manufacture goods. But it's manufacturing that bearslittle resemblance to the gritty smokestack version ofyesteryear.   The scale is smaller. Energy consumption is largelylimited to the electricity used to heat and light buildings.Exports play a big role. The products themselves have ahigher technology content and fill a niche rather than gardenvariety metal bending or nuts and bolts. And many of thesenew manufacturers are highly prosperous.   While parts of the nation teeter near recession, Ohio'seconomy chugs along. The state is the only one in theindustrial Midwest that still expects 2% or better job growththis year. The revival of manufacturing is a major reasonwhy.   Plenty of problems must still be overcome before Ohiobecomes a manufacturing paradise. The state ranks 39th in thenation in the availability of private venture capital, Mr.Eberts says. Worker wages stand 15% above the nationalaverage (though less than the 20% premium paid in 1983). Andwhile workers are skilled and plentiful, they're not terriblywell educated: Only 17% of household heads have collegedegrees, putting Ohio near the bottom in attained highereducation.   But already, there are other statistics that tell aremarkable story. Between 1979 and 1982, Ohio lost 27% of itsmanufacturing employment. In all, 372,000 jobs vanished asfactories padlocked their gates and companies pulled upstakes for sunnier climes. In January 1983, when Ohio'sjobless rate peaked at 14.2%, the state looked like a goner.   Today, joblessness stands at 5.1%, less than in Californiaand below the national average. Of course, services haveaccounted for most of the job growth: In 1989, in fact,services for the first time surpassed manufacturing as Ohio'sleading job sector. Still, manufacturing has posted a netgain of about 100,000 jobs since January 1983.   By contrast, manufacturing employment has continued toslide in New York and Pennsylvania, which together have lostan additional 239,000 such jobs since 1982. Ohio now accountsfor more manufactured goods than any other state exceptCalifornia and New York, having passed Pennsylvania in thepast decade.   Economists and executives offer several explanations forOhio's resurgent manufacturing. Some cite declines in workerwages and higher productivity gains than in neighboringstates. Others attribute it to a favorable politicalenvironment that has helped attract and nurture newbusinesses.   In truth, Ohio's strength may stem from more subtlefactors: Its diverse manufacturing base, covering a widerange of soft and hard goods, as well as its critical mass insome emerging sectors, such as surgical and medicalequipment.   Whatever the reason, technology-based companies say it'snow easier to do business in Ohio. &quot;Five years ago, I had togo to Silicon Valley to get the technology I needed. Now,everything is available locally,&quot; says entrepreneur Albert P.Kretz Jr. His firm, Synthetic Blood andamp; Medical TechnologiesInc. of Highland Heights, another town along I-271, expectsthis fall to begin producing a tiny, automatedinsulin-injecting pump for diabetics.   Labor, too, is readily available. In some cases, olderexecutives who weren't wanted at big corporations anymorehave been welcomed at small companies just starting out.   That was the case at a firm founded by Howard J.Drechsler, a pharmacist who had experimented for years withlight sources to treat skin disease. Finally, in 1981, hetold his wife he wanted to stop filling prescriptions andstart selling his own products. &quot;She thought I was nuts,&quot;says Mr. Drechsler, now 58.   Nine years later, the entrepreneur and two cousins haveparlayed their $6,000 investment -- and $101,000 in seedmoney from Ohio -- into National Biological Corp., a $3million-a-year business that has sold its products tocustomers as far away as Pakistan and Saudi Arabia.   Though shipments to the Middle East have been temporarilysuspended, Mr. Drechsler says that's a minor concern. And the6% increase he expects in transportation costs stemming fromthe Iraqi invasion pales in comparison with a 32% surge inhealth-insurance costs for the company's 26 employees, hesays. &quot;That's the real crisis,&quot; he quips.   The company, in Twinsburg on an offshoot of I-271, makesultraviolet lamps used mainly to treat psoriasis. It is thelast in a long row of new businesses on Enterprise Parkway.   The company struggled at first. Then, in 1983, it got abig break when Mr. Drechsler hired Elton T. Leppelmeier, oneof the nation's leading ultraviolet-light experts. &quot;He wrotethe book on this kind of therapy,&quot; Mr. Drechsler says. &quot;For asmall company like us, just starting out, to get a guy of hisstature was a huge boost.&quot;   Mr. Leppelmeier says he got the &quot;silver bullet&quot; fromGeneral Electric Co., where he had worked for nearly 40 yearsas a senior engineer in GE's Cleveland-based lightingdivision. Now nearly 65 and chief of product development forNational Biological, Mr. Leppelmeier says he has no plans toretire. &quot;Why should I? Just because GE had no use for medoesn't mean I can't make a contribution somewhere else,&quot; hesays.   Getting the most out of people is the top priority atAutomated Packaging Systems Inc., just around the corner fromNational Biological in Twinsburg. Founded in 1962 by brothersHershey and Bernard Lerner, the company was chased by zoninginspectors from its first production site -- the familygarage -- in the Queens borough of New York City. Then it wason to Brooklyn. About a decade later, the company settled inTwinsburg, the first tenant in an industrial park that nowstretches for miles.   Today, Automated Packaging Systems is a global player inthe world packaging business. It makes machines that printlabels and package everything from soft-drink containers toplastic bags. Annual sales total about $80 million. But,despite its size, Automated still manages to retain apersonal touch with its 650 employees.   The atmosphere is relaxed, the banter frequent. WhenChairman Hershey strolls through the factory floor, employeescall out, &quot;Hey, Hersh, how ya' doin'?&quot; The company phone bookalphabetizes people by their first names. The brothersregularly attend funerals and weddings. And the perks ofemployment at Automated include free use for all employees ofthe company cottage at a lakeside resort in central Ohio.   More than half of the employees are involved in voluntaryquality circles meant to improve productivity and productquality. Recently, one seven-person team tackled a problemthat had vexed Automated for years: the time lost setting upmachinery for a new production run. The process typicallytook more than an hour. After filming and studying it forseveral months, the team whittled the time to 15 minutes.   Hershey says he felt like a proud father when the grouppresented its findings to management. &quot;They did a terrificjob,&quot; he says, beaming. The team has begun to teach otherworkers the new system.   There is no union at Automated. &quot;If you feel treatedunjustly, you can walk right into Hershey's office and he'lllisten to your complaint,&quot; says Brian Ripley, who packsfreight on the shipping dock and has five relatives workingat Automated. &quot;When you have direct access to the chairman,who needs a union?&quot;   Automated tries mightily to promote loyalty, eschewinglayoffs and almost always promoting from within. And loyaltyis returned: The company's first hire in Brooklyn, VinnieLattur, still works on the shop floor.   Automated has also cultivated loyalty with its suppliers.It has bought plastic resin -- an essential ingredient of thelabels it makes -- from the same suppliers since itsbeginnings even when others were offering cheaperalternatives. That's a policy that will guarantee Automatedsupplies, Hershey Lerner says, even if hostilities in theMiddle East trigger shortages of oil and, ultimately,oil-derived resin.   Just around the corner from Keithley Instruments in Solonis another sleek manufacturing compound. The company, Tecmar,sits on Solon's main thoroughfare, Cochran Road, anindustrial artery lined for miles on either side with newbuildings and businesses.   Hank Oberle, the tanned and blond operations vicepresident, looks as if he had been transplanted fromCalifornia. He's dressed in a white shirt, open at thecollar, and khaki slacks. But his approach to manufacturingis hardly laid back. Since he took charge of production fiveyears ago, Tecmar, which makes equipment that stores computerdata on tape as a backup to the hard disk, has slashed itsmanufacturing employment from 380 to 103.   &quot;We automate everything we can,&quot; says Mr. Oberle, who leftEaton Corp., a diversified truck-parts maker in Cleveland,because of what he felt was the insufficient priority givenmanufacturing.   Like many of the companies along I-271, Tecmar suggestshow ever-declining technology costs have put some of the bestmanufacturing methods and equipment within the reach of smallplayers. State-of-the-art circuit boards get minted at a rateof one every two minutes, output approaching the best worldstandards.   Even with the hostilities in the Middle East, the companyexpects at least 20% growth next year. &quot;We're planning toexpand aggressively,&quot; says Mark A. Bretl, Tecmar's31-year-old president.   Of course, small-scale manufacturing can be adisadvantage. Small production runs mean higher per-unitcosts. But some companies sprouting up along I-271 havefigured out ways to combat that, too.   A final stop at Iotech Inc., west of Solon in BedfordHeights, is a case in point. Founded three years ago byentrepreneur Thomas DeSantis, the company, which makesdevices that link computers to scientific instruments, hasaveraged about 80% growth each year. But even with sales thisyear of nearly $10 million, it's still a relative midget inmanufacturing. While Keithley or Tecmar stamp out thousandsof the same circuit boards, 500 is considered a longproduction run at Iotech.   So Iotech farms out part of its production, bringing newmeaning to the phrase cottage industry. It employs about adozen part-time workers who put together its circuit boards.The workers pick up their kits, stocked with all thenecessary gadgetry, assemble 25 or so at their own pace andbring them back for a refill.   &quot;I like it a lot,&quot; says Joyce Mays, inspecting the partsin her refill kit. The mother of three, who once worked on anelectronics assembly line, figures she nets about $4 an hour.More important, she says, &quot;I can set my own hours.&quot; In hercase, the production line -- her kitchen -- usually doesn'tget cranked up until the children have gone to bed.   Mr. DeSantis says the quality of the farmed-out circuitboards is top-notch. And Iotech reaps big benefits. The mainone is that it saves capital, allowing it to spend more ondevelopment and marketing.   There's no recession in Iotech's future, Mr. DeSantisinsists. Already, he says, August is shaping up as thecompany's best month ever, with the little firm shipping itsproducts to customers world-wide. About one-third of Iotech'sproducts go overseas, mostly to Western Europe.   &quot;We're small, so we have to be smarter, more creative. Wehave to spend our money more wisely,&quot; he says. &quot;That's theonly way we can hope to compete.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>