<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900409-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>900409-0081.</DOCID><HL>   Loss of a Star Can Cast Shadow Over Firm   ----   By Gilbert Fuchsberg   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><LP>   Can the magic continue without the magician? That's thequestion that faces any organization that loses a superstar.   The loss of an extraordinary leader can mean wrenchingchanges in a company's culture. Anguish and uncertainty oftenensue. For those who succeed superstars, there is opportunity-- but also the pressure of high expectations.</LP><TEXT>   Consider the daunting tasks facing Morris Smith andMalcolm S. Forbes Jr. Mr. Smith was named last month tosucceed Peter Lynch, who's retiring after winning renown --and a reputation as one of the nation's top stock-pickers --while running Fidelity Investments' Magellan Fund. Now thenation's largest stock mutual fund, it exploded to $13billion in assets from $20 million under Mr. Lynch's 13-yearguidance.   And Mr. Forbes took the reins at Forbes Inc. last monthafter the death of his flamboyant father. Malcolm S. ForbesSr., a masterful self-promoter, had gained enormousrecognition for his magazine -- and attracted advertisers andsubscribers -- by exploiting the publicity value of hiswealth and personality.   Fidelity and Forbes won't fade away because theircharismatic chiefs are gone, but both companies have aproblem. Beyond coping with emotional strain, they mustregain their footing with employees, clients, advertisers andinvestors, among others. &quot;You worry, when one person has beenso responsible for business practices, that when they leavethey create an enormous void,&quot; says William A. Sahlman, aHarvard Business School professor.   The stakes are often highest in small companies,especially start-ups or family businesses where there isn't aclear successor or a strong enough management team. But majorcompanies can be vulnerable too. How critical is Lee A.Iacocca to Chrysler Corp.? Could Trump Organization survivewithout developer Donald? What about Berkshire Hathaway Inc.without investment genius Warren E. Buffett?   When a company and its star are synonymous, the star'sfall can throw the business into crisis. Since the 1986 deathof designer Perry Ellis, the fashion house that bears hisname has lost many important employees, gone through severalmanagement changes and struggled to maintain its prestige --and sales -- in light of criticism that the quality andappeal of its clothing lines have dropped. Michael Milken,one of the business world's most acclaimed stars for much ofthe '80s, almost single-handedly created the market for junkbonds and fueled Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s success in thedecade. But federal charges of racketeering and securitiesfraud pulled the plug on Mr. Milken -- part of a swirl ofevents that led to the junk-bond market's woes and Drexel'srecent collapse.   Companies needn't always plummet when a star exits. Itoften depends on timing. Apple Computer Inc. forced outfounder Steven Jobs when his entrepreneurial vision and stylewere judged incompatible with its needs as a matureorganization. The company remains a major player in itsindustry. But if Mr. Jobs were to leave his nascent Next Inc.now, that company might have a short future, says Harvard'sMr. Sahlman, because Mr. Jobs is clearly its greatest asset.   Big companies normally insist that potential successorsare in place to carry on. Such planning is critical for anycompany to avoid serious damage from the abrupt loss of asuperstar, visionary or veteran leader, managementspecialists say. They must also move quickly to putcontingency plans in place and make them public, lestspeculation grow that the ship will sink because its rudderis gone.   Malcolm Jr. had been president and deputy editor in chiefof Forbes, and his ascension was no surprise. Still, he led anews conference at Forbes headquarters on a Sunday, the dayafter his father's death, to get out word of a smoothtransition.   When Mr. Lynch went public with his plans to leave,Fidelity announced the same day that it had selected Mr.Smith to succeed him and began publicizing his solid recordrunning another Fidelity stock fund. The company braced for aflood of investors to redeem their Magellan shares, but itturned out to be &quot;a fairly meaningless number,&quot; says GeorgeA. Vanderheiden, a Fidelity vice president who will overseeMr. Smith.   Management specialists say Mr. Smith will be under heavyscrutiny for months, and probably longer, as investors assesswhether he's worthy of handling their money. If heunderperforms the market, &quot;the media, the public will beginto say life without Peter Lynch just won't work,&quot; says Jay A.Conger, professor of organizational behavior at McGillUniversity.   Companies shouldn't expect miracles from a superstar'ssuccessor, Mr. Conger says. Truly exceptional businesspersonalities are rare, he says, and they seldom cultivateothers to have the same vision or inspirational skills. Forone, they may not want the competition. They also can be soimposing that they drive away or stifle those who otherwisemight shine.   This is often the case in family operations, wherechildren may never feel free to be their own person. &quot;Veryfew children have outperformed their fathers,&quot; Mr. Congersays. The late Mr. Forbes, who inherited the empire hisfather started, and Mr. Trump, whose father got him going inreal estate, are notable exceptions.   More typical is Frederick Wang, who never managed to carryWang Laboratories Inc. in the style of his father, founder AnWang. The elder Mr. Wang, who died last month, forced his sonto resign as president and chief executive officer last yearafter a string of losses and other problems.   When companies lose an important figure, specialistssuggest, they should quickly remind employees and others thatthe organization lives on, that &quot;no one individual can createsuccess or failure for the whole,&quot; says Mary Anne Devanna, aColumbia University management professor.   After years of plugging Mr. Lynch and his record, Fidelityis careful now to stress that Magellan represents just 11% ofits assets and that investors needn't worry. &quot;This is awell-oiled machine,&quot; Mr. Vanderheiden says.   At Forbes, Editor James W. Michaels says there is &quot;adetermination to show that there is a lot more to thisorganization and this magazine than simply one person.&quot;   At the same time, management specialists say companieswould be wise to preserve some of the values of extraordinaryfigures, in part to help perpetuate their charisma. &quot;This iswhere an artful leader will jump in and gain a sympatheticedge&quot; before advancing a new agenda, says John L. Ward,professor of private enterprise at Loyola University ofChicago.   But guiding philosophies must be selected with care.&quot;Think&quot; remains part of the culture at International BusinessMachines Corp., a legacy of founder Thomas Watson Sr. He alsodictated that IBM salesmen wear blue suits and whitebutton-down shirts. Neither preaching has harmed the company,but &quot;if he had said `mainframes,' that would have killedthem,&quot; Mr. Conger contends.</TEXT></DOC>