<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911021-0174</DOCNO><DOCID>911021-0174.</DOCID><HL>   Technology (A Special Report)   ---   Readin', Writin' andamp; Multimedia:   Slowly, Teachers Are   Turning to a New Tool   ----   By Stephen Kreider Yoder</HL><DATE>10/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R12</SO><CO>   AAPL CCB IBM MSFT TAN</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><NS>EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)FLORIDA (FL)ILLINOIS (IL)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   MULTIMEDIA IS FINALLY inching its way into the classroom.   Across the nation this fall a smattering of teachers, manyfor the first time, will use some form of multimedia -- thecomputer setups that can mix ingredients such as video clips,recorded speeches, music, computer graphics and text.</LP><TEXT>   Italian-language students at Dartmouth College, forexample, will face a new language-lab instructor, an AppleMacintosh plugged into a laser-disk machine that playsvignettes from Italian television. While watching, say, astand-up routine by the popular Italian comedian Toto on a TVscreen, a student can punch up the synchronized text on theMac's display and get the computer to define tricky words,provide an English translation, or give a culturalcommentary.   In El Paso, Texas, elementary-school teachers began theyear without a science text. Instead, they present lessons onlarge-screen television sets, picking photos and video clipsfrom a set of laser disks the state has approved as a&quot;textbook.&quot; And at Yale New Haven Hospital, medical residentsare learning to identify heart ailments by first takingdrills from a computer that juxtaposes an animated heart on acomputer screen with video clips of real, ailing hearts on aTV set.   &quot;We're just in the beginning phase of going ballistic inthe adoption of multimedia technologies&quot; in schools, saysDouglas Doyle, manager for higher-education marketing atApple Computer Inc., Cupertino, Calif.   Though multimedia setups are still rare in the nation'sclassrooms, growing numbers of schools are using multimediasoftware to supplement lessons and to drill students.Teachers who use multimedia, and companies that sell it, areconvinced that such systems will soon be as commonplace asthe blackboard. &quot;This is not a fad,&quot; says Geoffrey Fletcher,an assistant commissioner in Texas's education agency. &quot;Thisis a trend.&quot;   Even the most ardent multimedia fans concede that stickyissues are slowing multimedia's advance in education.Equipment is often expensive, and many teachers still balk atlearning the technology. The absence of a single standard forequipment means a given program probably won't run on everyschool's machinery. Software makers are bogged down by thecopyrights they must pin down for the thousands of imagesthey put on a typical disk.   Still, many schools, despite shrinking budgets, appearincreasingly eager to bring multimedia into classrooms. Thestate of California, where many districts are laying offteachers this year, is negotiating with a unit of NewYork-based Capital Cities/ABC Inc. to put ABC's multimediasoftware in all the state's public secondary schools to teachabout AIDS and drugs. The financing would come from federaldrug-prevention money, not state coffers. Florida hasestablished special funds to put multimedia machines in allits public secondary schools this year, and the Texaslegislature has earmarked $30 annually per student fortechnology, starting next year, much of which is expected togo toward multimedia setups.   &quot;There's a wave of realization across the country,&quot; saysNelson Heller, publisher of the Heller Report on EducationalTechnology and Telecommunications Markets, &quot;that if kidsaren't technologically ready they're going to miss the boat,the country's going to miss the boat, . . . that somehowwe've got to make these resources available.&quot;   The appeal of multimedia for the teacher is simple andcompelling. A single computer can edit and display theresources that a teacher must now painstakingly get fromdozens of sources: filmstrips, videotapes, atlases, historybooks, dictionaries and annotated texts. A typical multimediaprogram puts scores of such materials on one laser disk, fromwhich a computer can pull out and chain together what'sneeded.   At Stanford University, for example, students of LarryFriedlander, an English professor, study Shakespearean playson their own, using a personal computer tied to a laser-diskplayer and a TV screen. In an exercise to compareinterpretations of &quot;Hamlet,&quot; students pull up the play's texton the computer screen. With a click of the computer's&quot;mouse&quot; pointing device, the TV screen displays LaurenceOlivier's performance of a scene. With another click, thescreen switches to the scene as played by a Russian actor.   Other mouse clicks produce annotations and worddefinitions, and students can type notes or record commentsthat are synchronized with the video. Another part of theprogram allows students to play director by moving aroundanimated actors on the computer screen. &quot;Until multimediacame along, there was no way to bring together all thesevisuals,&quot; says Prof. Friedlander.   While multimedia's critics say it's a flash in the pan,supporters such as Prof. Friedlander say it will sweepschools because it is fundamentally different from earlier,ill-fated attempts by schools to use &quot;computer-assistedlearning&quot; programs. Those programs tried to mimic the entireteaching process but were rejected as dull and mechanical.Multimedia's proponents say it doesn't replace the instructorbut instead becomes a supplemental fixture; it bringstogether the functions of older devices such as projectorsand record players, and can also take over tasks that aren'tan efficient use of the instructor's time.   That's what C. Carl Jaffe, a professor of diagnosticradiology at Yale University's medical school, found. Everymonth a new resident arrives at the hospital for a stintunder Dr. Jaffe. Every month, Dr. Jaffe says, he used tospend precious time standing over the new resident's shoulderwhile the neophyte learned to interpret the fuzzy videoimages of ailing hearts generated by an ultrasound machine.&quot;My time was very inefficiently used because I repeatedmyself every month,&quot; says Dr. Jaffe.   He decided to let multimedia do the work. He had a laserdisk custom-pressed with some 1,800 several-second videoimages of beating, abnormal hearts. With the help of a Yalecomputer expert, he created a program for a Macintosh thatdisplays an animated version of the heart that appears on thecomputer screen. The resident clicks the mouse on to choose,for instance, &quot;coronary artery disease&quot; from a list to seethe animated heart along with a real, diseased heart.Clicking the mouse on a stethoscope symbol produces therecorded sound of the troubled heart. After a session, a testbuilt into the system requires the resident to name diseasesfrom unidentified video clips. Now, when new residentsarrive, &quot;I tell them to see the computer and come back to mewhen they can talk my language,&quot; says Dr. Jaffe.   Another payback from multimedia is that it grabs the shortattention span of the Nintendo-and-MTV generation. &quot;You showkids a movie, and they won't pay attention. After fiveminutes their minds wander to `Ah, what's my boyfrienddoing?'&quot; says Dianne Douglas, a high-school health teacher inLake Worth, Fla. She says students are more attentive to herlessons on AIDS, sex and drugs now that she uses a set ofmultimedia disks on the topics. &quot;The students who watch thissit totally spellbound.&quot;   Using the AIDS disk, a product of the ABC News division ofCapital Cities/ABC, she uses a PC to chain together videoclips from ABC's archives, including shots of drug addictssharing needles and interviews with AIDS victims. The disk iscompelling, she says, because she can intersperseexplanations and class discussions with video clips,answering questions by instantly retrieving other videoclips.   Students' test scores have improved from the time that sherelied on lectures and textbooks, Ms. Douglas says. Florida'seducation department was so impressed by the AIDS disk'simpact that it plans to put the disks in every secondaryschool. And it helped ABC News assemble another disk, on therise and fall of communism, from which it will gain royaltieson sales.   Companies such as ABC see in multimedia a chance tosqueeze extra profits out of huge archives of video, audioand text. Enclyopaedia Britannica Inc. of Chicago has put itsentire Compton's Encyclopedia on a compact disk, allowing astudent to navigate through the electronic encyclopedia on aPC screen, jumping from one topic to a cross-referenced topicwith a click of the mouse, or to dozens of video clips,speeches and music scores.   &quot;It's another market out there for the material we have inour library,&quot; says William Lord, vice president of ABC NewsInteractive, the ABC division in charge of multimedia.   Computer companies likewise see huge potential. AppleComputer, Tandy Corp. and other PC makers are heavilymarketing their machines for multimedia uses in schools, andApple recently unveiled a software architecture tailored tomultimedia use. Microsoft Corp., Redmond, Wash., has set upan entire division to develop and market multimediatechnology. &quot;Education is a relatively untapped market,&quot; saysRobert Glaser, who manages the new Microsoft division. &quot;We'reoptimistic that the next 12 months will be a launching pointfor this. If we're successful in getting the PC to be morethan just a productivity thing, there are lots of benefits tous.&quot;   The equipment needed to run multimedia applications iscertainly increasing. CD-ROM drives -- which play 4.75-inchdisks -- were in 1,377 of the nation's approximately 15,000public-school districts last school year, up 70% from theprevious year, according to Quality Education Data Inc., aDenver-based research firm. And 1,273 districts, up 38%, usedlaser-disk players -- which play 12-inch disks. Schools' useof laser and CD-ROM players will more than double this schoolyear, the firm predicts. Optical Data Corp. of Warren, N.J.,which designs and distributes multimedia disks, says itsdisks are in nearly 10% of the nation's 100,000 schools.   But before computer companies can rake in multimediaprofits, they must agree on a standard. Without a standardfor what equipment constitutes multimedia, makers of thesoftware are likely to be leery of putting together softwarethat is limited to one setup. &quot;You build platforms of Macsand PCs and somebody else's optical drive,&quot; says Ralph Gorin,who oversees Stanford University's multimedia efforts. &quot;Thenyou discover you have one of a kind and discover no one hasanything that works with it.&quot;   It doesn't help that computer companies are battling overstandards. About a dozen companies have rallied aroundMicrosoft's &quot;MPC&quot; standard, which determines what kind ofhardware and software a computer must have. InternationalBusiness Machines Corp. and Apple have decided to joinanother group that Microsoft doesn't dominate.   Another hurdle: Like personal computers in the 1970s,multimedia is a largely unknown quantity and teachers areoften reluctant to learn to use it. &quot;There's widespreadskepticism, in some quarters there's hostility, peoplemuttering about how we should be spending our money on otherthings,&quot; says Stanford's Mr. Gorin. &quot;But then, in 1981 therewere a lot of faculty who thought we were spending too muchmoney on computing.&quot;   The San Francisco public schools installed 17 multimediasystems in 1989 with social studies and history software fromthe National Geographic Society. But by the end of the schoolyear more than half of the machines were sitting unused, saysSamuel Dederian, who manages the schools' computers. Theproblem was that teachers hadn't been taught how to workmultimedia into their lesson plans. A training program gotteachers using them, and by this spring all but two werebeing used, Mr. Dederian says.   &quot;Schools are just beginning to find out what the power ofmultimedia is,&quot; says Judy Saltpeter, managing editor ofTechnology and Learning, a magazine published in San Rafael,Calif. &quot;But teachers are already overworked and don't havetime to get up to speed on it.&quot;   Some schools have discovered a more practical problem. Theschool districts around Cedar Rapids, Iowa, last year boughtseveral multimedia systems along with Compton's CD-ROMencyclopedia, which costs $695, or about $150 more thanschools pay for the 26-volume conventional set. Students areso delighted with the setup that &quot;they start queuing up touse it,&quot; says Clifford Ehlinger, executive director of mediafor the area's education agency. Therein lies a problem inreplacing reference books with computers, he says. Manystudents can use a traditional set of encyclopedias at once,but with one computer running a multimedia disk at the sameprice, &quot;if a teacher assigns a report and sends a class of 20down to the library, you've got a problem.&quot;   The biggest nightmare for developers of multimediasoftware is the maze of copyrights for the sometimes tens ofthousands of images put on a disk. AND Communication Inc., aLos Angeles software firm that has developed five multimediaprograms with IBM -- including disks on Martin Luther Kingand the Declaration of Independence -- was forced to shootnew footage of some interviews with experts because thecopyright holders of existing recordings wouldn't agree tosell the rights.   Stanford's Prof. Friedlander says his efforts to get themultimedia rights to Shakespearean performances have beenvery frustrating. A movie company that owns a recordingwanted to charge $4,000 a minute for the rights; another,Sony Corp.'s Columbia Pictures unit, refused to even talkabout selling the rights to a &quot;Hamlet&quot; production in itsarchives, he says. He has given up on getting rights to manyof the British Broadcasting Corp.'s acclaimed Shakespearevideos because the BBC hadn't obtained the multimedia rightsin the early 1980s, meaning that every actor, director ormusician has legal copyrights.   &quot;You need squadrons of lawyers to go out and negotiatecopyright issues,&quot; says Walter Stephens, a DartmouthItalian-language professor, who adds that the copyrightproblem will discourage many universities from selling theirmultimedia programs, thus preventing them from recoupingdevelopment costs and slowing the spread of multimedia.   Developers say future multimedia programs will be evenmore compelling. As powerful computers become cheaper,developers expect, for example, to produce programs such as acomputerized Gray's anatomy that will allow a student to&quot;dissect&quot; what appears to be a three-dimensional human bodyon the computer screen. Others talk of assembling vastcatalogs of disks containing virtually all recorded materialon a topic. Stanford's Prof. Friedlander is pushing to puttogether a database of performances of all Shakespeare'splays. And as optical disks are designed to hold more data,says an Encyclopaedia Britannica official, electronicencyclopedias will include thousands -- instead of dozens --of speeches and video clips.   Ultimately, multimedia's backers say, computers in schoolsand universities will tap into huge libraries of video imagesand sound recordings through fiber-optic cables. But even thestaunchest supporters are leery of predicting that multimediawill become mainstream soon. Says Prof. Friedlander: &quot;Foreight years now we've been saying next year is the year thisis going to happen.&quot;   ---   Mr. Yoder is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal'sSan Francisco bureau.</TEXT></DOC>