<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910116-0076</DOCNO><DOCID>910116-0076.</DOCID><HL>   What Saddam's Got in Mind...   ----   By Steven Emerson</HL><DATE>01/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   Like the late Egyptian dictator Gamal Abdel Nasser, SaddamHussein plans to win by losing. Exploiting and inciting Arabresentment against a Western conspiracy, Nasser was able inthe 1950s and '60s to transform resounding and repeateddefeat on the battlefield into political victory. Likewise,all Saddam Hussein has to do to make himself master of theArab world is survive attack by the American-led forces inSaudi Arabia.   Saddam's strategy was articulated in a surprisingly candidinterview given last week by Yasser Abd Rabbo, a leadingofficial of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the manappointed by Yasser Arafat to serve as the number twoofficial in charge of the now-suspended U.S.-PLO dialogue, tothe Jordanian newspaper Saut al Sha'ab.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;The American conspiracy against Iraq,&quot; Mr. Rabbo said,&quot;is unable to evaluate accurately, in spite of the bribesgiven by the U.S. to the {pro-Western} Arab regimes, theextent of the popular response in the Gulf countries and theArab world. The American conspiracy is unable to evaluate theArab awakening . . . {which} will open a new front for theintruders.&quot;   Mr. Rabbo was expressing the core of Saddam's two-partstrategy: to portray all threats against him as part of amassive Western conspiracy against Islam, and to destabilizepro-Western regimes by rallying pan-Arab nationalists andIslamic fundamentalists. To achieve this, Mr. Hussein hasshrewdly invoked the Palestinian cause, which has emerged asthe most effective means to bridge the profound religious andpolitical differences between Arab secularists andfundamentalists. Saddam has succeeded in the first part ofhis strategy.   A military victory over the Western infidels wouldobviously be best for Saddam. He would achieve mythicalstatus in the Arab world, becoming a modern-day Saladin, thegreat Kurdish leader who led the successful Arab attack uponthe Christian Crusaders in the 12th century. But American andIsraeli intelligence officials have concluded that Saddamknows he cannot beat the overwhelming firepower of theU.S.-led forces. Therefore he has settled on the next bestrole model: Nasser. The Egyptian dictator proved that bysimply surviving defeat on the battlefield, an Arab leadercan win politically.   After nationalizing the Suez Canal in 1956, Nassersuffered what appeared to be a humiliating defeat whenIsraeli, British and French troops captured the SinaiPeninsula and Suez Canal in a one-week military campaign.Nasser's bluster was thoroughly discredited, although U.S.President Dwight Eisenhower soon forced the invaders towithdraw their forces.   And yet, during the next two years, Nasser's status grewto mythical dimensions in the Arab world. He took up thecause of pan-Arabism, openly calling for revolutions againstpro-Western regimes and secretly funneling money and arms toArab radicals. In 1958, King Faisal and Premier As-Said ofIraq, the two men who had committed Iraq to the pro-WesternBaghdad Pact, were overthrown and killed. Insurrectionserupted in the then-pro-Western countries of Jordan, Libyaand Lebanon. U.S. or British military forces were obliged tointervene. In the early 1960s, Nasser fomented rebellion inYemen and nearly succeeded in toppling the House of Saud.   Nasser was humiliated again in 1967 when the Israelisdestroyed his armed forces in six days, but the fact that heand his regime survived raised his status even higher amongArabs. The next year one of the most important remainingAmerican allies in the Middle East, Libya's King Idris -- whohad given the U.S. its only airbase in the region -- fellfrom power.   It would be wrong to claim that Nasser personallyorchestrated all of these revolutions and uprisings. But bykeeping his regime intact and portraying his defeats as theresult of a Western conspiracy, he triggered a powerfulpan-Arabist chain reaction.   Saddam Hussein too is capable, as Mr. Rabbo pointed out,of igniting a chain reaction among Palestinian radicals,Islamic fundamentalists, Nasserites, Arab socialists,Baathists and the have-nots generally, including ShiiteMuslims and the populations of non-oil producing countries.   According to American and Israeli intelligence officials,because the U.S. felt compelled to tilt toward his regimeduring the Iraq-Iran war, Saddam is convinced that the U.S.is neither militarily capable nor willing to destroy himtotally. These officials say he is prepared to absorbpunishing blows against his forces in Kuwait and Iraq andeven lose his most prized military weapon -- his ballisticmissiles and nuclear weapons development sites.   One American intelligence assessment prepared in the pastthree days says that Saddam apparently believes that Americanground forces will never dare enter Iraq and that the U.S.will be constrained from bombing population centers unlessthey are near clear military targets. In any case, thisassessment added, Saddam believes his population will accepttens of thousands of deaths, having endured over a millioncasualties in the Iran-Iraq war. And if he survives theonslaught of the mighty Americans, he will have proven to theArab masses that he is invincible.   By standing up to the U.S. for six months, Saddam hasalready transformed Jordan into a satellite regime, unleashedpowerful Muslim Brotherhood and Islamic Jihad groups in Egypt(where their underground organizations, according tointelligence officials, have grown by leaps and bounds sinceIraq's invasion of Kuwait) and sown deep worry in SaudiArabia about the loyalty of the oppressed and second-classShiites who predominate in Saudi Arabia's oil-producingprovinces. On top of all this, leading Palestinianterrorists, such as Abu Abbas, have openly vowed to toppleEgyptian President Mubarak and the House of Saud. An Islamicconference in Baghdad this week attended by leading religiousofficials from 14 countries called for a jihad against theU.S.   For Saddam, a war with the U.S. is welcome. All he has todo is lose.   ---   Mr. Emerson is a Washington-based writer who reportsfrequently on national security matters.   (See related story: &quot;...and How He Plans to Pull It Off&quot;-- WSJ Jan. 16, 1991)</TEXT></DOC>