<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900813-0157</DOCNO><DOCID>900813-0157.</DOCID><HL>   Iraqi Chief Links   Kuwait Pullout   To Israeli Move   ---   U.S. Rejects the Initiative,   Aimed at Rallying Arabs,   And Readies Blockade   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST FORGN</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Iraq's Saddam Hussein, his options forending the Persian Gulf crisis growing increasinglyunpleasant, assumed the role of embattled Arab hero inoffering his first rough proposal for a negotiated end to theconfrontation.   The Iraqi leader, in an &quot;initiative&quot; designed as much torally Arab public opinion as to launch meaningfulnegotiations, announced yesterday that he will withdraw histroops from Kuwait only if Israel withdraws from the WestBank and Syria from Lebanon. He apparently hopes to luresupport from Arabs who have spurned him so far by suggestingthat Iraq will use its occupation of Kuwait as a lever tosolve the Arab world's most frustrating problem, the 23-yearIsraeli occupation of land claimed by Palestinians.</LP><TEXT>   Even as Saddam Hussein was searching for a ploy to easehis isolation, though, the international pressure against himclicked up another notch. The White House yesterday disclosedthat Kuwait's ousted government has formally asked the U.S.to enforce the total trade embargo the United Nations hasimposed on Iraq, allowing the U.S. and other nations toimmediately begin stopping ships carrying Iraqi goods.   Secretary of State James Baker, speaking on ABC News'&quot;This Week,&quot; said the Kuwaiti request gives the U.S. andother countries &quot;a legal basis for stopping the export of oiland that sort of thing.&quot; The U.S. maintains that under theU.N. charter, the Kuwaiti request triggers steps for thecollective enforcement of international sanctions.   Mr. Baker declined to use the word blockade, but said that&quot;interdiction&quot; of Iraqi shipments would begin &quot;almostinstantly.&quot; In a statement, the White House said it would do&quot;whatever is necessary&quot; to ensure compliance with thesanctions.   Other Bush administration officials said that theinternational naval force in the area -- consisting ofAmerican, British, French, Canadian, Soviet, German andAustralian ships -- may be used both to stop oil exports fromleaving Iraq and Kuwait and to stop shipments of food andother goods from going in. President Bush implied as muchyesterday when reporters asked whether the interdiction wouldapply to food. The president responded, &quot;Everything,everything.&quot; While shying away from actually using the word&quot;blockade,&quot; Mr. Bush acknowledged that the U.S. and otherswere trying to block shipping to Iraq. &quot;No point getting intoall these semantics,&quot; he said. &quot;The main thing is to stop theoil from coming out of there.&quot;   The naval interdiction force is part of an overallAmerican strategy that officials say is designed to leave theIraqi leader with only the stark choice of backing out ofKuwait or launching new attacks to change his situation.Though they insist they aren't trying to lure Saddam Husseininto an attack, officials hope that if he strikes again, theU.S. and its allies will have such an impressive force inplace in Saudi Arabia that they will be able to crush him inretaliation.   Iraq's first option, of course, may be simply to sit tightand hope it can endure a trade embargo longer than the Westcan live without Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil. Speaking on the ABCprogram, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, Iraq's ambassador to the U.N.,asserted that an embargo on Iraq could plunge the U.S. into a&quot;depression&quot; and the rest of the world into an economic&quot;crisis.&quot;   Iraq clearly is trying to woo back more Arab support incase the conflict drags on, hoping that its neighborseventually will help it survive a prolonged war of economicattrition with the West. So Saddam Hussein on Friday tried toscare other Arab leaders into supporting him by calling onArabs to rise up in a holy war against leaders who invitedAmerican and other Western soldiers into Saudi Arabia toprotect the oil-rich kingdom.   Then yesterday, he tried to entice Arab leaders with hisproposal for a diplomatic solution linking his occupation ofKuwait with Israel's occupation of the West Bank. Theproposal also called for replacing American and other Westerntroops in Saudi Arabia with Arab forces. The Bushadministration immediately said it &quot;categorically&quot; rejectsthe proposals. And President Bush yesterday, asked whether hewas at least glad Iraq is discussing negotiations, replied:&quot;I don't see anything to be pleasing in there at all.&quot;   American strategists are calculating, though, that thetrade sanctions -- enforced by an effective though perhapsundeclared naval blockade -- will hold tightly enough toconvince Iraq that it will lose in the long run by simplystanding pat.   At that point, rather than go through the humiliation ofbacking out of Kuwait, the Iraqis might well conclude thatthey need to lash out in some way to shake things up. In thatevent, Saddam Hussein appears to have three choices.   The first would be to launch the much-feared directinvasion of Saudi Arabia, hoping to seize some Saudi oilfields and improve his bargaining position. But that optionis growing less and less likely as thousands of American,British, Egyptian, Syrian and Moroccan forces assemble in andaround Saudi Arabia to protect the kingdom. The Saudis evenhave in their possession 48 Kuwaiti jet fighters, virtuallythe entire Kuwaiti air force, which managed to escape theIraqi invasion, Saudi officials said. The Saudi &quot;window ofvulnerability . . . is closing very fast,&quot; Prince Bandar binSultan, the Saudi ambassador to Washington, said over theweekend.   The second possibility would be to start a fight withIsrael, in hopes that all Arabs would have to move behindIraq in a fight against their common Israeli enemy. In suchan event, Saddam Hussein also might calculate, the Saudiswould be under pressure to kick out U.S. troops because ofAmerica's close ties with Israel.   Iraq could start hostilities with Israel either through adirect attack or by attacking Jordan. Israel has publiclydeclared that it will respond to an Iraqi attack on Jordanbecause it won't allow Iraq's dangerous army to take controlof Jordan's long border with Israel.   Iraq's third attack option would be to start an undeclaredwar on the U.S. and other Western nations through terrorism.Two Middle East terrorists with records of successful attacksagainst Western targets, Abu Nidal and Abu Abbas, have tiesto Baghdad. And even terrorist groups that opposed Iraq inits war with Iran show signs of swinging behind SaddamHussein now that he is in a confrontation with the U.S.   And Iraq still has thousands of Americans and otherWesterners under its control in Iraq and Kuwait. They aren'tbeing allowed to leave and could become hostages.   If Iraq chooses a simple war of nerves and economicattrition, the Bush administration knows a long stalematecould try the patience of the American public and the West ingeneral, and could open the possibility that moderate Arabs-- even including Saudi Arabia -- might drop out of theeffort against Iraq and accept some deal from Saddam Hussein.   But U.S. officials have sized up Saddam Hussein as a manwho, despite some recklessness, will back down if he must.&quot;This is a guy who is impulsive, and therefore capable of bigmiscalculations,&quot; says one senior administration officialinvolved in managing the crisis. The official adds, though,that &quot;at the same time, we think he is someone who is capableof rational judgments when it comes to power. And when hefinds something is unprofitable, then one can see certainaccommodations.&quot;   Thus, administration aides will be trying to calculatewhether Saddam Hussein's proposed diplomatic formula forgetting out of Kuwait represents the first sign he issearching for a way out or simply is a public relationsstunt.   There are disagreements among experts about how muchpressure will be needed to make Saddam Hussein decide he's upagainst the wall and whether simple economic pressure willever be enough. The biggest worry is that if he decides heneeds a way out of his predicament but doesn't see aface-saving method, he could lash out in dangerous andunpredictable ways.   U.S. officials claim they already see signs Saddam Husseinis getting nervous. In the first days after President Bushannounced the dispatching of U.S. troops, they note, theIraqi leader made several nationwide addresses indirectly --having them read by a television announcer. &quot;That shows he'snervous about pinpointing his location, either because he'safraid we'll find him, or that internal enemies will,&quot; saysone U.S. official.   The unpredictability of Iraq's leader is a principalreason the U.S. is going to such great lengths to build amammoth force in and around Saudi Arabia. Pentagon officialssay the goal is to put 40,000 troops in the region by the endof the month. But the administration isn't putting any upperlimit on how high the force could go after that, calculatingthat it would be a mistake to underestimate and an advantageto keep Saddam Hussein guessing. U.S. commanders in charge ofplanning for Middle East crises have indicated in the pastthat they were capable of deploying as many as 300,000troops.   And the U.S. is taking similar steps to ensure that itsnaval force is adequate to carry out a blockade of Iraq andsupport a war if necessary. Over the weekend, Pentagonofficials confirmed reports that a fourth U.S. aircraftcarrier -- the John F. Kennedy -- and its powerful group ofsupport ships could head for the Middle East within a fewdays. Three other carriers and their escort vessels alreadyare stationed within striking distance of Iraq or aresteaming toward the area.   But unless the military situation changes drastically,military officials say, the most likely plan will be for theKennedy to eventually replace the carrier Dwight D.Eisenhower, which has been on patrol since March and wasscheduled to return to port before hostilities erupted inKuwait.   ---   Andy Pasztor contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>