<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910522-0094</DOCNO><DOCID>910522-0094.</DOCID><HL>   Where the Minority Middle Class Lives   ----   By Richard P. Nathan</HL><DATE>05/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><RE>COLORADO (CO)INDIANA (IND)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)MINNESOTA (MN)MISSOURI (MO)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NEW YORK (NY)OHIO (OH)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)TEXAS (TX)WISCONSIN (WI)</RE><LP>   Much attention has focused of late on growing distress ininner-city &quot;underclass&quot; neighborhoods, where positive rolemodels are hard to find. But much less attention has beenpaid to the people who have moved up and out, in large partas a result of the civil-rights movement.   Where have they gone? Many middle- and working-classblacks and Hispanics are settling in areas that could becalled &quot;zones of emergence&quot; in the city and in inner-ringsuburbs.</LP><TEXT>   Seventy years ago, two social-work experts, Albert Kennedyand Robert A. Woods, wrote about working-class andmiddle-class neighborhoods beyond the core of Boston, whichthey defined as &quot;zones of emergence in the great Irish beltof the city.&quot; Today there are signs of change for blacks andHispanics similar to those Kennedy and Woods described amongthe Irish so many years ago.   These new minority-group neighborhoods are some good newson the urban scene, although we do not yet have a good handleon the degree to which this is happening. Not until the endof 1992 will detailed 1990 Census data be available to allowus to study these areas closely. In the meantime, myassistant, Paul Page, and I have done a telephone canvass ofurban experts in big cities and visited a number of thosecities to learn about the character and characteristics ofthese changing neighborhoods.   My interest in this subject originated in Cleveland.There, the Buckeye-Woodland neighborhood contrasts sharplywith the troubled John F. Kennedy public housing project,just across a ravine in the distressed core area of the city.Predominantly Hungarian as recently as 15 years ago,Buckeye-Woodland has been transformed into a community ofsome 20,000 middle- and working-class blacks.   Much of the Hungarian population owned and lived in thedouble- and triple-deckers found throughout older cities ofthe Northeast and Midwest. These same buildings are now ownedand occupied by blacks living in one unit and renting out theothers. There's security, but there is also fear. The peopleof Buckeye-Woodland feel threatened -- and are threatened --by the problems nearby. Their biggest concern is to protecttheir territory. They have their own crime patrols. They fearbacksliding by the young.   It is the residents of another such area whom LouisWinnick studied in a recent book, &quot;New People in OldNeighborhoods.&quot; Mr. Winnick's research was on the Sunset Parkneighborhood in Brooklyn, which is now Puerto Rican. AlthoughSunset Park has gone through tough times it is now muchbetter off, Mr. Winnick says: &quot;By the mid-eighties SunsetPark was nestled securely in the curl of a rebounding wave.That fact was evidenced in any number of indicators:population growth, rising real income, retail activity,soaring real estate prices and rents, bountiful inflows ofprivate mortgage capital. In 1987, a substantial majority (70percent) of Sunset Park's residents rated it as a fair toexcellent community.&quot;   New York City has a number of such new neighborhoods inQueens, Brooklyn and the Bronx. Bronx Park East, for example,is a middle-income area that previously was Italian, mainlyelderly. Recently there has been an influx of blacks andHispanics from the South Bronx. The new entrants in manycases are two-earner families who buy and fix up condos,invest in the economy of the area, and promote &quot;traditional&quot;values. They have joined in community clean-ups, tree- andflower-plantings, and &quot;crime-buster&quot; efforts. The communitygroup for this neighborhood, which is strong, claims it hasbeen able to keep out crime and crack, though both threatenand surround the neighborhood.   Similar developments are found in other cities.Minneapolis Central is a community of once-grand homes thatnow has mainly working-class residents, more than 60% of whomare black. When the first working-class blacks moved intoCentral in the 1950s, their neighbors were elderly whitecouples whose children had left. As whites retired or movedaway, younger black families took their place. As inBuckeye-Woodland, neighborhood activists worry about theability of the community to stave off drugs and prostitutionfrom surrounding neighborhoods.   In Kansas City, Mo., blacks are moving southward andeastward into areas that had been white. The Hickman Millsschool district is experiencing an influx of blacks who wantto take advantage of its schools. The largest shift inpopulation is occurring along a corridor extendingsoutheastward out of the city. In other neighborhoods, suchas Eastwood Hills, Marlboro and Marlboro Heights, into whichblacks are moving, housing is better and not much moreexpensive than in core areas. The movement into theseneighborhoods has created its own dynamic: Increasinglyblacks are attracted to neighborhoods where other blacksalready have settled, serving as magnets to draw people awayfrom the inner city.   Aurora, Colo., which lies just beyond Denver's citylimits, is also attracting blacks with rising incomes.Low-cost housing is available for those seeking to buy orrent their first homes; the schools are good; and governmentjobs are available in Aurora and Denver.   Mattapan is the second-largest minority neighborhood inBoston. Originally an Irish and then a Jewish area, theneighborhood became increasingly black beginning in the 1960sand now is 84% black. The northern half (Franklin Field) hasa relatively lower-income black population. In the 1960s,blacks displaced by urban renewal in Roxbury were attractedto Franklin Field by FHA-insured mortgages funded under theBoston Banks Urban Group Program. Since then, the area hasexperienced a resurgence in economic activity.   Other new black and Hispanic zones of emergence are inIndianapolis; Dallas; Orrington and Orange, N.J.(north ofNewark); Henrietta, N.Y. (southwest of Rochester); UniversityCity, Mo. (northwest of St. Louis); the northwest area ofColumbus, Ohio; New Orleans East; the Upper Hill and PennHill neighborhoods in Pittsburgh; and the Northridge area ofMilwaukee.   Not only are these new neighborhoods emerging, but thephysiognomy of blighted inner-city areas has changed. Thestereotype many of us carry in our heads about urban blightis one of slums and crowded tenements. This is not so typicalanymore. Some blighted inner-city neighborhoods are crowded,especially high-rise public housing projects for families.But in more cases than not, the worst neighborhoods are largetracts of vacant land -- empty reminders of a cityscape thatonce was.   The urban landscape was reshaped in the 1980s much morethan many people realize. During the 1970s, inner-cityconditions worsened substantially for minorities. Thepercentage of poor blacks in extremely poor neighborhoods(with poverty rates of more than 40%) increased to 40% from25% in that decade. But this trend now shows signs ofabating. Surely it makes sense to look hard at successesinstead of always focusing on failures.   ---   Mr. Nathan is director of the Nelson A. RockefellerInstitute of Government of the State University of New Yorkat Albany.</TEXT></DOC>