<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910304-0094</DOCNO><DOCID>910304-0094.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   Recession-Proofing a Company's Employees   ----   By Hugh Aaron</HL><DATE>03/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><LP>   When, as CEO of a small plastics materials company, Ifirst read that many Japanese companies guaranteed theirpeople lifetime employment, I couldn't decide whether toadmire them for their courage or deride them for theirfoolhardiness. How could a company possibly expect to weathera recession and not lay off a portion of its people?   During three recessions, laying off our people wasstandard operating procedure -- mandatory, a common Americancustom. After all, when business activity is insufficient tokeep everyone occupied and to maintain the bottom line at itsaccustomed (or survival) level, it is only natural that thecompany cut back its personnel, typically the most costly andvulnerable expense item in the profit-and-loss. Moreover, howdoes one lay off a machine or a building or a bank loan?</LP><TEXT>   Still, though a layoff seemed logical and necessary, itwas always the most distasteful and painful decision we asmanagers -- including myself as CEO -- ever had to make. Ourcompany was small enough (about 100 employees) and ourturnover infrequent enough that everybody knew everybody elseby first name, regardless of rank. Indeed, most of us werefamiliar with the details of each other's personal lives: howmany kids a worker supported, whose were in college, who wassaving for a down payment on a new house, which families werebeset with illness.   Additionally painful was the necessity of having to layoff trained, proven, highly motivated people who were simplyvictims of economic forces beyond their -- and management's-- control. Most of us felt not only helpless but alsooutraged at being punished for having done nothing bad.   Furthermore, there were some noticeable disadvantages tothe layoff strategy from management's point of view. Aftereach of three recessions (roughly one every four years) thatwe countered with the usual layoffs, several excellent peoplefailed to return when business improved. Replacing competent,trained employees with green people was, of course,inconvenient -- and costly. But worse, it delayed therestoration of our pre-recession efficiency just when weneeded it most to meet the unpredictable order pattern of aturnaround.   It was evident that our most valuable human asset was notthe hands but the brains, seasoned by long experience. Thisprinciple applied as well to returning laid-off employeeswho, having lost touch with their jobs, were out of practice.If layoffs make economic sense in bad times, they have astrikingly adverse effect as good times return.   Indeed, though laid-off employees were thrilled at beingcalled back, we often observed a residual bitterness in theirattitudes, especially after they saw that certain othersremained on the job through the tough time. Subtle though itwas, those employees now seemed less secure and committedthan before the layoff. If returning employees didn't ask theboss, they had to ask themselves: How long will it be beforethe next layoff? With this question implanted, when slowtimes returned -- a guaranteed event -- our formerly laid-offemployees sought to protect themselves against the dreadedlayoff notice by the only tactical means at their disposal: aslowdown.   In prior crises we often broke loose from the bounds ofconventional thinking by seeking the solution in a conditionprecisely opposite the one troubling us. We called this ourLesson of the Opposite. We used it here, to wit: If layingoff is the problem, then perhaps working overtime, itsopposite, is the answer.   As good times returned, sales were nearing a peak. We helda plant-wide meeting before hiring more people and offeredthe workers a proposal gleaned from our Lesson of theOpposite: Would the employees work any necessary overtime andperform any reasonable job request in exchange for thecompany's promise to eliminate all future layoffs? If so, thecompany would delay taking on additional people until thefirst signs of genuine weariness appeared. Being in acyclical business, everyone, especially management, knew wehad made a daring offer. The employees went for it withouthesitation.   But we had a few aces to play, just in case we were caughtshort-handed. By using our sales history, plus a factor forgrowth to define the sales range from the depths of recessionto the heights of prosperity, we estimated how many employeeswe would need in various functions to maintain efficientproductivity within those limits. When we found ourselvesstraining under pressure to produce, we called in ourretirees who were delighted to come to our rescue and mixwith the gang again. For the summer, our busiest season, wehired bright college men and women on their break who caughton quickly. And we called on agencies that specialized intemporary experienced help for people who could perform ourroutine tasks.   We were also ready for the day that sales would sag. Asthis condition developed we first busied our people byexpanding our inventory of standard items -- maintained atminimum as the good times matured -- to an establishedmaximum. We assigned anyone not kept busy with his or herregular task, even foremen and supervisors, to maintenanceprojects that had been intentionally delayed for such anoccasion. These could range from cleaning and painting theexterior or interior of the building to rebuilding wornequipment as preventive maintenance.   But most important was the willingness of everyone for thesake of security to pitch in and do whatever job was needed.This then led in time to retraining everyone to do one ormore other jobs -- but also for another reason: After a yearof employment an employee received one week's vacation foreach year worked, up to 10 weeks. During slowdowns idleemployees were urged to use up part of their paid vacations.And most did, especially those with substantial seniority. Itworked marvelously.   Employee morale attained a new height; turnover, alreadylow, became negligible. Pride in being a part of a caringorganization was clearly evident. A desire to exert extraeffort on the company's behalf became the norm. Withtransients no longer in our midst, we had, in a sense, becomea stable, cohesive &quot;family.&quot; Though we endured two morerecessions, one serious, before the company was sold, wenever had another layoff in the eight years that followed.   And there were other unanticipated pluses too. Byeliminating layoffs and thereby reducing the number ofpermanent employees enrolled, we also reduced our generousbenefit costs. But perhaps our major triumph was the drasticreduction of our financial contribution to the state'sunemployment pool. Somehow, reducing our involuntarycontribution to government seemed, at least to this CEO, themost satisfying fallout of all.   ---   Mr. Aaron writes from his home in Belfast, Maine.</TEXT></DOC>