<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900622-0011</DOCNO><DOCID>900622-0011.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>06/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   AN EARTHQUAKE SHATTERED northern Iran, killing thousandsof people.   Iranian officials said at least 25,000 were killed andtens of thousands injured, adding that the toll probably willrise as rescuers reach remote areas. The quake demolishedtowns in the densely populated Caspian Sea region and buriedpeople asleep in their homes. The temblor measured as high as7.7 on the Richter scale. A dozen or more aftershocks hit theregion within two hours of the initial quake, which was atleast as bad as the one that struck Iran in 1978. Landslidesobstructed rescuers on the ground, and bad weather hinderedairlift operations. In Tehran, the quake sent people fleeinginto the streets, but no deaths were reported there.</LP><TEXT>   The White House sent condolences to Iran's leaders andexpressed U.S. willingness to give &quot;appropriate humanitarianassistance should it be requested.&quot;   ---   THE JUSTICES RULED hiring decisions can't be made on thebasis of party ties.   In a 5-4 ruling, the Supreme Court said party affiliationcan no longer be used to determine who is hired or promotedfor most government jobs. The court, in a devastating blow topatronage, said First Amendment rights of government workersare violated if they are denied promotions, transfers orrecalls from layoffs because of party ties. The justices saidpartisanship may play a role in employment decisions onlywhen party affiliation is an appropriate requirement.   The court, in an Ohio case, ruled that the First Amendmentdoesn't make the news media immune from libel lawsuits basedon statements of opinion.   ---   The House killed a proposed constitutional amendmentbarring flag desecration, an outcome that seemed unlikelywhen the Supreme Court threw out the federal flag-protectionlaw 10 days ago. The lawmakers voted 254-177 in favor of theamendment, but that was over 30 votes short of the two-thirdsmajority required.   ---   West Germany will seek historic political concessions fromthe Soviets today in Berlin in negotiations involving the twoGermanys and the four victorious World War II powers. At thesame time, the Bonn government will be approving a $2.98billion bank credit to Moscow.   The two Germanys' legislatures voted to approve aneconomic merger that could set the stage for unification asearly as December. Lawmakers, meeting simultaneously in Bonnand East Berlin, adopted a state treaty introducing the WestGerman mark as their common currency July 1.   ---   Soviet officials are spreading the word that they aremoving nuclear warheads out of volatile southern republicsand into storage areas in the Russian Republic. Transfer ofthe weapons is being done not out of fear of foreign attackbut because of concern that a nuclear warhead could fall intothe wrong hands internally.   ---   Mandela spoke at Yankee Stadium in New York and called fornew investment in South Africa, adding that &quot;some form ofstate participation&quot; will be necessary. The black nationalistleader plans to reassure the U.S. business community todaythat a South Africa led by the ANC would protect privateinvestments.   ---   Shamir urged the U.S. to permanently end talks with thePLO. The Israeli prime minister toned down his initiallyelated response to Bush's suspension of talks. Palestiniansmarched in West Bank cities to protest the U.S. move, and theState Department warned Americans abroad, especially in theMideast, to exercise caution.   ---   Canada's Prime Minister Mulroney asked Newfoundlanders tohelp rescue a constitutional amendment that is aimed atkeeping French-speaking Quebec in Canada's federation. Theratification deadline for the socalled Meech Lake agreementis tomorrow, with Newfoundland and Manitoba still to takeaction on the amendment.   ---   Researchers presented papers at an international AIDSconference in San Francisco that ends this weekend, but theprogress reports on AIDS drugs were mixed. Data presented onone antibody for AIDS showed that the drug appears to benontoxic to patients, but it has yet to show signs ofeffectiveness.   ---   The Senate failed to override Bush's veto of legislationthat would have eased restrictions on political activity forfederal employees. Opponents fell two votes short of thetwo-thirds margin needed to overcome the veto. The bill wouldhave revised the Hatch Act to remove curbs on campaignactivities for federal and postal workers.   ---   A House committee approved a $15.8 billion foreignoperations bill for fiscal 1991 that would cut U.S. militaryaid outside the Mideast and impose curbs on funds for ElSalvador and non-Communist forces in Cambodia. The measurereflects a temporary accord between the administration andDemocrats in Congress.   ---   A Romanian court sentenced the brother of former dictatorCeausescu to 15 years in prison for inciting mass murderduring the December revolution that toppled his brother'sregime. Meanwhile, Bucharest students began a three-daystrike to protest the government's violent crackdown lastweek on anti-government demonstrators.   ---   A local prosecutor began a criminal investigation in WestGermany of former East German Communist leader Honecker andreports that he harbored leftist terrorists sought in theWest. Honecker has denied the accusations, which increasedafter this month's arrests in East Germany of nine reputedmembers of the Red Army Faction.</TEXT></DOC>