<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910731-0040</DOCNO><DOCID>910731-0040.</DOCID><HL>   Frontier Economy:   To the Feuds, Malaise   And Guns of Pakistan   Comes the Free Market   ---   New Regime Seeks Investors,   But Crime and Corruption   Jeopardize Its Bold Plans   ---   Eli Lilly's Long Wait Ends   ----   By John Bussey   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR LLY</CO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)INDIANA (IND)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PAKISTAN (PK)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Visit a branch of the state-runHabib Bank here and you can see the legacy of this country's20-year affair with central planning.   Behind the counter, Rafiq Azam bends over his dogearedledger and ponderously records the day's transactions inlonghand, like a latter-day Bob Cratchit. Technology in theover-staffed office amounts to a pocket calculator and astapler. If he needs a new phone line, the state phonecompany may take a year to deliver. And as for electricityfrom the state utility, well, don't expect it to stay on allday.</LP><TEXT>   This is the Pakistan that's just joined the wave ofnations embracing economic reform. Starved for capital, thecountry is throwing open its doors to foreign investors andhanging a For Sale sign over its state enterprises. &quot;Theanswer to this country's problems,&quot; reasons Akram Zaki, headof the Foreign Ministry, &quot;is an industrial revolution throughprivate initiative.&quot;   But that greater day may be a long time coming. ForPakistan, already reeling from the spreading BCCI bankscandal, is in the midst of a very different revolution -- asocial convulsion that could easily derail its ambitiouseconomic plans. Never a stable place, Pakistan is now grippedin perhaps the worst outbreak of lawlessness in its history.And the U.S., it turns out, inadvertently helped supply thefirepower.   Newspapers daily recite a litany of crime: &quot;Seven Killedas Bomb Goes Off on Train,&quot; reads one headline. &quot;EducationOfficial Shot Dead,&quot; another. A standard topic at Karachidinner parties is who got kidnapped this week. When thegovernment appointed a special judge to try domestic&quot;terrorists,&quot; the terrorists got to the judge first --shooting him in his car at a stoplight, 18 times.   Pakistanis call this their new &quot;Kalashnikov Culture,&quot;because a flood of the automatic weapons has given old ethnicand political rivalries a new lethality. The guns are thebackwash from the war in neighboring Afghanistan, financed bythe U.S. and the Soviet Union.   Visit, for example, the dusty frontier village of DarraAdam Khel, not far from the Afghanistan border. Gun-makinghas long been a tradition here, but now the town is a virtualshopping center of ever-more-deadly weapons. Displayed on thewalls of dozens of open-air shops and arranged on colorfulOriental carpets are an array of assault rifles, handgrenades, bazookas, German pistols, M-16 rifles and machineguns -- fresh from the war.   &quot;I'll show you mines,&quot; Miwa Khan, an earnest shopkeeper,tells a visitor as testfirings resound about him. &quot;They'reavailable here. This is a market, we buy and we sell. Wedon't care who comes as long as he has money.&quot; Mr. Khandemonstrates his merchandise by picking a Kalashnikov off arack and cracking a couple rounds into the craggy hills.&quot;We're experts in weapons.&quot;   Border markets like Darra have created what one governmentleader calls &quot;a balance of terror&quot; in Pakistan, and it's morethan distracting. This month Prime Minister Nawaz Sharifcanceled a visit to Japan, a quest for investment, to calm anation rattled by a particularly grisly string of murders.Foreigners, meanwhile, are warned not to travel in largeparts of the interior without armed guards.   &quot;All the economic policies in the world don't meananything when people coming here to put their money downdon't know if their employees are safe,&quot; says KameronDeLashmutt, an American dairy farmer working out of Karachi.   Attracting foreign investment is more important than everfor Pakistan. It has lost roughly $600 million in foreign aidin a wrangle with the U.S. over its nuclear arms program, andremittances from workers in the Gulf states are way down.Social services simply don't exist in many areas, though theneed is growing: Pakistan's population has almost doubledsince 1970, and now stands at 113 million. Three-quarters ofits people can't read.   Pakistan has had only the barest exposure to stable freeenterprise. When it split from India in 1947, it was leftwith little industry and a feudal land structure that stillexists. In the late 1960s, a study found that just 22families controlled 80% of Pakistan's industry. Zulfikar AliBhutto changed that in the 1970s by nationalizing everythingfrom banks to steel plants. He created a mixed economy, butit was one where bureaucrats reigned supreme.   For the next 20 years, frustrated entrepreneurs soughtopportunities in other countries; Agha Hasan Abedi, who usedPakistani managers to found BCCI -- the Bank of Credit andCommerce International -- was among them. Central planningchoked what enterprise remained. When the government wouldn'traise vegetable oil prices for 10 years, producers closedplants. And when it couldn't pay for capital needs, factorieswent without.   At a government cement plant in Mustehkam, west ofIslamabad, a layer of stone dust covers everything, includingone aging control room. A precipitator would help, but yearsof requests haven't produced one yet. As the plant hisses andgroans behind him, Ghulam Qaisrani, the managing director,laments how long it takes to get government approval for evenroutine purchases.   &quot;Personally I would vote for the private sector,&quot; he says.&quot;As a manager I could make decisions faster, and in today'sworld speed is important.&quot;   Drive west across the Indus River to the privately runCherat cement plant and you see what he means. The pristinefactory, surrounded by mud and brick villages, rises from thebarren terrain like a promise of a better future. Cherat'smodern control room is computerized, cool and clean, itsmachinery -- and precipitator -- top-of-the-line. This plantgets more than twice the production per employee thatMustehkam does. &quot;Here the decisions are made by one man,&quot;says the plant's superintendent.   If nationalized industry has had it bad, foreign investorsoften have had it worse. The country's Investment PromotionBoard, also known as the Investment Prevention Board, waspart of a relentless bureaucracy that required foreigners tosubmit 45-odd copies of a proposed project. The copies werethen dispersed to myriad offices -- finance, customs, power-- any one of which could block the project.   The approval process might take years and still haveaberrant results. On the production line at a Pfizer Inc.drug plant in Karachi, Nicholas Procaccini picks up a bottleof vitamin syrup, one of several products his plant makes.&quot;We sell eight million of these here a year,&quot; he says, &quot;andwe lose money on every one.&quot; Government-set drug pricesaccount for that, and it's a capricious process at best.Sometimes prices aren't changed for years -- and sometimesthey go down. Just ask Eli Lilly.   In 1986, Lilly got approval to build a joint-venture plantin Karachi to make an antibiotic. The government agreed to aprice for the drug that gave Lilly a 10% profit. But justwhen Lilly was about to start production in 1987, thegovernment changed its mind and cut the price by a third. Sofor four years, the new plant, complete with mixers andpackaging lines, has stood idle, an eerie warning to otherprospective investors.   Now things are supposed to change. The government isselling off many of its stricken industries to compete ontheir own. It freed up foreign exchange rules so capital canmove across the border more easily. And it has stripped awaymany barriers to investment. Foreigners now can start almostany type of business and expand it at will -- at leasttheoretically.   The architect of these changes is Mr. Sharif, electedprime minister last year, who comes from a large businessfamily in Lahore. &quot;He's the best thing to happen to thiscountry in years,&quot; says a diplomat in Islamabad, expressing awidely held sentiment. A low-key administrator, Mr. Sharifcomes across as more technocrat than visionary. &quot;There wereall these committees to determine if an investment wasviable,&quot; he explains. &quot;If the investor finds it viable, lethim do it. It's his money.&quot;   Mr. Sharif is responsible for the ambitious, ifunrealistic, timetable for privatization. His goal was tosell off in a year 115 state operations, only a handful ofwhich make money; six months later, he has sold just one, theMuslim Commercial Bank. In some cases, there weren't even anybidders. &quot;These things will take time,&quot; says Saeed Qadir,head of the privatization commission. &quot;What he's trying to dois make sure people get the message that he means business.You've got to get them out of inertia, and for that you needshock treatment.&quot;   People do seem to be getting the message: Approval hasbeen granted for a foreign-run airline that will eventuallycompete with the state carrier. Prices on the Karachi stockexchange have soared. Several foreign companies have comeshopping, though few have bought. And many U.S. firms alreadyhere are expanding operations. Competition, argues MohammedAslan, an airline worker in Islamabad, is good. &quot;Withcompetition, if we work hard, we'll make more money.&quot;   The bureaucracy, too, is loosening up: The Ministry ofHealth registered four new Pfizer drugs in two months, ratherthan the two years it used to take, and has devised a newformula for annual price increases. It also restored thehigher price for Eli Lilly's antibiotic; in August, the plantwill finally open.   &quot;We could have gotten the increase earlier if we had beenmore creative with money,&quot; says Mohammad Iqbal, smiling. &quot;Butwe didn't. I'm proud of the Midwestern values of thiscompany.&quot;   Mr. Sharif's plan, however, has its opponents. AlthoughFormer Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto (daughter of ZulfikarAli Bhutto) also talked of privatization when she was inoffice, her party, now out of power, calls Mr. Sharif'sprogram the &quot;loot and plunder&quot; of Pakistan. Farooq Leghari,the intense deputy opposition leader, says the plan is toohasty, favors the largest investors and rides roughshod overlabor. &quot;They are doing everything with selfish and corruptulterior motives,&quot; he says, angrily.   Indeed, the sale of the Muslim Commercial Bank proved abit embarrassing for Mr. Sharif: It went to a group led by awealthy family friend. The government insists the group madethe highest bid.   Mr. Leghari says that if his party regains power it willconsider a program of selective renationalization. That maybe an idle threat, but it is likely to scare off someinvestors nervous about Pakistan's inconsistencies -- itsswings between free enterprise and socialism and its tendencyto cancel investment incentives after investors have takenthe leap.   And will there be peace with the nation's unions? Thegovernment says it has won over labor, though the periodicarrest of union leaders may have something to do with that.For now, &quot;we'll cooperate,&quot; says Raja Habib, head of theMuslim Bank union local in Rawalpindi. &quot;Otherwise, we'll bearrested. There are no laws here.&quot;   But if reform is undone in Pakistan, it will probably bebecause of more systemic problems. For one thing, corruptionis rampant. When Mr. DeLashmutt, the U.S. dairy farmer,considered joining forces with a local farmer, he says hefound the man was skimming cash from bank loans and evenbribing the meter reader to lower the electric bill. When thePakistani openly proposed an insurance scam -- arranging forcow embryos shipped to Bangladesh to be destroyed in a truckaccident -- Mr. DeLashmutt called it quits. &quot;The level ofethics is horrendous,&quot; he says.   For another thing, the tensions consuming this countryhave become so heated, they could easily consume Mr. Sharif'sruling coalition, too. This nation was carved from thesubcontinent by colonialists oblivious to tribal boundaries.A war is still being fought across the border in Afghanistanand Pakistan itself is skirmishing with India in the Kashmir.The very name of Pakistan bespeaks fragmentation: P for thePunjab in the north, A for Afghan lands in the west, K forKashmir to the east and S for Sind to the south.   Tensions are particularly high in Sind, the province thatencompasses the commercial center of Karachi. Frictionbetween native Sindis and people who migrated here from Indiaafter the partition regularly flares. Buses are stormed andpassengers shot, journalists are beaten, and people arekidnapped for quick ransom. Foreigners are no longer immune;so far this year, five Chinese and Japanese nationals havebeen taken hostage. A Swede was kidnapped and killed.   &quot;It's real, it touches everyone's life,&quot; says RobertMcCusker, head of Gillette Co.'s operations in Pakistan and abig supporter of U.S. business here. &quot;The gangland-stylekilling brings it to a new dimension. There isn't a personhere who doesn't know someone who's had his car stolen atgunpoint.&quot;   The police -- those who haven't turned to crime themselves-- are increasingly outgunned. In Sind, criminals use machineguns, rockets and grenades to avoid capture. Prime MinisterSharif tried ordering Pakistanis to turn in their illegalweapons this month, but predictably, few did.   As Pakistan's future comes down to a race between decayingsocial order and economic revival, the solution to one maylie in the other. During the 1970s, the province ofBaluchistan was a cauldron of violence, a poor region hopingto secede. The government sent in the army, to little avail.In the early 1980s, however, Pakistan instead pumpeddevelopment dollars into the province and offered investorstax breaks to set up factories there. Jobs multiplied and thesecession effort waned.   As his liberalized economy takes shape, Prime MinisterSharif is banking on a repeat of history -- this time on anational scale.</TEXT></DOC>