<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910222-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>910222-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Arkansas Lawyer Faces Charges   Over Dealings With Failed Thrift   ----   By Christi Harlan and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   JAPAN AMR LABOR WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)AIRLINES (AIR)SECURITIES (SCR)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   E. Harley Cox Jr., a former president of the Arkansas BarAssociation and onetime partner of a prominent Arkansas lawfirm, faces federal charges related to loans made by anow-defunct Arkansas thrift, FirstSouth.   Mr. Cox, who served as FirstSouth's general counsel, ischarged with two counts of conspiring to help the thriftconceal its worsening financial condition from federalregulators. He also is charged with 10 counts of aiding andabetting FirstSouth officers in the mis-application of fundslent by the thrift.</LP><TEXT>   FirstSouth, once the largest thrift in Arkansas with $1.86billion in assets, was riddled with insider dealings,including loans to directors and shareholders, according tocivil suits and criminal charges filed since the thrift wasclosed by regulators in December 1986.   The indictment of Mr. Cox, returned Wednesday by a federalgrand jury in Little Rock, Ark., alleges that companies hecontrolled borrowed at least $25.2 million from FirstSouth topurchase delinquent loans from the thrift, thus removingthose bad loans from the books and, presumably, the eyes ofregulators.   Mr. Cox, who established a solo law practice nine monthsago, and his defense lawyers couldn't be reached for comment.   Mr. Cox's former law firm, which had representedFirstSouth since 1919, previously settled civil chargesbrought against the firm by federal regulators. The civilcharges, which were related to the criminal charges againstMr. Cox, were settled for $12 million, paid by the law firm'smalpractice insurer. The managing partner of the law firm,Ramsay, Bridgforth, Harrelson andamp; Starling, couldn't be reachedfor comment.   ---   SANCTIONS IMPOSED against lawyers for AMR Corp.'s AmericanAirlines.   A federal judge in Fort Worth, Texas, ordered finestotaling $18,000 against two of American Airlines' outsidelawyers and barred the lawyers from appearing in any case inNorth Texas for the next six months. A third outside lawyerand an in-house attorney for American were barred from NorthTexas courts for 30 days.   The sanctions were imposed Wednesday after Judge JohnMcBryde found the lawyers in contempt of court for filingaffidavits purportedly signed by American officials butactually signed by the lawyers.   The affidavits were filed in December as part of AmericanAirlines' efforts to obtain a temporary restraining order tostop an alleged work slowdown by members of the Allied PilotsAssociation, the union that represents American Airlinespilots. The carrier, which was at an impasse in contracttalks with the union, accused the union of encouraging pilotsto call in sick when they weren't.   Judge McBryde said in a 13-page order that he relied onthe American Airlines officials' affidavits when herestrained the pilots' union and didn't realize the documentshad been signed by the lawyers until they filed a motion tosubstitute the signature pages.   The judge ordered Donald L. Havermann and Neal D. Mollenof the Washington office of the law firm Morgan, Lewis andamp;Bockius to pay the fines and stay out of North Texas courts.He also barred Clay Humphries, a partner in the Fort Worthlaw firm Cantey andamp; Hanger, and American Airlines in-housecounsel Richard A. Malahowski from North Texas courts for 30days.   A spokesman for American and lawyers at the two firms saidthey are considering appeals.   The American Airlines spokesman said the attorneys'signatures on behalf of the company officials were &quot;aprocedural error, which we regret, and has no bearing on theultimate merits&quot; of the case.   Judge McBryde's sanctions against the lawyers didn'taffect the restraining order he issued against the union.American Airlines has since reached a tentative contract withthe union, which may preclude further litigation.   ---   ATTORNEYS IN DREXEL bankruptcy get $14 million for lastquarter of 1990.   An additional $4.9 million in fees and expenses will go toother professionals, such as accountants and financialadvisers, bringing the total in fees and expenses to $48million since the case began a year ago.   The latest round of fees and expenses was approved bybankruptcy court Judge Francis Conrad last week, just daysbefore Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. and its creditorsannounced they had reached a tentative settlement over how todivvy up Drexel's $2.8 billion in assets. U.S. District JudgeMilton Pollack, who is presiding jointly with Judge Conradover the settlement efforts, said that he is pushingaggressively for a settlement partly out of concern that feesand expenses are depleting Drexel's assets.   Although Judge Conrad approved almost all of the feeapplications for the third quarter, he criticized some of therequests, such as a bill of $200-an-hour for flight time onone attorney's cross-country trip, with no indication thatany actual work was done on the case.   For the last three months of 1990, fees and expensestotaling $3.8 million were approved for Weil, Gotshal andamp;Manges, the law firm for Drexel. The second largest amount,$3.3 million, went to Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue, counsel tothe main creditors' committee.   Milgrim Thomajan andamp; Lee, the law firm for the Drexelshareholders' committee, received $1.9 million. Two law firmsthat are special counsel to Drexel and its subsidiaries,Rosenman andamp; Colin and Cahill, Gordon andamp; Reindel were awarded$1.3 million and $1.2 million, respectively.   Coopers andamp; Lybrand, the accounting firm for Drexel, wasawarded $2.5 million for the quarter. The bill for PriceWaterhouse, accountants for the main creditors' committee,was $1.2 million.   Rory Millson, an attorney for the Federal DepositInsurance Corp., which is seeking damages of $11.3 billionfrom Drexel for thrift-industry losses, said the case hasbecome &quot;a litigation bonanza.&quot; At the hearing before JudgeConrad, Mr. Millson of Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore, said thetotal fees sought in the case &quot;are an enormous expense thatwe believe is not justified.&quot;   The FDIC hired Cravath on a contingency-fee basis, and thefees won't be paid out of Drexel's assets. Nonetheless,Drexel and its creditors, stung by criticism of theirattorney fees, want to shed some light on how much the FDICwill pay Cravath.   &quot;This is information which all taxpayers should beconcerned about and is the kind of information which isroutinely required to be made available by counsel inbankruptcy proceedings,&quot; Drexel said in a recent courtfiling.   Drexel creditors sought more information about the feesthrough a request under the federal Freedom of InformationAct, but turned up few details. According to the FOIAresponse, 25 Cravath lawyers, including partners Thomas Barrand David Boies, will devote &quot;all or a substantial portion&quot;of their time to the case.   The FDIC and Cravath declined to comment on how much moneythe law firm will be paid. Alfred Byrne, general counsel ofthe FDIC, called the dispute &quot;something akin to sour grapes.&quot;   He added: &quot;It's particularly surprising in that Drexelcounsel doesn't have any problem being paid from the estate.&quot;   ---   TOKYO COURT agrees partly to enforce a California verdict.   A Tokyo court gave an Oregon developer a partial victoryin his two-year legal chase of a Japanese concern thatallegedly defrauded him in a real estate venture.   The Tokyo District Court held that it would enforce theactual damages portion of a California Superior Court juryaward to developer David Bryant against Mansei Kogyo Co., acigarette lighter distributor based near Tokyo. The Tokyocourt, however, declined to recognize punitive damages thatthe California jurors awarded.   The California jury in 1982 found Mansei and two officialsliable for &quot;intentional misrepresentation and intentionalconcealment of material facts&quot; in connection with its 1980canceling of an agreement between a U.S. subsidiary and Mr.Bryant covering development of a computer-chip plant inOregon. It awarded Mr. Bryant $425,000 in actual damages and$1.1 million in punitive damages. An appeals court affirmedthe award in 1988.   Mr. Bryant has spent two years trying to persuade theJapanese courts to recognize the award. Mansei attorneysbelieved it was excessive and resisted. The dispute became acase of clashing legal cultures and, to Mr. Bryant, aquestion of international fair play.   &quot;We are totally unhappy,&quot; Mr. Bryant said of the Japaneseruling. He said he plans to appeal.   Japanese courts typically don't entertain the concept ofpunitive damages. Mr. Bryant said the Tokyo court didn't ruleout recognizing foreign punitive damage judgments in othercases, but decided it wasn't appropriate in his. The courtdid award interest and costs.   &quot;The matter had been litigated extensively and in theCalifornia appeals process Mansei never disputed the adequacyof our proof at trial of their conduct supporting punitivedamages,&quot; said John Crittenden, a lawyer at Cooley GodwardCastro Huddleson andamp; Tatum in San Francisco for Mr. Bryant. &quot;Itis bizarre that the Japanese court would look behind that andwant to demand additional proof of that at this stage of thegame. We thought that had been fully litigated and concededby the other side.&quot;   A Mansei official in Japan declined to comment.   ---   NOTED: Former California Attorney General John K. Van deKamp joined the Los Angeles office of the New York law firmDewey, Ballantine, Bushby, Palmer andamp; Wood. He will be chairmanof the branch's litigation department. Mr. Van de Kamp, 55years old, stepped down as the state's chief prosecutor afterhe was defeated last year in his bid for a Democraticgubernatorial nomination. Previously, Mr. Van de Kamp was LosAngeles County district attorney, U.S. attorney for the LosAngeles area, and a federal public defender.</TEXT></DOC>