<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910205-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>910205-0116.</DOCID><HL>   Under Water:   A Luxury-Home Plan   That Won High Praise   Falls Victim to Errors   ---   Delays, Cost Overruns Hurt   New Jersey Canal Project;   Main Lender Taken Over   ---   Work May Yet Be Resumed   ----   By Mitchell Pacelle   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   NW</CO><IN>REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)HOME CONSTRUCTION (HOM)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   JERSEY CITY, N.J. -- Dredgers had just begun to carvecanals into a rubble-strewn tract of abandoned rail yards onthe Jersey City waterfront when Richard Shiffman, a retiredNew Jersey manufacturer and avid yachtsman, bought into adream. Port Liberte, with stunning views of the Statue ofLiberty and lower Manhattan, was to be the sister village ofPort Grimaud, a storybook, canal-laced community of 18,000 insouthern France.   In January 1988, Mr. Shiffman moved into his $209,000one-bedroom apartment, becoming Port Liberte's thirdresident. He felt he had moved to &quot;the star of the New Yorkmetropolitan area.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Two years later, Mr. Shiffman and the 350 other PortLiberte residents are feeling more like castaways on a remoteisland.   Just 252 of the planned 1,690 apartments and town houseshave been completed. They sit clustered in a corner of the115-acre site. The development partnership has defaulted onits construction loans, freezing all pending sales andpreventing any new ones, and on Jan. 25 it filed underbankruptcy law for protection against creditors. The leadlender has been taken over by the government, the contractorshave pulled out, and 111 nearly completed condominiums liefallow. Not a stick of new lumber has gone into Port Libertefor more than a year.   Port Liberte is just a splash in a tidal wave ofcommercial real-estate failures that have left behindhundreds of empty -- and never-needed -- office buildings,shopping centers and condominium units.   But not only senseless projects failed. The real-estatecrash sparked by reckless building also crippled projects,such as Port Liberte, that would have enriched theircommunities. Penn's Landing, which would have blanketed 37acres of seedy riverfront property in Philadelphia withoffice buildings, condominiums and stores, has been halted.And a plan by Southland Corp. to rejuvenate inner-city Dallaswith a 140-acre office, residential and retail complexcollapsed after only a few buildings were erected whenSouthland filed for bankruptcy protection last September.   The initial plans for Port Liberte, a similar casualty,drew praise from architects and builders and publicity fromParis to Tokyo. It was to give the metropolitan area itsfirst luxury yachting community. Even before its developersbroke ground, they collected deposits on 80% of the 363 unitsin the first phase, at prices ranging from $170,000 for astudio to nearly $1 million for a harbor-front town house.   Yet even though Port Liberte has been a resounding failurefor nearly everyone involved, real-estate experts believethat a new wave of luxury town houses will eventually risefrom the ashes. The project is simply too attractive to fail,they say.   The Port Liberte story so far is not one of fly-by-nightdevelopers and speculators. It is a story of respecteddevelopers who underestimated costs, of experiencedcontractors ill-suited for the job and of a long-establishedNew Jersey lender, City Federal Savings Bank, that was sweptby the nationwide building euphoria into a project toocomplex for it to manage. Mistakes by all of them caused PortLiberte to fall so far behind schedule that scores ofcommitted buyers just walked away.   &quot;City Fed saw this as a home run for them,&quot; says JerseyCity's mayor, Jerry McCann, who lives at Port Liberte. &quot;Theyhad these wide-eyed dreams about how this project would carrythem to the big leagues. Unfortunately, they didn't watch theproject, because they probably didn't have the personnel.&quot;   It isn't difficult to understand how an eager regionallender such as Somerset-based City Federal could be attractedby Port Liberte's cosmopolitan developers. Francois Spoerry,the French architect and developer who created Port Grimaud,was convinced that he could repeat his triumph. His partnersincluded Germany's Prince Ferdinand von Bismarck, who haddeveloped resorts in Spain, Pierre Barrier, a Swiss resortspecialist, and Paul Bucha, a charismatic American war hero.   The partners, however, didn't put up any capital. &quot;Thesedevelopers were not wealthy people,&quot; Mr. McCann says. &quot;Thebanks lent them a tremendous amount of money on someone'sdream.&quot;   City Federal provided 100% financing in the form of a $90million revolving construction loan. In return, it received a50% equity interest. It kept $18.2 million of the loan andsyndicated the balance to National Westminster Bank of NewJersey, a unit of National Westminster PLC of London, and 13other New Jersey thrifts. City Federal also kept 25% equityand farmed out the rest to three of the thrifts.   &quot;They were all talking about the equity they were going toget, not how much money they would put in,&quot; Mr. McCannrecalls.   At the apex of the commercial real-estate boom -- but nolonger -- many lenders engaged in the risky business of 100%financing. With buildings soaring in value, the lure ofprofits from equity positions proved irresistible. Banks wererisking far more than developers, who shared the upside butlittle of the downside.   Mr. Bucha had less real-estate experience than hispartners; previously, he had been involved only in planning a348-unit condominium project in Westchester County, north ofNew York City. But the square-jawed Mr. Bucha, now 47, had notrouble winning over his bankers. He inspires trust. Aftergraduating from West Point and Stanford Business School, heshipped off to Vietnam, where he won the Congressional Medalof Honor for leading 89 soldiers in a fierce firefightagainst more than 1,000 North Vietnamese attacking inhuman-wave assaults.   From the beginning, Mr. Bucha attacked Port Liberte withhaste typical of the times. With the New York economy boomingand New Jersey's &quot;Gold Coast&quot; luring developers, Mr. Buchawanted to be the first to bring units to market.   The partners were desperate to have something standingbefore the 1986 centennial of the Statue of Liberty, whichthey hoped would bring the project even wider attention.Ground was broken more than a year before the architecturaldrawings were completed, making budgeting more difficult,according to Stuart Graham, the construction manager for theproject and the chief executive of Sordoni SkanskaConstruction Co., of Parsippany, N.J.   Traditionally, housing developers draw down theirrevolving construction loans, build some units, sell them,pay down the loan, borrow some more and so on. But CityFederal's insistence that 80% of the units be presold beforeconstruction began, a seemingly conservative strategy, forcedthe developers to tackle all 363 units at once. And buyerswere entitled to reclaim their 10% deposits if their homesweren't ready within two years.   Unfortunately, the richly detailed units proved far harderto build than to sell. Digging the canals was expensive andtime-consuming. Because the building boom had driven up thecost of concrete, the developers shifted to a trickiersteel-construction method. The units had about 50 differentfloor plans, further slowing construction.   &quot;The architects, the developers, the construction manager,the contractors -- none of us had the experience to do thiskind of custom work on a mass scale in such an overheatedconstruction environment,&quot; Mr. Graham concedes. The projectsoon was one year behind schedule and far over budget.   At City Federal, &quot;there was a breakdown and lack ofcontrol on the payouts,&quot; says Joseph Ochman Sr., chairman ofInter-Boro Savings andamp; Loan Association, which held $4.2million of the loan.   By 1986, however, City Federal had sharpened its watchover developers and tightened its controls overconstruction-loan disbursements. But Port Liberte didn't seemto go through that process, one former executive at the banksays. &quot;There was a feeling that all of the presales wouldconvert into sales,&quot; he adds.   The two executives with day-to-day responsibility for theproject, Senior Vice President George Mikula and VicePresident David Herrmann, decline to comment, citing thewelter of litigation arising from the foreclosure proceedingsand from various subcontractors that say they haven't beenpaid. Also declining to comment is a spokesman for the bankand for the Resolution Trust Corp., which has run the banksince it was declared insolvent by the Office of ThriftSupervision.   Mr. Spoerry says he &quot;tried to go speak to the bank&quot; aboutcost overruns and mismanagement, and &quot;they said, `There's noneed. We're in touch with Mr. Bucha.'&quot;   Mr. Bucha says he faults himself for not temporarilyhalting the project to allow architectural planning to catchup with construction. But the bank, he says, insisted thatbuilding continue.   Mr. Spoerry says he favored firing Sordoni, theconstruction company, because of the overruns. But Mr. Buchainsisted the firm be kept on so it could later be heldlegally accountable for construction problems. Sordoni's Mr.Graham responds that he told the bank early on that theproject couldn't be built within budget.   The first units were supposed to be ready for sale andoccupancy by March 1987. They weren't. Later that year, the$90 million loan ran out. Still no sales. Constructionstopped, and many buyers retrieved their deposits and walked.Amazingly, other buyers came forward, and half of the unitswere sold a second time.   By now, City Federal officials were worried. Although theloan wasn't due until 1989, the bank's executives anddirectors faced a dilemma -- whether to cut off furtherfunding and foreclose or to put more money at risk. &quot;Therewas a gnashing of teeth over whether to lend more money,&quot; aformer City Federal executive says.   Mr. Bucha proved persuasive. Between January and June of1988, City Federal and National Westminster fed the projectanother $58.8 million. Sales were closed, and people beganmoving in. But the funding still was inadequate.   As the first loan was about to fall due, Port Liberte hungin the balance. The developers still had buyers but neededmore money to deliver the units. Eventually, City Federalagreed to extend a third major loan, for $58.3 million.   Then City Federal's house of cards fell in. In August1989, Congress passed a law limiting a thrift institution'sloans to one borrower. Even worse, a new appraisalcommissioned by the bank came in at about $90 million, downfrom $156 million the previous year. The real-estate markethad collapsed, the appraiser explained.   In October, City Federal shut off the spigot and wrote off$52.7 million of the $69.8 million it had in the project.Other lenders were saddled with $88.4 million in bad debt. OnDec. 7, 1989, the government seized City Federal, which wasawash in bad loans, renamed it City Savings Bank FSB and tookcontrol of the Port Liberte debt.   &quot;A basic mistake was made by the lead lender and the 14participants,&quot; Mr. Ochman of Inter-Boro Savings says. &quot;Youdon't let a developer get out that far ahead of you&quot; onconstruction. &quot;Someone should have blown the whistle threeyears ago.&quot;   Many people familiar with Port Liberte say the projectshould never have been financed entirely with debt from aregional lender. &quot;There was no real equity player who couldstep in and pump cash into the project when it was needed,&quot;says Andrew Davidoff, a vice president at Jones Lang WoottonUSA, the American arm of the London-based real-estate firm.Several years ago, Mr. Davidoff says, he talked to Mr. Buchaabout perhaps bringing in an equity partner, such as aninsurance company, pension fund or overseas constructionfirm. But Mr. Bucha didn't retain Mr. Davidoff to seekfinancing.   Last August, the RTC initiated foreclosure proceedings.Sensing that a steep discount on the existing debt would makethe project a winner, bottom fishers from as far as Japan,Korea, Sweden, Spain, France, Mexico and Grenada have beenapproaching Mr. Bucha and the RTC.   Mr. Bucha says the RTC now has a firm offer from a groupthat includes Shingo Nomura, a Japanese developer; AkiraYamashita, a Boston-based architect and city planner; andRocky Aoki, chairman of Benihana National Corp., a Miami foodcompany. The group has offered about $35 million for the $170million of secured debt and up to $35 million to settlelawsuits, buy more land and continue construction, he says.In addition, two other buyers have approached the RTC. Itrebuffed them all, Mr. Bucha complains.   &quot;None of the prospective offers have come close to themost recent appraised value, and none of them have met ourminimal requirements for making an offer,&quot; responds an RTCofficial. He declines to disclose the appraised value butsays the bidders didn't submit financial statements, signconfidentiality agreements or offer a &quot;meaningful deposit.&quot;   Mr. Bucha says the partnership filed for bankruptcyprotection to prevent the RTC from taking control of rentalrevenues as part of the foreclosure and to force the agencyto negotiate with the bidders.   Even now, the project may well be resurrected. Although ithas been in limbo for more than a year, a steady stream ofpotential home buyers continues to pass through the salesoffice. And most residents, while grousing about problemsstemming from the financial mess, still rave about PortLiberte. They feel sure that so desirable a project willeventually succeed. Many real-estate people agree.   &quot;This project is going to make someone very, very wealthysomeday,&quot; says Clifford Adams, president of Statewide SavingsBank, a Jersey City thrift that has written off its roughly$3 million share of the construction loan. &quot;We'll sit hereand watch it go into someone else's pocket.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>