<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920124-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>920124-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Looking West:   In Canada, Ukrainians   Discover the `Lost' Art   Of Modern Farming   ---   They Come to Learn the Skills   Needed To Revolutionize   Agriculture Back Home   ---   Trading 3 Hogs for a Tractor   ----   By John J. Fialka   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/24/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)</NS><RE>CANADA (CN)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UKRAINE (UKR)COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (UR)</RE><LP>   SMOKY LAKE, Alberta -- Petro Borovets, the 32-year-oldformer manager of a big collective farm in Ukraine, knowsabout farm work. So when he first saw 200 cows waiting hereon a snowy field for their dinner, he made a quickcalculation.   Feeding them would take three men wielding pitchforksthree days, he announced.</LP><TEXT>   Nonsense, said Steve Zarusky, the owner of the cows. Hefired up one of his tractors equipped with a front-endloader, plopped down a 1,650-pound spool of rich alfalfa hay,and then nudged it with the tractor, unrolling a five-footwide edible carpet in front of the hungry cows. Half an hourlater, the herd was fed.   While politicians from the West met in Washington thisweek to discuss how and whether to inject billions of dollarsof aid into the new nations emerging from the old SovietUnion, Canadian farmers of Ukrainian descent are way ahead ofthem. For a few thousand dollars, they are teaching the firstgeneration of newly privatized Ukrainian farmers how to farm,Western style.   In return, Mr. Zarusky is finding his roots. Hisgrandfather came from the L'vov area of western Ukraine in1903 with little more than the clothes on his back anddetermination. He homesteaded this 1,400-acre stretch offertile plain, starting with a nest egg of $10. Although thefarm is now highly automated, Mr. Zarusky still grows some ofthe same crops and uses crop rotation schemes brought fromthe old country by his grandfather.   Mr. Borovets, a strong, large man whose smile reveals twogleaming gold teeth, comes from a different kind of poverty.Until recently, he was chief economist of the sprawling GorkiCollective Farm near L'vov. &quot;You are the economist,&quot; he wastold by fellow workers, &quot;do something.&quot; But try as he mighthe couldn't overcome waste, inefficiency, theft, decrepitmachinery and a 9-to-5 work ethic that often clashed with the24-hour needs of farm animals.   So in 1988 he mortgaged his house to buy a 25-acre sliverof the collective. Among the very first of the new Ukrainianhomesteaders, he came here to Alberta with a group of 19others last summer for what amounts to an internship. Many ofthese men were born on collective farms. They have come allthe way to Canada to learn -- from those who left Ukrainelong ago -- what their ancestors knew about how to go italone on the land.   &quot;People forgot how to work after 70 years of communism,&quot;says John T. Solodzuk, president of the Alberta-UkrainianFarmers Exchange Program. A fireplug of a man who favors darkshirts and thick red suspenders, Mr. Solodzuk was cuttingwheat in his field near here last year when the idea hit him.Farmers in the area were having trouble finding hired help.Why not bring over some Ukrai- nians and help them at thesame time?   The idea caught on fast. Last year, Mr. Solodzuk and otherfarmers of Ukrainian descent here enlisted the help of aSwiss foundation and the Canadian government, and soon therewas enough money to sponsor 20 farmers. This year, the numberis expected to rise to 60, and next year, 100. The exchangepays each Ukrainian $500 a month during his half-year stay.It also plans to set up a model farm in Ukraine and publishtranslations of Canadian farm magazines.   Ukraine is one of the most fertile farming areas in theworld, far richer than the cold, windswept plains of Alberta.But becoming a private farmer is still viewed in the republicas a very risky business. The vast collective farm systembrutally stamped into the land by Josef Stalin in the 1920sstill controls 90% of the land, and the people who work ithave vivid memories of what happened to the Kulaks,peasantfarmers who had acquired small plots of land. Stalinshot some, starved many more and sent thousands to Siberia.   Prodded by former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev,however, a few local governments had begun prying land awayfrom the collectives for homesteaders. Mr. Borovets took theplunge. His three brothers worked the private farm while hemade one last try to shake up the somnolent work force of theGorki Collective.   He persuaded the administrator of the collective to lethim use 2,500 acres and 120 farm workers for an experiment.&quot;This is ours,&quot; he told his assembled workers. &quot;Whateverprofit we make, we split.&quot;   But nothing really changed. The cows were milkedsporadically. Machinery continually broke down. A lot of thecrops disappeared into workers' pantries.   &quot;The feeling was that it was theirs, so they take it. Theyknow they are going to get so many rubles per month whetherit's productive or not,&quot; says Mr. Borovets. His experimentalfarm did produce, after a fashion: It generated 7,500 rublesa year off 1,000 acres. Meanwhile, his three brothers made2,500 rubles growing vegetables and raising animals on 10acres.   Mr. Borovets didn't need his master's degree inagricultural economics to figure out what to do next. Twoyears ago, he resigned and joined the private farm, borrowingmore money to buy equipment.   As the ruble devalued ever farther, cattle, cabbages,geese and potatoes became the real currency for farmers likeMr. Borovets and Yaroslav Maiovets. Over at Ernest Humeniuk's1,200-acre livestock and grain farm near Innisfree, Alberta,they are still talking about the story of how Mr. Maiovetstraded three hogs for a tractor before leaving Ukraine forwork in Canada under the exchange program.   A quick-moving, confident 36-year-old, Mr. Maiovets firstworked in Ukraine as a skilled mechanic, then became managerof construction equipment for the entire district aroundL'vov. In August 1990 the district government gavehomesteaders 25 acres of land each, and Mr. Maiovets and hiswife began growing hogs, potatoes and buckwheat. As theeconomic chaos grew and the big collectives began to holdproduction back, &quot;the demand for food became extremely high,&quot;he explains.   So high, in fact, that Mr. Maiovets left his constructionjob, where he was earning $12 a month, and went into farmingfull time -- at more than 10 times his old salary. Sometimes,he joshes his temporary employer, Mr. Humeniuk, about it. &quot;Ican do a lot better than you guys back home.&quot;   He is right. Mr. Humeniuk has worked out the math. &quot;I takethree hogs and I can't even buy a lawn mower,&quot; he says. &quot;I'dhave to sell 250 hogs to get the same size tractor.&quot;   Mr. Humeniuk says his new hired hand from Ukraine stays ontop of everything. If machinery breaks down, he fixes it. Inhis idle hours he makes detailed drawings of equipment thatdoesn't exist in Ukraine. Lately, Mr. Maiovets says, he hasbeen thinking about going into food processing.   Most of those in the exchange program had been specialistsin large cooperative farms in Ukraine, and they are learningthe economics of running a small operation efficiently,including the intricacies of borrowing and bookkeeping.   Like Mr. Maiovets, Ivan Scherbina, another exchange farmerin Alberta, also was discovering the virtues of privatefarming in Ukraine. An expert in animal nutrition, he oncemanaged 12,000 hogs on a state-owned research farm nearKherson on the Black Sea. Then one day he called the farmadministrator a &quot;donkey&quot; and worse.   Mr. Scherbina, a tall, darkly handsome man, insists he hadplenty of provocation. On one of the farms where he worked,the managers planted more tomatoes than they could harvest.When he protested, he was informed that, despite the acres oftomatoes rotting in the sun, the crop fulfilled the farm'squota.   Then there was the local party boss, a woman who insistedhogs could gain weight eating ground-up wheat straw, which,because it was cheap, saved the farm money. Mr. Scherbinacomplained that the straw had almost no nutritional value,but his superiors overruled him. So, while he secretly fedhis animals grain, he kept a supply of the straw around foruse during visits of the party boss. &quot;The hogs would sneezeinto the trough and it would blow away,&quot; he recalls withdisdain.   Fired from the hog farm after his outburst, Mr. Scherbinafound himself at his mother-in-law's house staring at lushfields of hay that grew, untended, along a nearby river. Hebought a cow and now owns 10, running what amounts to aprivate dairy farm, even though the local government has yetto sell the first acre of private land.   By selling his milk and cheese at the local market, heearned seven times the salary he made managing 12,000 hogs,Mr. Scherbina says. His goal now is to go back and teachother farmers the methods he has learned in Canada and maybeopen a fast-food restaurant on the side.   &quot;If you were to completely privatize Ukraine,&quot; he says,&quot;you could feed half the world.&quot;   While there may be fortunes to be made by borrowing moneyand buying land and equipment in Ukraine, the new farmersstudying Canadian methods have also learned that you canoverdo it. Ukrainian Jaroslav Rodytch, for example, has beenworking the fields of Nadine and Eddy Skitsko's farm, andspending his off hours teaching Mrs. Skitsko how to makeUkrainian delicacies, such as fish soup and country sausage.His real learning experience came when he looked at thefarm's books: Like many in the neighborhood, it is deeply indebt to the banks. Mr. Rodytch's conclusion: &quot;You take onlyas much as you can manage so you can enjoy life.&quot;   Despite some early success stories, Ukrainians are notlining up to homestead new farms in Ukraine, explains BohdanChomiak, the chief manager of the Canadian program. &quot;Peoplestill deeply distrust the government,&quot; he explains.   Mr. Chomiak, who recently returned from Ukraine, says hehas seen trade representatives of foreign governments and bigWestern agriculture companies scouting the newly independentrepublic. But the big agribusiness deals won't take off, hesays, until there are many more little deals that create moresmall farmer-entrepreneurs, who then buy farm machinery andthe like from abroad.   Thus, the significance of the Canadian training program.The Canadians acknowledge that there is more to their effortsthan just altruism and nostalgia for the old country. Whenthe Ukrainian graduates are back home and one day go shoppingon the world market for fertilizers, chemicals and farmequipment, they may well turn first to the place they aremost familiar with: Canada. &quot;It's going to give us a littleedge on the other fellows,&quot; W. Roman Petryshyn, one of thoserunning the program, says with a smile.</TEXT></DOC>