<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900620-0010</DOCNO><DOCID>900620-0010.</DOCID><HL>   White House Mulls U.S. Participation   In Effort to Shore Up Soviet Economy   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration is reluctantlyconsidering U.S. participation in a multibillion-dollarinternational effort to save the Soviet economy from a crashthat could undermine Mikhail Gorbachev and harm EasternEurope.   The National Security Council is debating the conditionsunder which the U.S. might take part in such a rescue plan,which West Germany and France are pushing. The allies foreseeit totaling about $20 billion over one or two years. For theU.S., the major issue is exactly how it could participate ina way that encourages, rather than postpones, economic andpolitical changes in the Soviet Union. The White House isplanning to settle on a U.S. position in time for the July 9economic summit meeting in Houston, at which the Soviet-aidissue promises to be the dominant issue.</LP><TEXT>   American officials familiar with the internationaldeliberations caution that President Bush hasn't decidedwhether the U.S. will join such a rescue effort. They addthat no Western plan is likely to be adopted in detail at thesummit or to begin operating soon thereafter. Instead, theheads of the seven largest industrial nations are likely toorder lower-level officials to work out a program foradoption later.   But the administration, which has opposed direct Westernaid or financing for the Soviet Union, has concluded that themeeting is likely to begin a process by which Western fundsand food will begin flowing to the U.S.S.R. this year.American officials fear that unless the U.S. gets involved,the Europeans will proceed on their own with an aid packagethat would carry too few conditions and might help prop upinefficient state-run enterprises. The U.S. officials wouldprefer to assert American leadership over any Western effort.   French President Francois Mitterrand yesterday publiclydeclared for the first time that he will push to make aid tothe Soviets a top priority at both the Houston summit and acoming Dublin meeting of the European Community.   On Monday, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl wrote aletter to leaders of the EC, the U.S., Japan and Canada,asking them to discuss in Houston and Dublin the question ofeconomic and financial cooperation with the Soviet Union.Reached at home last night, a top aide to the chancellorinsisted that Mr. Kohl has made no recommendation for aspecific amount. &quot;What we prefer is, first of all, adiscussion with our partners over whether it is in our bestinterests to give such support and only then talk aboutspecifics,&quot; he said.   Asked to comment on yesterday's statement by Mr.Mitterrand, the State Department stuck to the currentofficial U.S. position opposing Western aid. It deliberatelyavoided any mention of the high-level discussion aboutchanging the policy. &quot;Neither the West nor the U.S.S.R. wouldbenefit from the extension of large-scale credits orassistance,&quot; the statement declared.   Administration officials are keenly aware that aid toMoscow -- even such indirect measures as permitting U.S.banks to lend the U.S.S.R. money -- would be politicallycontroversial at home. When House Majority Leader RichardGephardt (D., Mo.) proposed such aid a few months ago, theWhite House ridiculed the proposal and it got little support.Mr. Gorbachev's campaign against Lithuanian independence hascomplicated the political calculation.   However, U.S. experts privately have concluded that theSoviet economy, already faltering badly, could break down,amplifying the country's political chaos dangerously. Theyfear such a prospect -- especially a Soviet food crisis laterthis year -- could swamp the current reform efforts and mighteven topple Mr. Gorbachev, whose continued presence at thehelm is thought necessary to get Moscow's final agreement onGerman unification and arms-control treaties.   What's more, American officials fear that any Sovieteconomic crash could badly undermine the new democracies ofEastern Europe, whose own economies are still heavily tied toMoscow's both for imports and exports. A politicallyunpopular decision to aid Mr. Gorbachev thus might be madepalatable by posing it as indirect help for the popular newregimes in Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.   Mr. Gorbachev raised the issue of possible Westerneconomic help in vague terms during his summit meeting withPresident Bush here two weeks ago. But U.S. officials saytheir discussion of the topic was general and didn't produceany agreements or promises.   The Bush administration is likely to insist on three broadconditions before it will participate in any aid package.   First, it wants guarantees that the Soviets will beginimplementing more fundamental economic reforms to create atrue market economy and that Western aid will bolster theseefforts directly. Some U.S. officials even see the Westernaid being used to flood the country with consumer goods as asweetener to help the Soviet public accept the economicburdens of reform.   Second, the administration wants the Kremlin to stop usingits money to prop up distant allies, notably Cuba. Otherwise,the administration fears, Western aid simply would allow theKremlin to avoid the painful decision of cutting off Cubanleader Fidel Castro and other clients.   Moreover, the U.S. will want to see the economic crackdownon Lithuania removed.   In an interview with the French newspaper Le Monde, Mr.Mitterrand warned that if Mr. Gorbachev's reforms fail, &quot;therise of nationalism threatening the implosion of the SovietUnion will set off a cycle of confrontation and violencewhich will have grave international repercussions.&quot;Therefore, he declared: &quot;I intend to ask the forthcomingsummits in Dublin and Houston to consider financial,commercial and technical aid for the U.S.S.R.&quot;   Details of what a $20 billion package would entail aresparse, partly because nothing has been decided.   One component seems likely to be food, which might have tobe delivered by Western trucks or aircraft to the country'sinterior to prevent it from being left to rot at docks anddepots because of the awful Soviet transportation system. Asecond element is likely to be access to commercial credit,though it's uncertain whether Western banks will be willingto lend to a country behind on its payments and threateningto splinter into a dozen separate republics. France and WestGermany also are pushing for some direct government credit,though the U.S. is very wary of the idea.   In the U.S., congressional approval might be required towaive legal restrictions against aid and bank lending to theSoviets, who still haven't repaid U.S. loans from earlierperiods.   If the U.S. participates in an aid effort, the Bushadministration would want to carefully target the assistanceso that it encourages the Soviets to turn state-runenterprises over to private hands. That has been a goal ofother American aid programs for new, non-Communistgovernments. Some U.S. aid for Poland, Hungary andCzechoslovakia, for instance, is earmarked specifically forgovernment firms that have plans for going private.   ---   Timothy Aeppel in Bonn contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>