<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900822-0006</DOCNO><DOCID>900822-0006.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Attorneys' Fees Capped in Asbestos Case   ----   By Wade Lambert and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   MVL F.AQU LABOR MDEST SGP MRK</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal judge capped at 20% the fees that asbestosplaintiffs' attorneys can currently receive from the Manvillepersonal-injury trust.   Judge Jack B. Weinstein of federal court in Brooklynlimited the fees in an order yesterday. For weeks, he hashinted that such action might be necessary.</LP><TEXT>   Under a spending freeze ordered by Judge Weinstein a fewweeks ago, the trust can pay claims only to seriously illasbestos victims who are in &quot;extreme financial hardship as aresult of asbestos-related diseases,&quot; and the 20% cap on feesapplies to these payments. The trust is prohibited frompaying all other settlements and judgments until Sept. 6,when the judge has ordered it to disclose its plans forrefinancing.   Although the cap on fees applies only to the hardshipcases at this time, the judge's order indicated that such alimit may be extended to other cases. Previously, JudgeWeinstein has called on asbestos plaintiffs' attorneys toreduce their fees, which are said to often total more than athird of the claims.   In his latest order, Judge Weinstein said: &quot;The matter offees is now being considered in connection with arestructuring of the trust's payment program.&quot; He added thatcourt discussions with plaintiffs' attorneys about the cap onfees are continuing.   Judge Weinstein has criticized the trust in recent weeksbecause the trust's cash shortfall has prevented it frompaying current asbestos personal-injury claims for at least20 years.   The trust was set up as part of Manville Corp.'s 1986bankruptcy-court reorganization; the reorganization planplaced no restrictions on attorneys' fees collected from thetrust. The average claim paid by the trust has been $42,000.   Most of the victims are former construction workers andshipbuilders who were exposed to asbestos while working.Asbestos, once widely used, causes cancer and respiratoryillnesses. Currently, more than 100,000 lawsuits are pendingagainst Manville and other former producers.   The latest order authorized the Manville trust to decidewithout court review which claims may be paid during thespending freeze. The court also set standards for whichclaims can be considered to be hardship cases.   ---   RETIREE'S HEALTH BENEFITS can't be cut for now, a judgerules.   A federal judge in Connecticut barred Societe NationaleElf Aquitaine from reducing a health-benefits plan thatcovered a former senior executive of Texasgulf Inc. The U.S.oil company was acquired by the Paris energy conglomerate in1981.   The dispute between Richard D. Mollison, who was thechairman and chief executive officer of Texasgulf at the timeof the acquisition, and the French parent company is one of agrowing number of cases against companies that attempt to cutretirees' benefits. Mr. Mollison retired in 1982.   Similar suits have been filed against Primerica Corp.,General Motors Corp. and Combustion Engineering Inc., nowpart of Asea Brown Boveri AB. But this is believed to beamong the first in which a judge has granted an injunctionbefore a company reduced benefits. The injunction will remainin effect pending the final outcome of the case.   Under Texasgulf's health-benefits coverage, all employeesreceived 80% reimbursement for medical and health-careexpenses. Under a supplemental plan, senior executivesreceived 100% reimbursement. Mr. Mollison contended that thesupplemental plan also provided that upon retirement he andcertain other officers would continue to receive fullcoverage throughout their lifetimes.   Mr. Mollison sued Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine and twosubsidiaries, Elf Aquitaine Inc. and Texasgulf, both ofStamford, Conn., after receiving a letter from the units'current chief executive officer informing him that thesupplemental plan would be abolished as of May 31, 1990. Thebasic 80% coverage would remain.   In his complaint, Mr. Mollison alleged that as part of themerger contract Societe Nationale Elf Acquitaine agreed tomaintain all employee benefit plans then in effect. Hecontends that terminating the supplemental plan is a breachof that agreement and violates the federal statute regulatingemployee benefits known as the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974, or ERISA.   Richard Klapper of the New York law firm Sullivan andamp;Cromwell, representing the defendants, said that the planapplied to fewer than 25 of the top current and retiredexecutives and that the company decided it would be&quot;inequitable&quot; to continue higher health benefits for them.Mr. Klapper said that the company had not violated ERISA andmaintained the right to modify or abolish any benefits.   In the decision, federal judge T.F. Gilroy Daly ofBridgeport, Conn., said he was granting the injunction out ofconcern that Mr. Mollison, who is 74 years old and has beentreated for cancer, would be harmed if the plan was canceledbefore the trial.   Marilyn J. Ward Ford, a professor of law at the Universityof Bridgeport School of Law and a lawyer for Mr. Mollison,said other former Texasgulf executives may join Mr. Mollisonas plaintiffs in the lawsuit or file their own actions.   ---   LAW FIRMS BENEFIT from economic sanctions against Iraq.   New York's Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen andamp; Hamilton registeredAug. 13 as a foreign agent for the exiled government ofKuwait. The firm is dealing with foreign-asset matters andwill represent Kuwait chiefly before the Treasury Department,according to one partner, who asked not to be named forreasons of personal safety.   Several members of the Kuwaiti royal family are beingrepresented by the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp;Pogue. Partner Norman Vander Clute said the law firm seeks tosever private assets held by royal family members from anycompanies controlled by the Iraqi government.   Oil companies, investment banks, and other companieslikely to be pinched by the freeze on assets have hired lawfirms including Washington's Wilmer, Cutler andamp; Pickering andPhiladelphia's Morgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius.   Some law firms are marketing their services aggressively.A news release issued by Ruder Finn, a public relations firmrepresenting Washington's Shaw, Pittman, Potts andamp; Trowbridge,&quot;strongly&quot; encourages reporters covering the U.S.government's asset freeze order to contact Thomas Crocker,who is of counsel with the firm. A release from Morgan Lewisurges multinational corporations to develop &quot;legal battleplans to cope with a potentially conflicting maze&quot; ofsanctions. &quot;We're in the thick of it,&quot; says MichaelCalabrese, an associate at Morgan Lewis and co-author ofpapers issued by the firm on the trade embargo.   In many cases, the work amounts to guessing what theassets control office will do in the future.   &quot;We try and tell the client where we think {the Treasury}will come out&quot; on asset questions, says Andrew Vollmer, apartner with Wilmer Cutler.   ---   TWO RESEARCH SCIENTISTS indicted for conspiring to selltrade secrets.   The scientists were charged in Newark, N.J., withparticipating in a scheme to sell information about themanufacture of Schering-Plough Corp.'s interferon, a drugused in cancer research, and Merck andamp; Co.'s ivermectin, ananimal anti-parasitic drug that as Mectizan is used to treatriver blindness in humans. Schering-Plough is based inMadison, N.J.; Merck is based in Rahway, N.J.   U.S. Attorney Michael Chertoff said the defendants hadtried to sell secrets about the processing of thepatent-protected drugs for a total of $9.5 million.   The defendants, Bernard Mayles, who had worked for bothcompanies, and Mario Miscio, the director of BiopharmResearch Inc. in Hazlet, N. J., pleaded not guilty and arefree on bail.   Neither Messrs. Mayles and Miscio or their attorneys couldbe reached for comment.   If convicted, each faces a maximum of 30 years in prisonand fines that can be as much as twice the gain to thedefendants or loss to the companies.   The defendants were arrested this month when they handedover a folder of documents and an ivermectin specimen to anundercover agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation inexchange for $1 million in cash and $500,000 in bonds.   The two defendants had sold the agent documents containingpartial information on how to manufacture ivermectin and hadnegotiated a deal to sell information about interferon.   ---   NEW ENGLAND JUDGES will get environmental law training.   The program for state judges is believed to be the firstof its kind and is expected to be a prototype for judicialenvironmental education programs elsewhere in the country.   It is being developed by the Environmental Law Institute,a Washington, D.C., research and education organization, theMassachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs andthe Flaschner Judicial Institute.   The Flaschner institute, the judicial education arm of theMassachusetts Bar Foundation, received a $46,500 grant fromthe Jessie B. Cox Charitable Trust to develop the program.   &quot;There's a tidal wave of environmental litigation that'sabout to break over the courts,&quot; said Andrew W. Savitz,general counsel for Massachusetts' Office of EnvironmentalAffairs. He said that litigation resulting from an increasein environmental legislation and recent efforts to enforceenvironmental laws is now flooding the courts.   John A. Pendergrass, a senior attorney with theEnvironmental Law Institute said the program was planned sothat it can be adapted to the needs of judges in otherstates. He said a judge and law-enforcement personnel inCalifornia, Minnesota and Maryland as well as the AmericanBar Association had expressed interest in the program.   The first seminars will be offered next year.   ---   Timothy Noah and Arthur S. Hayes contributed to thiscolumn.</TEXT></DOC>