<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910131-0111</DOCNO><DOCID>910131-0111.</DOCID><HL>   Battlefield Success Doesn't Guarantee Victory   ----   By James H. Webb Jr.</HL><DATE>01/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   The Bush administration, aided by editorial onslaughtsfrom many sides (most notably this newspaper), has earned acongratulation that is odd and even incongruous in thecontext of our history: It has relentlessly maneuvered ournation into a war.   One must reach back to William Randolph Hearst's urging usinto the Spanish-American War to find a parallel to theeditorial pressure that preceded our present conflict. Onemust go even further, perhaps to the Mexican War, to find apresident so avidly desirous of putting the nation at riskwhen it has not been attacked. In fact, if the president'sever-vague war aims continue to escalate as they have overthe past two weeks, he might even fulfill The Wall StreetJournal's desire to see a &quot;MacArthurian regency in Baghdad.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   No matter. The nation is at war. It is our duty ascitizens to back the men and women who have been sent inharm's way. And there is no doubt, absent some unthinkableexpansion such as the entry of the Soviet Union into the war,that our military will prevail on the battlefield. Few ofthose who urged a more patient approach ever argued theeventual outcome of a military clash.   But whether even a quick success on the battlefield willtransfer into a victory for the nation and a politicalbenefit to the president depends on three key variables. Thefirst is the human and financial cost of subduing the Iraqimilitary. The second is the impact of this action over thenext two or three years on the region, and indeed on theinternational community as a whole. And the third is itseffect on political alignments here at home.   One needn't belabor the first point, particularly with ourtroops at risk. Support for President Bush's desire to sendAmericans out to die was reed-thin before the first shot wasfired, and will remain only as long as casualties areextremely low. George Bush believes he has taken us to warover &quot;the greatest moral issue since World War II,&quot; but hehas not convinced the country of this. The country haspredictably rallied around our troops now that hostilitieshave begun. But in two of the more revealing polls taken justprior to the war, a clear majority was opposed to militaryforce if it would result in a thousand casualties -- lessthan 2% of the casualties suffered in Vietnam -- andtwo-thirds supported linkage of the Palestinian issue if itwould preclude a war.   Saddam Hussein obviously is counting on this factor, butthe president also must have been acutely aware of it fromthe outset. This national hesitation was not a measure of oursociety's unwillingness to endure loss on behalf of a greatergood. Rather, it was a clearheaded calculation by ourcitizens, placing value on the benefits to be gained andweighing them against possible human costs. George Bush hasbeen forewarned.   The second consideration is less clear, but equallytroublesome. The chaos and destruction that our forces areinflicting on Iraq will be justified only if they bring ameasure of constancy to the region and a feeling in theinternational community that the U.S. is credible, consistentand just.   Our policy in the Middle East for at least the past 20years has best been characterized as &quot;Realpolitik&quot; -- amanipulation of regimes, several of them potentially hostile,to preclude the absolute dominance by one to the detriment ofthe region. This policy has led us to the irony of nowattempting to destroy the very nation that only months agowas our preferred bulwark against a virulent Iran and anemerging Syria.   Realpolitik requires a subtle hand and a patientphilosophy. Instead, we are wielding a blunt sword and at thesame time continuing the failure that led us to this war -- adangerous strengthening of the same types of regimes that wenow seek to destroy. If we are prepared to try Saddam Husseinfor war crimes, are we going to ignore those of Hafez Assad,who, after he joined our &quot;coalition,&quot; raped the LebaneseChristian Phalange and allowed the summary execution of manyof its soldiers?   Among other regimes in the region, there are already signsof stress. Since the crisis began, Turkey has seen theresignation of its minister of defense, minister of state andmost senior military officer -- all in protest of Turkey'sabandonment of its traditional neutrality. Egyptian leaderHosni Mubarak, referred to by some Egyptians as the &quot;DanQuayle of Egypt,&quot; is under criticism from many Muslim leadersand may suffer an internal backlash once the extent of Iraqicasualties is revealed. Such a backlash could be severe ifIsrael enters the war.   While Iran has promised neutrality, its spiritual leaderAyatollah Ali Khamenei declared a &quot;jihad&quot; against U.S. forcesin the region last September. This could have consequences ifthe number of Iraqi planes landing in Iran grows, or if theSoviet Union decides to resupply Iraq using Iraniancorridors. Things will also change in the region if the wardrags on.   Jordan is a keg of dynamite, straddling the war in amanner reminiscent of Belgium at the beginning of World WarI. Yemen, an Iraqi ally with a population of 11 millionlocated near the Saudi holy cities of Mecca and Medina, hasyet to be heard from. Syria, whose greatest criticism of Iraqat the outset was that its invasion of Kuwait distracted theworld's attention from the West Bank's &quot;intifada,&quot; bides itstime. Israel, bursting at the seams with new immigrants fromthe Soviet Union, must await the postwar demands of Arabnations within the coalition to see what price it may beasked to pay for their cooperation with the U.S.   Nor should we forget the dilemma of Iraq itself, amultiethnic nation whose Lebanonization following the warmight bring on greater instability as border nations seek tofill the vacuum.   And what of those Arab allies, on behalf of whom we maysoon be spending up to a billion dollars a day, as well asthe blood of our finest young men and women? When the emir ofKuwait returns with his 70 wives and fleet of personal jets,bringing behind him the legion of young men who danced outthe war in the discos of Cairo and London, the world is goingto take a cool look at the uncomfortable totality of Mr.Bush's &quot;moral principle.&quot; One need not be a pessimist toimagine a groundswell of anger directed at the royal familiesof Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, from within both the Arab andWestern communities.   Internationally, allies and enemies alike must bewondering at the way this coalition was patched together, aswell as at the principles on which our country will conductfuture policy. This administration has dealt in extremes:payoffs to, rather than persuasion of, those who wouldsupport us; brute force rather than simple pressure againstthose with whom we disagree. The fallout from such anapproach will become clearer when the bills come due, andwhen the next crisis appears.   At home, the past six months have seen a crystallizationof new alliances that seem to be tossing away the old liberaland conservative monikers characterizing the cold war. Whilelegitimate concern still lingers over the Soviet threat,particularly in light of recent (and predictable) actions bythe Soviets as the world's attention is diverted to theMiddle East, the new alliances seem shaped by theinterconnection of two other considerations: one's view ofAmerica's changing place in an increasingly internationaleconomy, and of the conditions under which Americans shouldbe called upon to shed blood.   Those who do not feel threatened by massive foreigninvestment inside the U.S. seem more willing to provide ourmilitary as a service to other nations who are capitalizingour economy and propping up our national debt. It is no smallirony that this administration is actually proud of themonetary contributions our war effort is receiving, while itseems content to allow Americans to fight and die so long asother nations pay the bills.   In contrast, those who worry about the extent of ournational wealth that has been sold off to foreign buyers seemalso to be resisting this tendency toward providing ourmilitary as the world's Hessians. It is self-deception toproclaim we are the only remaining superpower. Our societyreels from internal problems, and we are steadilyrelinquishing control over our own economic destiny.   Both factions must, and will, unite while the nation is atwar. But once the hostilities are over, the debate willbegin. If we are lucky it will be historic, and will shapeour nation much more clearly than any notion of a new worldorder.   ---   Mr. Webb was a Reagan Navy secretary. His novel &quot;Somethingto Die For&quot; (Morrow) appears next month.</TEXT></DOC>