<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900511-0136</DOCNO><DOCID>900511-0136.</DOCID><HL>   MEDICINE andamp; HEALTH (A Special Report): Living Right   ---   A Perilous Journey:   A Reporter Navigates the Treacherous   Aisles of a Supermarket, Seeking to Keep   Himself Happy and His Heart Healthy   ----   By Jerry E. Bishop</HL><DATE>05/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R29</SO><IN>FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)</IN><LP>   NEW YORK -- The navigator is ready to embark, his vessel ashopping cart. Peril is everywhere. To port lie reefs ofcholesterol; to starboard, shoals of saturated fat; ahead andbehind, outcrops of sodium. And all around he hears, luringhim toward shipwreck, the siren song of advertisers' claims.   His mission: get through all this and emerge fromWaldbaum's all-night supermarket, here in Queens, with a loadof groceries that won't foul up his heart.</LP><TEXT>   This proves almost as tough a sail as Odysseus had ingetting home from Troy. But Odysseus had no charts. Ournavigator does -- a sheaf of reports and studies fromscientists who have spent many years ferreting out the linksbetween fats in the diet, cholesterol in the blood, andcoronary heart disease, or atherosclerosis, the clogging ofthe coronary arteries by fatty deposits that leads to heartattacks.   Plunging down aisle No. 1, the navigator immediately spotsa major hazard and briskly steers around it. Eggs. This is aneasy passage. By now most people know that egg yolks areloaded with cholesterol and that too much cholesterol is bad.But how much is too much, and for whom?   Actually, cholesterol is necessary for life, and everybodyhas a base level of it, manufactured by the liver, in hisbloodstream. This level is genetically determined, and thereisn't much that can be done to change it. On top of that,however, everybody who eats animal products (plants have nocholesterol) has an extra amount of it in the bloodattributable to that diet. This cholesterol can be lowered byeating properly.   About 10% of the people don't have to worry much. Theyhave a genetically set base level of cholesterol so low, ortheir processing is so efficient, that they can eat prettymuch anything they want without clogging up their arteries.Another 10% are unlucky. They have such high inborn levelsthat they probably will develop coronary-artery disease nomatter how they restrict their diets.   The rest of the population may be warier about eggs thanit once was, but people still consume far too much dietarycholesterol -- an average of 450 milligrams a day, accordingto research by the American Heart Association and theAmerican Dietetic Association. None of it is needed.   &quot;It is useful to remember that there is no knownbiochemical reason for humans to ingest cholesterol at all,&quot;writes W. Virgil Brown, professor of medicine at Mount SinaiSchool of Medicine in New York. Vegetarians, he notes, eatless than 10 milligrams of cholesterol a day and remainhealthy.   Failing to discern any mass movement toward vegetarianism,the heart association recommends a daily intake of no morethan 300 milligrams a day for most people. For those who wantto be absolutely heart-healthy or who are at or near highblood cholesterol levels, 100 milligrams daily is the ration.   That's 700 a week. The navigator consults his charts. Theysay that one single, solitary egg yolk has 274 milligrams ofcholesterol. Sure, he can have an omelet -- if he is willingto eat nothing else but plants all week. He is not willing.Eggless, he sails on.   Stopping near another part of Dairy Reef, he employs arule of thumb for such food: If it's solid at roomtemperature, it's loaded with saturated fat and thereforeundesirable. More about fat later. It's enough to say nowthat saturated fat is the worst kind for the innards and thatAmericans eat way too much fat of all kinds -- representingan average of 36% of the calories they consume.   The heart association would like that cut to 30% or below.Way below, others insist; the Pritikin diet, one of the mostsevere, limits fat to 10% of calories. To our 59-year-oldshopper, whose belt has unaccountably been let out by twonotches over the past few years, all this means steering awayfrom butter, the &quot;hard&quot; margarines, and almost all cheeses.   He reads the fine print. Dorman's LoCal Swiss cheese looksgood (the label says &quot;80% less cholesterol&quot; without sayingwhat it is 80% less than), but it still has some cholesterolplus seven grams of fat. This is not high, but the navigatorknows that each thin slice will eat into the safety marginhe'll need in traversing the meat counter. He gets low-fatcottage cheese instead, along with a quart of skim milk and a&quot;soft&quot; margarine that has only one gram of saturated fat perspoonful.   He turns into aisle No. 2 -- and into a blinding fog ofhealth hype. Here is a sector that's eight cart-lengths longand seven shelves high, crammed with hundreds of bottles ofsalad dressing and cooking oils singing their own praises atthe expense of others -- &quot;94% saturated fat free,&quot; &quot;lower insaturated fat than Mazola, Wesson or Crisco,&quot; &quot;lowest insaturated fat,&quot; and on and on.   The navigator stops at Mazola, which recently had an ad inAmerican Health magazine. In the ad, a middle-aged jogger ina sweatsuit is saying, &quot;Great news] Mazola has now beentested and approved by the American Heart Association HeartGuide program. Even better news] A diet with Mazola broughtdown my cholesterol.&quot;   At first blush, impressive. But, for one thing, the heartassociation, under pressure from the federal government, hasscrapped the Heart Guide program. (Even before that, Mazolahad pulled out of the program.) And inspection of theevidence shows that the &quot;even better news&quot; is 17 years oldand that a lot more than the use of Mazola was behind thelowering of cholesterol.   The ad is based on an experiment in the early '70s byphysiologist Ancel Keys of the University of Minnesota, apioneer in linking diet to blood cholesterol and heartdisease. He put three dozen male college students on variousdiets and measured the change in their cholesterol. A dozenof them lowered it by an average of 17% over three weeks onone 3,000-calorie diet (more than a non-athletic middle-agedmale should eat). That diet replaced butter and shorteningwith corn oil like Mazola -- but it also involved substitutesfor meat, eggs and whole milk, changes that appear to havebeen considerably more important.   The lesson for the navigator? &quot;Caveat emptor.&quot; And readthe fine print.   He passes up aisle 2 for the moment and moves into thecalmer waters of the produce department. Here he can load upunworried by fat, cholesterol or sodium. Amid the fuss andfeathers over the first two, sodium sometimes gets forgotten,but it is an important contributor to hypertension andcongestive heart failure. Sodium encourages the retention ofwater and thus increases blood volume and pressure. Highpressure can cause arterial blowouts -- stroke and aneurysm-- and an aging, weakened heart can fail when required topump too high a volume of blood.   Traversing the aisles, the shopper contents himself withpicking out products that claim they are lower in sodium thancompeting brands and reading the labels to make sure theyare. (Meanwhile, the most effective measure to limit sodiumconsumption has been taken back in his kitchen, where some ofthe holes in the salt shaker have been taped over.)   Going on, he almost grounds his vessel on a shoal ofRedi-Wip non-dairy dessert topping. &quot;Contains no milk or milkfat,&quot; the label says seductively. But the lookout spies inthe fine print the revelation that &quot;partially hydrogenatedpalm kernel oil&quot; is the second most plentiful ingredient.Which calls for a return to the arcane world of fats.   There are three chemically different kinds of fats infood. In saturated fats, hydrogen atoms are bound to all thecarbon atoms in the molecule; it is saturated with hydrogen.In polyunsaturated fat, two or more pairs of carbon atomslack attached hydrogen. In monounsaturated fats, one pairlacks it.   Scientists don't understand the mechanism involved, butthey do know that replacing saturated fats in the diet withpolyunsaturated reduces blood cholesterol, and with itcoronary risk. The Redi-Wip? Its label fails to note thatpalm kernel oil is 82% saturated fat in its natural state.&quot;Partial hydrogenation&quot; makes it even more so. Feeling hisarteries constrict, the navigator goes on to meat andseafood.   He avoids cuts of meat heavily marbled or streaked withsolid fat, knowing that this very solidity means it is heavyin the saturated variety. Most animal fats are 45% saturated.A notable and healthy exception is fish; if fish carried sucha load of saturated fat, they'd become stiff as boards incold water and couldn't swim. So the navigator regretfullysweeps past the spareribs, a favorite, and picks up insteadsome whitefish chubs for Sunday breakfast.   He needs his charts for other choices, for there are nolabels and appearances deceive. Liver and shellfish, forexample, look lean and heart-healthy, but a heavy dose ofcholesterol lurks hidden in their tissues. A lean sirloin isbetter, but it still has 76 milligrams of cholesterol builtinto every three-ounce serving.   This doesn't mean sirloin, or foods like it, should beshunned. In shopping for a healthy heart, neither basicnutrition nor appetite appeal should be pitched overboardjust to shave off a few calories of fat or a few scoremilligrams of cholesterol. What any shopper needs to do ismake sensible trade-offs and watch portion sizes.   The navigator again consults the work of Dr. Brown ofMount Sinai medical center. The doctor smiles on theingestion of three or four portions of meat, fish and/orpoultry daily, so long as the ingester is &quot;a large person&quot;and isn't piggish. &quot;It is advisable to keep the portion sizeat four ounces for chicken and other poultry as well as formeat,&quot; he writes magisterially. &quot;This will be reduced toapproximately three ounces by broiling, providing a servingapproximately the size of a deck of playing cards.&quot;   The navigator, whose usual portion runs more to the sizeof a Robert Ludlum paperback, takes heed. A chicken and somelean round steak are taken on board.   Feeling righteous, he tacks over to baked goods and snackfoods, hoping to spend in tasty fashion some of the reservehe has amassed by being so sensible about everything else. Heblows 89 grams of fat on Kellogg's Common Sense oat-branwaffles, justifying the purchase thus: He likes waffles,there are no egg yolks in these waffles, and the oat bran issupposed to help ream out the arteries (there is nowconsiderable doubt that it does, to the consternation of anindustry that has filled the shelves with every conceivableoat-bran product short of toilet paper).   Other products look fairly benign and affordable under hisfat allowance, but the navigator discovers illusion here.Frookie Seven-Grain Oatmeal Cookies (&quot;no cholesterol, low insaturated fat&quot;) have only 45 calories -- per cookie. DoritosNacho Cheese tortilla chips (&quot;as always cholesterol free&quot;)have a fairly modest seven grams of fat -- for every 15chips. Who ever stopped at one cookie or 15 chips? No thanks.   Almost finished with his circumnavigation of the store,the shopper returns to the perils of aisle 2 and its 60 feetof vegetable oils clamoring for his attention. Most of themsay they are &quot;cholesterol free,&quot; which, as vegetableproducts, they always were anyway. The issue here is notcholesterol or calories -- almost all the oils have 120calories per tablespoonful -- but the type of fat theycontain.   So the label on Hollywood safflower oil (&quot;lower insaturated fat than Mazola, Wesson and Crisco&quot;) catches theeye. It has 11 grams of polyunsaturated fat -- the betterkind -- and only one gram of saturated fat. Not bad. Criscosoybean oil and Mazola corn oil have eight grams ofpolyunsaturated fat but two grams of the saturated kind.   But what about Puritan canola oil, which brags that it's94% saturated fat free, with four grams of polyunsaturatedfat and one gram of saturated fat? And Vineyard grapeseedoil, with the same composition? Are they better or worse thansafflower oil?   All these vegetable oils have 14 grams of total fat pertablespoon, but in every case the amounts given for saturatedand polyunsaturated fats don't add up to 14 grams. What isthe missing fat? It has to be monounsaturated, which bringsus to the sunny shores of the Mediterranean.   Advocates of heart-healthy nutrition have long pushed forreplacing saturated fats in the diet with polyunsaturatedones. But some studies indicate that although the latterlower total cholesterol, large amounts of them may increasethe risk of gallstones and reduce so-called HDL, the &quot;good&quot;form of cholesterol that actually protects against heartdisease.   The Greeks and the Italians may have an answer. Their dietis heavy in fat -- up to 40% of calories -- but they rarelyhave coronary disease. The fat they eat is mainlymonounsaturated. So Bertolli's olive oil, with 11 grams ofmonounsaturated fat, goes into the basket.   The navigator is at last ready for checkout. Only onenagging question bothers him. Will biscuits made with oliveoil taste as good as biscuits made with old-fashioned,bad-for-you Crisco shortening? He'll soon find out.   ---   Mr. Bishop reports on medicine and health from The WallStreet Journal's New York bureau.</TEXT></DOC>