<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900920-0167</DOCNO><DOCID>900920-0167.</DOCID><HL>   High-Tech Gamble:   Xerox Tries to Shed   Its Has-Been Image   With Big New Machine   ---   Will the Do-It-All `Xenith'   Revolutionize the Office   Or Join a List of Failures?   ---   One Last Legacy of PARC   ----   By Laurence Hooper   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   XRX SUNW ADBE</CO><IN>OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><LP>   While other companies spend millions to establishcorporate identities, Xerox Corp. yesterday launched aneffort to shed one.   Famous for inventing the copier and personal computer,then ceding the markets, Xerox is poised for a criticalcomeback bid. Success promises big returns from acomputerized approach to paperwork that may change businessas much as did its original copier. Says Chairman DavidKearns: &quot;This is a really, really big deal for us.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   But another failure -- and there have been several overthe past 20 years -- could see Xerox outflanked again withits own inventions. And that would cripple the company'shopes of ever participating in an information age itpredicted 15 years ago, says Charles Pesko, chief executiveof BIS Marketing Information, a market-research firm.   &quot;They have to succeed,&quot; says Mr. Pesko. &quot;At this stage,they have no other choice.&quot; Echoes David Nadler, a consultantwho has advised Xerox: &quot;There's only so long you can defend amaturing technology like the copier.&quot;   In Act I of a two-part rollout, Xerox yesterday unveiled awide-ranging package of computers and software intended tohelp people in offices work better together. While notunique, the technology plays off Xerox's strengths:Easy-to-use, consistent displays; good communications; and anapproach that emphasizes work groups. As in almost everycomputer announcement these days, Xerox claimed its productswould work with those of other major manufacturers.   But yesterday's introductions were just setting the scene.Act II comes Oct. 2, when Xerox will augment this vision byintroducing a new kind of technology: a $200,000 machine thatcombines high-speed copying, printing, scanning, facsimileand computing capabilities in a single unit.   The output is aimed at matching the quality usuallyassociated with offset printing.   This new machine, known inside the company as Xenith, ismore than 15 years in the making. Though no one will put aprice tag on its development, insiders say it is thecompany's largest-ever project -- in a company that spends$800 million a year on Randamp;D. For the first time since 1959,when the Xerox 914 copier rolled out, the firm is pushing anentirely new approach to paper work.   Xenith will hook up with the rest of Xerox's computingproducts and with other computers to provide what the firmwill tout as a seamless solution for companies swamped withpaper work. Acting as an exchange point between the world ofpaper and the world of computers, the big multifunctiondevice is Xerox's first digital copier and is designed tobecome part of a family of machines that would be thecompany's bread-and-butter revenue producer through the1990s, according to industry executives.   Essentially, Xenith will be able to take in everything anoffice now receives -- paper documents, computer information,pictures, graphics, even mail -- and then massage it, changeit and redistribute it.   It will put a publishing-grade printing device in thehands of casual computer users. Using Xenith, a telephonerepresentative at an insurance company will be able to send abound copy of a particular policy with the push of a button;a desk jockey at a government agency could send out 100 bidrequests on demand, complete with instruction manuals,without visiting a stockroom piled with forms.   But the machine works both ways: Since it also convertspaperbound images to electronic data, it will allow computerusers to manipulate and combine documents on-screen. With a&quot;jukebox&quot; of optical disks, it could even serve as thebackbone of a filing system that everyone in the companycould access.   Taken together, Xerox's two announcements embody a veryparticular view of how computing will develop over the nextfew decades: Increasingly dependent on decentralized networksof computers, the argument goes, firms will be forced to lookto better software and intelligent, highly efficientperipheral devices for productivity gains. Documents willhave to exist primarily in computers, while paper becomesjust another means of display.   The announcements also aim to alter Xerox's popular imageas the leading has-been in office equipment. Despite costlyefforts to become a player in computers and finance, Xeroxhas repeatedly failed to shed its identity as the firm thatpioneered the stand-alone copier, then saw its 100% marketshare devoured almost entirely by more cost-efficientJapanese producers.   Xerox's image in high-tech circles is equallyunflattering. It came up with many of the computer industry'smost important innovations, only to let other firms copy itsideas while it invested in outdated technology and dubioussidelines.   &quot;This is a company that has been painfully slow torecognize and commercialize its own best technology,&quot; saysAlex Henderson, an analyst who follows Xerox forPrudential-Bache Securities Inc.   Xenith is likely Xerox's last chance to take advantage ofa flowering of genius that took place at its Palo AltoResearch Center (PARC) in Palo Alto, Calif., during the1970s. That produced breakthroughs like the personalcomputer, the laser printer and the &quot;mouse,&quot; which have sofar benefited almost every electronics firm except Xerox.   Xenith is perhaps the only part of that legacy that hasn'tbeen plundered so far. Originally code-named Harvest, theproject started as a labor of love for a tiny team of Xeroxengineers, marketers and futurists who had been directed tocome up with technologies that would supplant traditionalcopiers before competitors beat them to the punch.   &quot;It was like a brave new world,&quot; recalls John Shoemaker,who oversaw the team for several years and now works at SunMicrosystems Inc. &quot;We were looking at everything, with nopreconceptions. It was hard to ask anyone their opinion ofour work, because nothing like it had ever existed before.&quot;   Mr. Shoemaker remembers nights and weekends in the late1970s when engineers' spouses would come in to sort machineparts so that prototypes could be assembled on time. Fromthis primal tinkering evolved a massive machine that requiresmore lines of computer code to control it than many mainframecomputers.   &quot;This will be very different than anything else that isout there,&quot; says William Lowe, the Xerox executive vicepresident imported from International Business Machines Corp.to push Xenith out the door.   Mr. Lowe is coy about details of the Xenith machine --indeed, he carefully avoids acknowledging its existence --even after yesterday's announcement. But he callscomputerized documents &quot;the big news of the 1990s,&quot; in muchthe same way personal computers were the big news of the1980s.   He knows a bit about that subject: He is sometimesreferred to as the godfather of IBM's original personalcomputer.   In an interview, Chairman Kearns leaves no doubt thatXenith and its successors are the key to returning his firmto double-digit revenue growth it last saw in the mid-1980s,&quot;rather than clunking along at 6% or 7%.&quot; He also predictsthat the new products would enable Xerox's $12.4 billionoffice-products division to deliver annual returns of 17% to19% in the mid-1990s.   Adds Paul Allaire, Xerox's new chief executive, in aseparate interview: &quot;This will show people that all the moneywe've been investing in research and development wasn'twasted.&quot;   But while Xenith is clearly impressive, its success is farfrom assured. For one thing, Xerox is still busy extricatingitself from a morass of problems caused by its last attemptto make a name outside of copiers, an ill-fated foray led byMr. Kearns into financial services during the early 1980s.   That move had some benefits: The financial servicesdivision did well for a few years, giving Xerox breathingroom to implement a quality program that helped itsonce-dominant copiers regain market share against Japanesecompetition. But the diversion has recently become as heavy aburden as the ancient millstone Mr. Allaire keeps propped inhis office in Stamford, Conn.   At the company's annual meeting in May, Mr. Kearnsconceded that a dismal performance by Xerox's $5.4 billionfinancial services arm will cause profits to drop in 1990,even before a $375 million write-off taken in the firstquarter to cover bad real-estate investments. In 1989, thecompany earned $704 million, or $6.41 a share, on revenue of$17.6 billion. Mr. Kearns didn't suggest how much profitswill fall this year.   Mr. Allaire has stopped internal subsidies to financialservices, and has announced his intention to sell or closeany business that can't return at least 15% on equity.   Then there's the competition. By setting itself up as aseller of office systems rather than stand-alone copiers andprinters, Xerox is poaching on some pretty serious turf. Manylarge computer companies have articulated plans to tiecomputers, output devices and software together, and Xerox'svision is yet another option in a world that's confusedalready.   &quot;They may have a hard time showing that this is somethingdifferent enough to merit attention,&quot; says analyst PeterEnderlin of Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co.   Moreover, companies like IBM and Unisys Corp. got a jumpon Xerox earlier this year by announcing systems designed towoo exactly the market Xenith is aimed at: Large-scalepushers of paper like banks, insurance companies andgovernment contractors.   Xerox will attempt to play down such conflicts by makingXenith take advantage of everyone else's computers andsoftware. But the company was beaten to market last week byEastman Kodak Co., whose well-received new LionHearthigh-speed printing system also connects to a wide range ofdesktop computers.   Though LionHeart apparently isn't as versatile as Xenith,Kodak promises to offer enhancements. Kodak says it sells for&quot;less than $250,000, fully configured.&quot;   Meanwhile, Japanese companies like Ricoh Corp., Canon Inc.and Sharp Corp. are hoping to ambush Xerox's multifunctionambitions by introducing low-end machines that copy, print,scan and fax. National Semiconductor Corp. recently unveileda microchip that will enable such machines, which aresometimes generically called Hydras, to be made cheaply.   With cheap Hydras being shared by work groups -- or evenwith one on every desk -- the appeal of a powerful machinelike Xenith, which is more reminiscent of a mainframe than apersonal computer, may be limited to a small number ofpaper-intensive companies.   &quot;We believe that the multifunction market will take offonly when the price drops low enough,&quot; says Les Wilson,corporate manager of imaging systems at NationalSemiconductor. &quot;I hate to say it, but right now it looks likethe Japanese have the technology to dominate this market.&quot;   Finally, there's the Xenith machine itself. While most whohave seen it are impressed with Xenith's technology, whichcan do just about anything short of making toast, they worryabout whether it offers enough advances to justify its highprice.   Says one prominent Xerox alumnus: &quot;It's a neat machine,and a worthwhile concept, but for hundreds of thousands ofdollars they'll have a lot of convincing to do.&quot;   &quot;If Xerox says it is trying to create a new market, werespect that,&quot; says Canon's Haruo Murase. &quot;We like theiridea.&quot; But, he adds with a laugh, &quot;a $200,000 machine is avery, very expensive way to test that market.&quot;   Mr. Allaire agrees that the major challenge with Xenithwill be marketing, but argues that the business environmentis moving in his favor. Printing of all sorts -- copying,laser printing, offset printing -- accounts for $80 billion ayear, he says, and Xerox soon will be positioned to competefor three-quarters of that market.   And while Xenith is clearly aimed at the high end of themarket, where Xerox has traditionally been most successful,company officials indicate that a workgroup-size Xenith islikely in the next few years; a desktop version is furtheraway, if Xerox decides to build one at all.   But success won't initially come from a choice ofmachines, analysts say. It will rest on whether peoplebelieve Xerox's view of how paper work should be done in acomputerized environment.   Mr. Allaire says most top executives aren't aware thattheir companies spend 10% or more of their revenue producingand manipulating documents, and that the area is ripe for amajor advance in productivity. He uses the super-efficientAmerican Express charge-card billing system, to which Xeroxcontributed, as an example.   &quot;We have to show people that kind of thing,&quot; he says. &quot;Wehave to ennoble the document somehow.&quot;   To that end, Xerox tapped the well-connected Mr. Lowe toline up an impressive list of industry heavyweights ascollaborators, from Sun to Netframe Systems Inc., a maker ofpowerful &quot;file server&quot; computers, to Adobe Systems Inc.,which controls the software that allows computers print anddisplay type.   Those alliances, coupled with Xerox's commitment toconnect its products with just about every computer inexistence, have convinced at least some people that Xerox canfinally change its image and emerge as a player in thecomputer industry.   &quot;The probability is on Xerox's side this time,&quot; says AjitKapur of Meta Group, a market-research firm in Stamford. &quot;Acompany can miss only so many opportunities before it getsthings right.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>