<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900412-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>900412-0070.</DOCID><HL>   Iran's Economy -- Hostage to the Hostages' Fate   ----   By Dilip Hiro</HL><DATE>04/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   While the freeing by the pro-Libyan Fatah RevolutionaryCouncil of a Frenchwoman, her Belgian companion and theirchild born in captivity is welcome news, it has no bearing onthe fate of the 17 American and European hostages held bypro-Iranian groups in Lebanon.   In Iran, following promising media reports earlier thisyear of an imminent release of one or more American hostages,a stalemate continues between pro- and anti-releasepoliticians. However, the balance of forces may now beshifting toward the moderates, which holds the possibility ofthe release of an American hostage in the next few weeks.</LP><TEXT>   On one side is pragmatic President Ali Akbar HashemiRafsanjani. On the other, hardliner Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, aformer Interior Minister and now a powerful member of theIranian Parliament.   The raison d'etre for abducting Westerners in Lebanondisappeared when the war between Iran and Iraq ended inAugust 1988. The pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon had used thistactic to inhibit the U.S. from mounting direct attacks onIranian targets during the Gulf War. The price of any suchaction would have been the execution of one or more of theAmerican and British captives (particularly Terry Waite, aBriton who had received much publicity trying to secure therelease of American hostages). That this was a real threatbecame clear when, following the American raid on the Libyancapital in April 1986 by U.S. warplanes based in Britain, twoBritish hostages were reportedly &quot;bought&quot; by the Libyanleader, Col. Moammar Gadhafi, and executed.   Mr. Rafsanjani rightly considers the resolution of thehostage crisis as the essential first step toward normalizingrelations with major Western nations, particularly the U.S.,in order to improve the beleaguered Iranian economy. Tostrengthen his case, Mr. Rafsanjani approached Sheik MuhammadHussein Fadlallah, the leading ideologue of the pro-IranianHezbollah movement in Lebanon, to endorse his stance. He didso by publicly urging the unconditional release of Westernhostages.   Encouraged by this, Ali Muhammad Besharati, Iran's deputyforeign minister, told the pro-Rafsanjani Tehran Times onMarch 18 that all Western hostages held in Lebanon could befree by next January, and that such a development would begradual.   But Mr. Mohtashemi continues to oppose the move. At hisbehest a majority of parliamentary deputies urged thegovernment, on March 20, to refrain from negotiating to gainfreedom for the Western hostages in Lebanon.   Moreover, Mr. Mohtashemi has as much influence, if notmore, over the Lebanese captors as does Sheik Fadlallah. Asthe Iranian ambassador in Damascus, Syria, in the mid-1980s,Mr. Mohtashemi was instrumental in establishing militantShiite groups in Lebanon, which among other things resortedto abducting Westerners.   Mr. Mohtashemi argues that once the Western powers haverecovered all their hostages, they will wreak bloodyvengeance on those responsible for their incarceration, andthe latter will have nothing to retaliate with.   But a hostage release need not lead to violentretaliation. One way in which the abductors can protectthemselves is by agreeing to release their captives in onesand twos over a period of many months. This would allow theWestern governments and their citizens to dissipate theiraccumulated frustration and anger gradually, and slide intothe mood of &quot;Let bygones be bygones.&quot;   Also, of the five groups involved in hostage-taking, acouple are amenable to pressures from Mr. Rafsanjani. As forthe recalcitrant ones, they can be brought into line with thethreat of terminating the subsidies they receive from Tehran.   On balance, therefore, the release of an American hostageduring the next few weeks is not unlikely, particularly whenthe Tehran Times yesterday called for the unconditionalrelease of the hostages. This will be a useful trial balloonfor all the concerned parties.   The crucial element in this long-running saga is the quietpersistence with which Mr. Rafsanjani has pursued this mattersince assuming presidential office last August. He sees theresolution of the hostage issue as an integral part of hisstrategy to repair Iran's faltering economy.   With inflation at 60% and unemployment at 25%, the Iranianeconomy is in a deplorable state. According to officialsources, based on the fixed prices of 1974, per-capita incomewas halved between 1978 and 1988. Part of the reason for thisdecline lies with the population growth rate of 3.4%, one ofthe highest in the world.   &quot;While Ayatollah Khomeini was alive and the war was on,the regime constantly urged the faithful to fight for Islam,and think of the `hereafter,'&quot; said Irfan Parvez, executiveeditor of the Tehran Times. &quot;But now Rasfanjani wants tostress the `here.' And he knows that to repair the economy weneed assistance from abroad.&quot;   Mr. Rafsanjani knows too that there is no longer thecharismatic figure of Ayatollah Khomeini to inspire themasses to suffer economic deprivation in the name of thesacred cause of Islam and Islamic revolution. He thereforehas no choice but to tackle the economic crisis.   He is making headway. After many months of skillfullobbying he finally managed to secure parliamentary approvalfor the $433 billion Five Year Plan for 1989-93. It assumesforeign loans of $27 billion. This is a comparatively modestshare of the plan, and shows that Mr. Rafsanjani took intoaccount the opposition that radical parliamentarians maintaintoward foreign credits. They fear that economic dependence onoutside powers would undermine Iran's political independence,which is widely regarded as the Islamic revolution's majorattainment.   In the domestic economy, the radicals favor a strongpublic sector. They also want to provide incentives to localcapital to invest in manufacturing rather than in trade.Aware of this, the Rafsanjani administration recently offeredpublicly owned mines for sale to the private sector. So farthe response has been poor, mainly because the prospectiveprivate buyers are unsure that they would have adequateaccess to electric power and foreign exchange for buyingmachinery and spare parts for the mines.   The ease with which hard currencies can be obtained byIranians depends on how well-disposed Western governments andfinancial institutions are toward Iran. They, in turn, aremonitoring the progress of the Rafsanjani camp inconsolidating its hold over the political and economicinstitutions of the state.   Nothing would signal the advance of the Rafsanjani campmore convincingly to Western capitals than its success insecuring the release of Western hostages in Lebanon --gradually or precipitately.   ---   Mr. Hiro, a London-based journalist, wrote &quot;Holy Wars: TheRise of Islamic Fundamentalism&quot; (Routledge, 1989).</TEXT></DOC>