<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900604-0130</DOCNO><DOCID>900604-0130.</DOCID><HL>   Workplace (A Special Report): Higher Tech   ---   Putting It All Together:   Computer-Integrated Factories Are Said to Be the   Savior of Industry; But Can Anyone Make the System Work?   ----   By Stephen Kreider Yoder</HL><DATE>06/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R24</SO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)SOFTWARE (SOF)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   THE ROBOT'S GLORY days are over.   Forget that old vision of the factory of the future withautomatons humming away in eerie, unmanned buildings whilethey churn out world-beating widgets. U.S. companies have anew script for the future factory, and robots, while stillhaving a supporting part in the drama, have lost the leadrole.</LP><TEXT>   The secret to competitive manufacturing, the new scenariogoes, lies less in heavy automation and more in usingcomputers to gather information from the factory floor andswap it with information from every other aspect of abusiness -- from the sales department to product engineeringto the shipping docks.   Consider how Motorola Inc. makes and sells its Bravopocket pagers. On May 5, a salesman in Foster City, Calif.,types an order into his Macintosh computer for 150 blackBravo pagers, specifies the unique code that will cause eachpager to beep and asks for delivery in two weeks. The orderzips over phone lines to a mainframe computer in a newfactory in Boynton Beach, Fla. The computer automaticallyschedules the 150 pagers for production May 15, orders theproper components, and, on the day after assembly, informsthe shipping docks to express-mail them to Pacific TelesisGroup in California.   Motorola's two-year-old operation is, in manufacturingparlance, &quot;computer integrated.&quot; Simply put, the factory'smachines and computers speak the same language as thecomputers in sales and shipping. The payback: Using mostlythe same type of machines that populate the company's olderfactory floors, the Florida facility makes pagers at the samecost as does Motorola's Singapore plant, which has cheaperlabor but isn't computer integrated. And the domestic plantcan deliver, overnight, custom-built pagers that used to takenearly six weeks to supply.   Computer-integrated manufacturing, or CIM, is increasinglythe U.S. manufacturer's mantra. Most manufacturers haveappointed CIM managers. A $35 billion-a-year industry hassprung up to supply CIM equipment and software, according toAdvanced Manufacturing Research, a Cambridge, Mass., researchfirm.   No wonder. CIM dangles the promise of a comeback forAmerican manufacturers, who for a decade have been criticizedas being inept. And it does so at a relatively small cost.CIM demands innovations that are heavy on software andnetworking technology, where the U.S. is strong, and light onrobots and machines, where Japan is stronger. &quot;If we get ouract together,&quot; says Jerry McCracken, manager of industrialprograms at San Francisco's Bechtel Group Inc., &quot;this is oneof the few areas left where we can get our competitiveadvantage.&quot;   But getting it together may be a tall order. More aphilosophy than a technology, CIM (pronounced sim) requires acompany to break down barriers between departments, tostreamline with quality control and just-in-timemanufacturing, and to give every machine and employee theability to talk with each other and &quot;watch&quot; a product as itmoves through the entire corporate pipeline. &quot;CIM is acultural change: People that over the years have learned towork separately need to find ways to work together again,&quot;says Rody Salas, senior vice president of Allen-Bradley Co.&quot;The computer is being used as a tool that allows you tointegrate these functions that have been separated over theyears.&quot;   The academics, manufacturing executives, vendors andconsultants who support CIM dissociate themselves fromAmerica's automation fetish in the 1970s and 1980s, whendoomsayers warned of a robot gap with Japan and companiesspent billions of dollars to replace humans with machines.Those robots were meant to cut labor costs; CIM's main goalis to improve competitiveness by cutting the time it takes toturn ideas into products and to get existing products tomarket. &quot;The idea is to cut cycle time so you can catch thecrest of the wave&quot; of demand, says CIM-systems manager KeithTurner of Levi Strauss andamp; Co., &quot;rather than following behindand picking up the pieces.&quot;   One trouble with robots is that although they are great infactories that churn out masses of a single product, they areof less use in today's &quot;flexible manufacturing&quot; facilities.Such a flexible factory is Apple Computer Inc.'s newMacintosh plant in Fremont, Calif., which uses littleautomation equipment but can assemble four different Macmodels at one time. By using CIM to tie the factory'scomputers into sales and delivery systems, Apple plans toswitch to what it calls &quot;build to order,&quot; which allows thecompany to make only what customers have requested andeliminate the need for large inventories.   Another problem with robots was that they often merelytook over the same inefficient tasks that humans hadpreviously performed on poorly run assembly lines. What'smore, companies tended to create &quot;islands of automation&quot; thataffected only specific tasks. That meant a design computerhere, an assembly robot or testing machine there, maybe abar-code reader at the shipping bay. But these &quot;islands&quot;didn't share information about where a product was in thepipeline.   That's what Federal-Mogul Corp. found last year when ittook a hard look at its oilseal factories. The Southfield,Mich., autoparts company was getting battered by U.S. andforeign rivals that could develop new seals in under 10weeks; it took Federal nearly 18. In April 1989, Federalhired Ernst andamp; Young, the consulting firm, to find out why.   The firm found chaos under a veneer of automation. Federalhad invested heavily in automation, but departments were runas fiefdoms whose employees barely communicated and whosemachines didn't understand each other's data. After asalesman sent in an order for a new seal, the paper worktypically spent weeks unnoticed on an engineer's desk.Blueprints sat for weeks more in manufacturing. And salesmen,ill informed of the factories' capabilities, often wouldagree to sell a part that was impossible to make, causingcostly delays. Federal &quot;was a traditional hierarchicalmanufacturing organization,&quot; says Lawrence Smith, Federal'smanager for technical services. &quot;We saw that if it continued,the seal group would be out of business.&quot;   Ernst andamp; Young prescribed a heavy dose of CIM that strippeddivisions of their autonomy and reorganized them into&quot;business-unit teams.&quot; The teams -- comprising salesmen,distribution experts, and engineers from manufacturing,testing and product design -- had to see a product throughfrom order to delivery. Federal bought software to connectits islands of automation, tying together its work stations,personal computers and milling machines.   Now a salesman taps into a computer that will quickly tellhim whether the part can be built and how much a new sealwill cost. The system schedules the part for manufacture orsends new-part dimensions to a design computer, whichgenerates electronic blueprints that flow directly intofactory machines. Without introducing a single new robot,Federal trimmed to 20 days the average time it takes to turnaround a new product; in urgent cases it can do it in threedays. And the cost was only &quot;several million dollars,&quot;Federal says, because relatively little capital investmentwas involved.   Military spending cuts and fierce competition for fewerdefense contracts were what spurred McDonnell Douglas Corp.to spend $10 million to begin introducing CIM to a Floridamissile factory in 1989. Tomahawk missiles once traveledthrough the plant accompanied by a two-inch-thick manual. Thecompany installed computer systems that automaticallyschedule manufacturing tasks, keep track of labor, and sendinstructions to computer screens at work stations along theassembly line, thus doing away with paper. Workers have timeto do 30% more work now that they don't shuffle paper, saysWalter Kurgas, deputy director of the Tomahawk operation.   Results like these are spurring a broad range ofindustries to consider CIM. Bechtel, for instance, has helpedintroduce CIM in a British potato-chip company, in Egypt'sstate petroleum works and in a California jail, whereautomated carts deliver food and laundry. Early CIM converts-- McDonnell Douglas, Hewlett-Packard Co., Digital EquipmentCorp. and Allen-Bradley, to name a few -- are doing a briskbusiness selling the know-how they've acquired to CIMneophytes.   Still, CIM is tall on talk but short on reality. On closeinspection, most companies are implementing only pieces ofCIM. Motorola's pager plant, for example, hasn't yet tiedinformation from the factory into an accounting system. Only11% of the manufacturers in a recent Ernst andamp; Young surveyrated themselves as &quot;high-level users&quot; of CIM.   And technological roadblocks sometimes remain. Levi's,which wants to integrate most aspects of its business by1992, has found gaps that defy integration by computers.Fashion designers can use computers to create new fashions,but pattern makers must still take those concepts andmanually cut patterns that are then converted to computercode and sent to cutting machines on the factory floor.   Technology, however, isn't the real problem. In a surveyof Fortune 500 manufacturers by Advanced ManufacturingResearch, 70% of the respondents said that people were themain stumbling block to integrating manufacturing; only 9%cited technological snafus.   At McDonnell's missile plant, for instance, the accountingdepartment has been reluctant to accept computer-generatedaccounts of how much labor was spent making a missile, saysMr. Kurgas. Under the current system, a worker fills out atime card by hand and mails it to labor accounting, wheresomeone checks it for errors and then punches the data intothat department's computer. Under the proposed system, acomputer would read a code on a worker's employee badge,record the worker's time and send it directly to thelabor-accounting computer. Accounting-department employees&quot;are reluctant to change what they currently have until yousystematically prove to them it does at least as well,&quot; Mr.Kurgas says. &quot;There develops a consistent and considerableroadblock until you prove what you set out to do.&quot;   Another people problem for CIM companies: Suppliers mustbe let into the integration game so they can automaticallykeep tabs on what parts the manufacturer needs when. Althoughfraternal ties with vendors have been common for decades inJapan, U.S. companies &quot;tend to regard the supplier as theirenemy,&quot; says Terry Ozan, national director of manufacturingservices at Ernst andamp; Young.   Changing that view is tough, as DEC found last year whenit began a program of sharing its CIM expertise with itssuppliers. Its aim was to help them refine quality and createmore reliable delivery schedules to match DEC's demand forjust-in-time deliveries at its disk-drive plan. For decades,executives have been told to keep suppliers at arm's length,the better to squeeze them for lower prices and to keep themfrom leaking secrets. But, says Walter Bonin, a DEC planningmanager, suddenly the company is supposed to do a turnaboutand condone sharing of production information and technologywith suppliers. &quot;Flags have been raised in the legaldepartment&quot; and in the purchasing department, he says.   For defense contractors, the Pentagon is a party to bereckoned with. It is pressing McDonnell and other contractorsto develop CIM systems that allow the Defense Department to&quot;watch&quot; a missile go through the entire manufacturing processto ensure that contractual requirements are being met. Thedepartment &quot;also wants to look through us to our majorcontractors with same visibility,&quot; says Mr. Kurgas.   Making these and other changes is wrenching for manycompanies, and CIM believers concede that theirs is ayearslong pilgrimage. Their ultimate goal is an elusivenirvana called computer-integrated enterprise, or CIE. Thatmeans that a company must reach beyond manufacturing to hooktogether sales, factories, shipping, procurement, accountingand even outside suppliers into one gregarious computerizedfamily. &quot;We talk about the CIM journey,&quot; says Keith Glick,manager of engineering at DEC's disk-drive factory inColorado Springs, Colo. &quot;It's the journey to enterpriseintegration.&quot;   Can most companies successfully reach that destination?Mr. Turner, Levi's CIM manager, acknowledges that problemslie ahead. &quot;The biggest drawback to CIM,&quot; he says, &quot;is thatyou're searching for the Holy Grail. You may never find it.&quot;   ---   Mr. Yoder is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal'sSan Francisco bureau.</TEXT></DOC>