<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900601-0067</DOCNO><DOCID>900601-0067.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Bush, Gorbachev Fail to Settle Differences   Over Germany on the First Day of Summit   ---   New Dispute Concerning   Trade Treaty, Lithuania   Threatens Grain Deal   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)AEROSPACE (ARO)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush and Soviet President MikhailGorbachev failed to settle deep differences over Germany onthe opening day of their summit meeting, and a new superpowerdispute emerged that threatens to torpedo a lucrativeU.S.-Soviet grain deal.   As the summit opened yesterday, Soviet negotiators hintedthey might not sign the five-year pact to buy American grain,apparently in an effort to get President Bush to sign a newU.S.-Soviet trade treaty. Mr. Bush has said he is reluctantto sign the new trade treaty because of Moscow's continuingresistance to Lithuanian independence. Both agreements werenegotiated earlier and await only the leaders' signatures.</LP><TEXT>   Late yesterday, U.S. officials said the chances of signingeither treaty were poor -- unless Messrs. Bush and Gorbachevthemselves can break the logjam by this afternoon. Thepresident said trade would be on the agenda today.   The grain and trade dispute was carried out behind thescenes of the summit and wasn't referred to by either leaderor their spokesmen. The public focus of the summit's firstday was a spirited debate the two leaders held on the moreimportant matter of German unification and whether a unitedGermany should join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.   Mr. Gorbachev caused a stir by suggesting the session hadproduced progress on the German issue, and the two presidentsissued a statement saying they had assigned Secretary ofState James Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister EduardShevardnadze to discuss the matter further.   But American officials close to the session said neitherside put forward any fresh schemes for resolving the Germanproblem. They said Mr. Gorbachev repeated earlier suggestionsthat a united Germany could belong to both NATO and theWarsaw Pact and that full German sovereignty be deferred. Mr.Bush repeated U.S. assurances, already conveyed by Mr. Baker,that NATO will change into a more political grouping and thatthe West will support a cut in German armed forces in laternegotiations.   In addition, the Soviets delivered a letter to the Bushadministration repeating a proposal that the 35-nationConference on Security and Cooperation in Europe betransformed into a full-blown security system that mightreplace NATO. The U.S. has repeatedly rejected that idea.   The U.S. officials said the decision to ask the twoforeign ministers to discuss Germany further was aface-saving measure adopted to imply that more progress waspossible. But the two presidents conceded Germany wouldn't besettled at this summit, and no Baker-Shevardnadze meetingsspecifically on Germany were scheduled as of last night. Mr.Bush plans to call West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl todayto reassure him that no deals were cut.   On the trade issue, American officials said Mr.Shevardnadze and other top Gorbachev aides emphasizedrepeatedly in yesterday's meetings that a signed trade treatywas of special political importance to Moscow, even though itwouldn't result in an early expansion of trade.   The trade pact would be a valuable political symbol forMr. Gorbachev, who needs to demonstrate at home that he canimprove economic relations with the West. But failure toconclude the pending five-year grain deal would have a muchgreater immediate economic impact, casting doubt on whetherU.S. farmers will be able to sell Moscow 10 million metrictons or more of grain annually, as planned.   Today, the two superpower leaders are expected to sign araft of other treaties and agreements. The most important ofthese is a statement setting out the major elements of astrategic nuclear-arms control pact to be signed later thisyear and establishing goals for a further nuclear-arms treatyto be negotiated, starting immediately thereafter.   In addition, the two leaders will sign treaties to slashinto their chemical-weapons arsenals and set up rules forverifying curbs on nuclear testing. Other officials will signaccords increasing air and maritime links and studentexchanges.   Right from the summit's opening, Mr. Bush coupled progressin superpower relations to the U.S. plea that Moscow startnegotiating an independence deal with Lithuania.   &quot;The agreements we've reached cannot cause us to losesight of some of the differences that remain,&quot; he told Mr.Gorbachev minutes after greeting the Soviet leader on theWhite House lawn. &quot;Lithuania is one such issue. We believethat good-faith dialogue between the Soviet leaders andrepresentatives of the Baltic peoples is the proper approach,and we hope to see that process go forward.&quot;   Mr. Gorbachev appeared bitter about Lithuania's decisionto declare independence from the U.S.S.R. At a Soviet Embassyluncheon, he told a group of U.S. intellectuals and filmstars: &quot;Only in Lithuania, they can overnight decide aquestion about seceding from the Soviet Union, and after thatthey are at a loss what to do, and we are at a loss what todo.&quot;   The Soviets badly want better trade ties with the U.S.&quot;It's quite unnatural that we, being almost the two biggestpowers in the world with a huge economic and scientific andtechnical potential are having so little in trade andcooperation,&quot; said Arkady Maslennikov, President Gorbachev'sspokesman.   The Soviets are arguing that their Lithuanian policy is aninternal Soviet matter and therefore shouldn't interfere withU.S.-Soviet cooperation. Beyond that, they are assertingthat, contrary to U.S. charges, the Kremlin isn't blockingLithuania from seceding from the Soviet Union but onlyinsisting that it do so through the slow process outlined inSoviet law.   Those arguments aren't enough to satisfy the U.S. Yet Mr.Bush has enough sympathy for Mr. Gorbachev's position that hehas tried to prevent it from disrupting superpowercooperation on broader political and arms-control matters.But Mr. Gorbachev, by balking on the grain agreement, appearsto be trying to demonstrate that a failure to cooperate oneconomic matters can harm the U.S. as well as the SovietUnion.   U.S. officials believe Moscow has chosen to use the graindeal as a weapon because the Soviet harvest has been good andU.S. farmers can be expected to press Washington to save thedeal by signing the trade pact.   Even if the trade agreement were to be signed, it would bemore of a political prize than an economic one for thebeleaguered Mr. Gorbachev. Administration officials sayPresident Bush could sign the pact but refrain from sendingit to the Senate, which has warned that it won't be ratifieduntil the Lithuania crisis is settled.   What's more, the treaty merely would establish the legalframework to permit increased trade. Unless it is accompaniedby the granting to the Soviets of most-favored nation tarifftreatment, it will have little impact.   However, Mr. Bush won't grant such treatment to Moscowuntil the Soviet Legislature gives final passage to aliberalized emigration bill. The bill was supposed to come toa vote yesterday in Moscow, but has been removed from theSoviet legislative calendar, and U.S. officials don't expectit to be passed during the summit, despite continuing rumorsto the contrary.   The grain accord, which is to take effect Jan. 1, wouldincrease the minimum amount of U.S. wheat, feed grains,soybeans and other commodities that Soviets would buy fromthe U.S. each year and would give the Soviets greaterflexibility in their purchases.   Among other things, the new deal calls for an 11% rise inSoviet purchases to 10 million metric tons of grain a yearfrom about nine million currently; of this amount, at leastfour million tons would have to be wheat and another fourmillion tons would have to be corn and other feed grains. Forthe first time since the inaugural 1973 agreement, barley andsorghum grain would count as feed grains.   In addition, the new accord would allow the Soviets to buyas much as 14 million tons of grain a year without having toclear it with U.S. officials beforehand. The previous limitwas 12 million tons.   The Soviet Union is the largest foreign market for U.S.grain.   Bush administration officials said that even if a grainagreement isn't signed at this summit, it could be completedlater this summer if the impasse over Lithuania and thebroader trade treaty is broken.   ---   Bruce Ingersoll contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>