<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910819-0115</DOCNO><DOCID>910819-0115.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Multifaceted Replies on Multiculturalism</HL><DATE>08/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9</SO><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Irving Kristol has gone too far (&quot;The Tragedy ofMulticulturalism,&quot; editorial page, July 31). Pillorying thebroad range of attempts to respond to our growing culturaldiversity by invoking such excesses as teaching that&quot;`Western civilization' was invented by black Egyptians andfeloniously appropriated by the Greeks&quot; is about as useful,and serves the same purpose, as the Bush presidentialcampaign's use of Willie Horton: manipulation of publicopinion through fear of change, rather than providing thefacts.   The fact is that, racially and ethnically, America'sschool-age population is increasingly unlike its pastgenerations. According to the 1990 census, 15% of today'spreschoolers are black, 13% Hispanic, 3% Asian and PacificIslander, 1% American Indian and 6% &quot;other.&quot; Compare thatwith Mr. Kristol's contemporaries (people aged 70 to 74 in1990): 8% black, 3.6% Hispanic, 1.5% Asian and PacificIslander, 0.4% American Indian and 1% &quot;other.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Demographers have made much of the change from a majorityof families with children to a majority of families withoutchildren. But that applies only to white families. Two-thirdsof black families have children under age 18, as do nearly70% of Hispanics and 63% of &quot;other&quot; races. This ensures thatthe school-age population will become even less a product of&quot;what we call `Western civilization'&quot; in the future.   It takes a high degree of obtuseness not to understandthat limiting the curriculum to &quot;what we call `Westerncivilization'&quot; is a sure way to turn off a youth populationthat is already largely alienated from school. A good exampleof how their different backgrounds produce differentinterests was provided by a study last year on awareness ofcurrent news events. Most of the conclusions faulted theyounger generation for its ignorance of the Gorbachev-Bushdialogue and the political changes in Eastern Europe -- andfailed to note that its interest in the freeing of NelsonMandela, the U.S. invasion of Panama and the politicalupheaval in China was as great as that of older generations.   Martha Farnsworth Riche   Director, Policy Studies   Population Reference Bureau Inc.   Washington   ---   I found Mr. Kristol's article very bold and accurate. Irecently graduated from one of the last bastions of a trulyclassical liberal-arts education.   But the &quot;core curriculum,&quot; as it is known at my almamater, is under attack. This is not surprising, since mostschools across the country are also under fire. I am,therefore, worried that if I have any children, they aregoing to grow up without ever being exposed to (let aloneversed in) Homer, Aeschylus or Montaigne. Oh, by the way, Iam from Africa -- a real, greencard-carrying immigrant.   There are thousands of Africans and other non-Americanswho would literally do anything for the privilege of being&quot;brainwashed&quot; by studying Hobbes and Locke.   Teodros Ashenafi   New York   ---   First of all, multiculturalism is not an attempt toaddress the social problems of African-Americans -- it is aneffort to correct the marginalization of significanthistorical figures and events involving nonwhite people andto portray history more accurately. Second, Latin Americansand Asian-Americans have been equally involved in, andconcerned about, multicultural education. Third, Mr. Kristolminimizes the impact of positive role models, contradictingthe declarations of social scientists concerning thedemonstrative impact of negative role models.   Finally, schools are a microcosm of our society. As such,they are an instrumental tool in the socialization ofAmerican citizens. An inaccurate and biased educationcontributes to the prejudices and misconceptions that othershave about African-Americans and that many African-Americanshave about themselves. To advocate the continuance of such aneducational injustice facilitates the miseducation of all andfurther promotes many of the societal problems representeddaily in the media. This is the real tragedy.   Marion O. Cunningham   Princeton, N.J.   ---   Was Mr. Kristol trying to be funny? Saying that blackswere &quot;among the earliest arrivals&quot; to this country must set arecord for most misguided euphemism. I suppose inmates onAlcatraz were &quot;island dwellers&quot; and that Franco's conditionhas remained stable.   Jordan Eth   San Francisco   ---   Assimilation among earlier ethnic groups, thoughdifficult, happened because these people became Americans andlost their ethnic identity, even if they maintained somefamily traditions privately. That is much more difficult forblacks to do, because no matter how well they adopt the localculture, they are still black and still subject to all thoselittle racial insults, whether real or imagined. Small wonderthat some blacks decide to chuck trying, and develop aculture they can live with. Wrong-headed as this might be,calling it &quot;psychobabble&quot; isn't going to help much either.   We need to show blacks that there really is a place forthem in mainstream American culture, and if teaching blackhistory helps boost their pride and bring them along, so muchthe better. The alternative is a perpetuation of two separateAmericas, which helps no one.   Timothy F. Merker   Cedar Rapids, Iowa   ---   Grant it that black Americans have not become&quot;Americanized&quot; to the degree of Hispanics or Orientals. Butthe &quot;arrival&quot; of blacks on America's shores for nearly twocenturies of slave trade meant being sold, starved, separatedfrom family, subjected to sexual and physical abuse, anddenied access to educational and economic opportunitiesavailable to &quot;other&quot; groups by virtue of arriving as chattel,subjected to a life of bondage. And, even after they werefinally emancipated, they were denied access to educationaland economic opportunities. Can we seriously blame certainblack Americans for not wanting to become &quot;Americanized&quot;? Canwe blame them for not wanting to be part of a &quot;process&quot;rooted in an institution such as slavery? And can we faultblack Americans for seeing &quot;multiculturalism&quot; as analternative to the continued second-class status affordedmost blacks in our society? By the way, where do the AmericanIndians fit into Mr. Kristol's analysis? Why don't we condemntheir failure to &quot;Americanize&quot;? After all, they were herefirst]   Robert Beeson   Greenwich, Conn.   ---   When our nation was launched in the late 18th century, wewere primarily from England, speaking English. The waves ofimmigrants that came to our shores in the 19th century wereassimilated into our culture by the third generation, and theEnglish language was the big unifier. When you could speakEnglish fluently, you were an American. And being an Americanmeant accepting the culture, social graces and form ofgovernment that were primarily Anglo-Saxon.   We have been fighting for the past half-century to bringpeople together. Multiculturalism represents a major stepbackward and is, on balance, far more destructive thanconstructive. And why should minorities just include blacks,Hispanics, Asians, etc.? How long will it be before other&quot;minorities&quot; are clamoring for the same cultural purity?   George J. Helwig   Scarborough, N.Y.   ---   As anyone who follows this issue must be aware, theprincipal justification for the multiculturalist movement isthat we are rapidly becoming a non-European country and ourculture and teaching of history must reflect that fact.Multiculturalism, in short, is not simply a radical ideology;it is a mainstream phenomenon, an historically predictableoutcome of America's revolutionary transformation into amultiracial, white-minority society. In order to accommodateitself to that transformation, America is literallyreformulating itself, adopting group rights along with aradically different &quot;cultural story&quot; to represent ourradically changed and heterogeneous population. This processis pushed along by the expanding cultural and political powerof minorities and the collapse of morale among a majoritythat sees itself rapidly diminishing.   How strange and tragic it is that conservatives, who seethemselves as the embattled opponents of multiculturalism,should continue to support the immigration policies that givemulticulturalism its most compelling rationale]   Lawrence Auster   New York   ---   That few individuals, mainly Afrocentrists, are aware ofthe racial character of the ancient Egyptians as a blackpeople (by today's definitions), should come as no surprise.   Egyptology was born on the crest of a great wave of racismand anti-Semitism that swept Anglo and Germanic Europe in theearly 19th century. While Egyptology provided a pretext forthe mass transfer to European museums of the much covetedwealth of the pyramids, it was also the hoped-for basis thatwould legitimize the whitening of the ancient Egyptianracial-ethnic character. With a Europeanized Egyptian typethat could never be confirmed as ancestor to those WestAfrican peoples taken into New World slavery, it would provestraightforward -- on moral grounds -- for Europe to justifythe colonization and enslavement of the dark-skinned races.   Were the whole, unvarnished truth ever revealed in publiceducation, the white-supremacist impulse that has governedthe Western world for 500 years -- and which Mr. Kristol andhis colleagues staunchly seek to defend -- would lose itsviselike grip on the destinies of the vast majority of thepopulace.   Grant Venerable   Professor of Black Studies   San Francisco State University   San Francisco   ---   As greater numbers of nonwhite Americans enter the workforce and consumer base, it is becoming clear that ourWestern &quot;common&quot; culture no longer works.   What Mr. Kristol overlooks is that this decline ofWesternism leaves us no surviving basis for social order. Inthe gaping hole left by a departing common culture, there istruly nothing to hold us together as a nation of people.   America's best and biggest corporations have already madeit a high priority to better understand and manage anincreasingly multicultural workplace. CEOs at thesecorporations do not have the luxury of time to reflect aboutthe loss of common culture; they must meet the challengespresented daily by heterogeneous markets and labor pools.   Thus, what must be debated is not whether multiculturalismwill be exploited by opportunists, as Mr. Kristol seemsobliged to conclude, but rather the extent to whichmulticulturalism might succeed in reuniting an increasinglyfragmented society. This is an exceedingly importantquestion. It has a direct bearing on the future health ofAmerican business.   Mr. Kristol and like-minded thinkers should bear in mindthat we are in acute need of positive ideas. They should beasking themselves a whole new set of questions: How can wedesign a framework that makes room for both Western andnon-Western strains? Reasserts founding principles? Advancesa unifying theme?   Gregory K. Tanaka   Marina Del Ray, Calif.   ---   The article is quite apropos and candid. If there is to beany hope for our educational system and social preservation,understanding and espousing this philosophy is urgentlynecessary for today's leaders.   Peter D. Kennedy   Drexel Hill, Pa.</TEXT></DOC>