<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910422-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>910422-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Final Judgment:   One Man's Obsession   Ties Up the Courts --   Until He's Murdered   ---   Who Killed Robert Young?   The Beugens, Tormented   For 8 Years, Are Delighted   ---   Foreshadowings in a Letter   ----   By Richard B. Schmitt   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><LP>   SAN FRANCISCO -- Robert Young is gone, but he sure isn'tforgotten.   At the Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund, where he worked asa paralegal assistant for the past year, there's a photo ofMr. Young from an office party last summer, looking like &quot;aprissy English butler,&quot; as one colleague puts it. He did havea manner about him -- erudite, soft-spoken, polite. A friendsays he sometimes sang German arias while he worked.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;He certainly brought a commitment to our agenda,&quot; says aSierra Club attorney, adding, &quot;Robert was very much belovedaround here.&quot;   Mr. Young also had a weirdly obsessive personal agenda:getting even with some people by the name of Susan and DavidBeugen. In 1983, the Beugens and Mr. Young got in a disputeover a $20,000 deposit in a business deal. So, Mr. Young sued-- over and over again. Using his knowledge of the courtsystem and most of his free time -- he had plenty because heslept only three or four hours a night -- he filed at least17 lawsuits and endless motions against the couple, enoughpaper to push him into a second apartment to avoid theclutter that had consumed his room and part of his bed.   Mr. Young once said he would chase Mr. Beugen &quot;until hewas dust.&quot; Financially, he succeeded. Mr. Beugen was driveninto a bankruptcy proceeding, where about 80% of the morethan 300 pieces of legal paperwork involved Mr. Young. Whenhis own claims stalled -- and they usually did -- Mr. Youngcame upon the idea of purchasing tiny judgments othercreditors had obtained against the Beugens to keep hiscrusade alive.   The eight-year vendetta caused emotions on both sides tooccasionally spin out of control. Last Nov. 7, Mrs. Beugensat down and wrote a letter to this newspaper, appealing foran expose of Mr. Young. &quot;There is nothing I can do short ofkilling the `bastard' to keep him from destroying my family,&quot;she wrote, &quot;and I might be justified in doing so.&quot;   On Feb. 8, Mr. Young was killed, shot through the chestwhile preparing to drive to another hearing with the Beugens.   Inspector Arthur Gerrands of the San Francisco PoliceDepartment says the department is conducting a &quot;broad range&quot;investigation. Police say they have no suspects. &quot;There areso many people who aren't too happy with him,&quot; Mr. Gerrandssays, though adding, &quot;the Beugens seem to be the most intenseand involved.&quot;   Police say the Beugens have cooperated in theinvestigation. The Beugens deny any involvement in Mr.Young's death, and the 44-year-old Mr. Young did have otheradversaries. He was once accused in a lawsuit of cheating aco-worker and her husband out of $250,000 by posing as afinancial planner and tax expert; the couple ended upsettling for a few hundred dollars, which was all Mr. Younghad left. Mr. Young himself once sued a hairdresser in SanFrancisco on behalf of his longtime roommate, Hyon Mun, aKorean-born barber, winning an $8,500 judgment; the money wasnever paid, and Mr. Young had recently renewed an effort torecover it.   Mr. Young, according to two friends, had also run up$70,000 in unauthorized credit card debt in the name of Mr.Mun, although the friends say the fraud wasn't apparent untilafter Mr. Young died. Mr. Mun and various other friends andassociates have been questioned.   While his killer remains at-large, a look at Mr. Young'slegal battle with the Beugens suggests that he got away withmurder, too, showing how the court system, designed to enddisputes, can instead be used as a weapon of torment.   Some judges figured they knew what he was up to as longago as 1984, but they weren't able to do anything about it.Eventually, sanctions were levied against Mr. Young, but henever had to pay because he appealed them. He wasn't anattorney, so he couldn't be disciplined by the bar. For awhile, some of this was even taxpayer-subsidized, as Mr.Young avoided paying filing fees by persuading courts that hecouldn't afford it.   Using the courts to harass is fairly common. &quot;A lot ofmisuse goes protected. Courts don't want to stifle thelegitimate use of judicial process,&quot; says Stephen Gillers, aNew York University School of Law ethics professor. &quot;It is aproblem that no one knows how to resolve, and it may beunresolvable.&quot;   Mr. Young nonetheless stands out as a startling casebecause of the depths of his obsession, redolent of somestrange fictional character in a Victor Hugo novel or, morerecently, the tenant in the film &quot;Pacific Heights.&quot;   The fact is, Mr. Young was born in Little Rock, Ark., in1946. From 1964 to 1967, he studied German and Latin in anhonors program at the University of Alberta in Canada,although he never graduated. Friends say he later studied atYeshiva University and worked as an overseas phone operatorin New York. One of his first jobs in San Francisco was atthe post office; he also worked as a legal secretary at a75-lawyer law firm. He took night classes at San FranciscoLaw School from 1984 to 1986, but didn't graduate.   The dispute with the Beugens started with an ad in thisnewspaper for the sale of their two Reno, Nev., hair salons.Mr. Young and Mr. Mun agreed to buy the business for$350,000, including $20,000 down. The deal was signed in May1983. The next month, the two sides were in court, eachclaiming that the other had scalped it financially.   Mr. Young and Mr. Mun claimed the Beugens hid unpaid billsand oversold the business potential of the salons. TheBeugens felt the new owners were either inept or crooked. Mr.Young wanted his $20,000 back and to call the deal off. Mr.Beugen, 58, contends: &quot;There is no way he didn't get $25,000to $30,000 in cash before we took {the salons} back.&quot;   The Beugens changed the locks and retook possession. Uponlearning this, Mr. Young flew to Reno, broke the locks,drilled the safe and made off with $1,300 in cash, checks andcredit card receipts, according to court documents and policerecords. On Mr. Young's return home to San Francisco, theBeugens, alerted by an employee, greeted him this way at theairport, according to a complaint Mr. Young filed againstthem in San Mateo County Superior Court:   &quot;Defendant Susan Carol Beugen battered Plaintiff bytackling him, knocking him to the sidewalk, seizing his leftarm with both her hands, and by biting Plaintiff's left handin an aggressive manner. . . . Plaintiff repeatedly tried toloosen himself from the grasp and from the bite of DefendantSusan Carol Beugen.&quot;   Mrs. Beugen, 51, also made off with Mr. Young's briefcasewith all the salon receipts. After airport police arrived,the two sides made mutual citizen's arrests. Mr. Young wastaken to the infirmary for a tetanus shot and spent the nightin jail. Mrs. Beugen was cited for assault and battery andreleased on her own recognizance.   Shortly after the airport incident, Mr. Young bit back incourt. He first filed a civil suit, charging assault andbattery, and through a subpoena, managed a look at Mrs.Beugen's employment history.   The Beugens had been sued once or twice before, inrelatively minor disputes over money. Although they live in amillion-dollar home in the affluent suburb of Woodside, theydepended on an odd assortment of jobs and small-businessventures for their income, which also supported five dogs,three cats, four daughters and a son who was adopted from theMother Theresa Missionaries in India. The youngest is incollege. One of the daughters is a Hollywood producer who wasthe executive in charge of production for this month'scritically acclaimed TV movie, &quot;Separate But Equal.&quot; AfterMr. Young began his pursuit, they were sued by others foralleged non-payment of bills or loans.   But they had never encountered anyone like Mr. Young, andYoung vs. Beugen soon became the case that wouldn't die.Around the time Mr. Young tried unsuccessfully to persuadethe San Mateo County sheriff to seize the Beugens' MercedesBenz, Mrs. Beugen allegedly started making threateningtelephone calls to Mr. Young, who sued her for &quot;intentionalinfliction of emotional distress.&quot;   A few months later, the Beugens spent a day takingphotographs of Mr. Young doing legal research inside SanFrancisco City Hall and of Mr. Mun cutting hair at his shopat the San Francisco Press Club. They both sued the Beugens,saying the picture-taking, together with previously allegedthreats, had made it difficult for them to sleep or appear inpublic.   San Mateo County Superior Court Judge Gerald Raganconsidered Mr. Young's first &quot;emotional distress&quot; suit &quot;thetype of case we should get in and out of the court system andhave it over.&quot; He tried to kill off the suit early on bydenying Mr. Young a waiver of his filing costs, figuring hewas &quot;litigious and attempting to use the courts forharassment,&quot; the judge wrote in July 1984. But he wasreversed, and the case droned on.   Eventually, the Beugens' homeowners insurer paid out whatone of its attorneys considered to be $15,000 in &quot;basicallynuisance money&quot; to resolve the assault and distress suits.Mr. Young was aided in working out that settlement by alawyer at the San Francisco law firm where he then worked asa legal secretary; that lawyer was later killed in a planecrash.   In May 1984, a Nevada court threw out Mr. Young's originalhair-salon suit because Mr. Young hadn't posted the requisitebond. But he soon found a new angle of attack: buying upjudgments or claims that other people had against theBeugens, which opened up whole new vistas of discovery andprocedural maneuvering.   In November 1985, for instance, he paid $500 for a $374judgment that a former Beugen tenant had won in small-claimscourt. In an effort to collect, Mr. Young subpoenaed threebanks, TRW credit reports, and business and personal records,and took deposition-like oral examinations. When the Beugensoffered to pay off the claim for $400, he rejected the offer,saying the amount due had grown to $1,100 through his longwork.   Other creditors found him useful, including one of theBeugens' very own former attorneys, who was having troublecollecting a $16,000 fee. The attorney sold his rights to$1,000 of the $16,000 claim to Mr. Young for $500. Soon, Mr.Young was demanding the Beugens' passports and insuranceapplications, among other things. The attorney, JohnHartford, says the arrangement was strictly a financialaccommodation. And, he adds, Mr. Young &quot;was the consummategentleman, and I cannot say that about 90% of the lawyers Ihave dealt with.&quot;   Between the mounting suits and bills, threats offoreclosure on their house and the fact that a new businessselling gelato ice cream was in a seasonal slump, Mr. Beugenfiled for bankruptcy-law protection in March 1986. Theunintended effect was to give Mr. Young a new forum in whichto try to revive his original hair-salon suit and a new setof legal rules with which to make a case.   In October 1987, the bankruptcy court rejected theattempt, and in May 1989, an appeals court even awarded theBeugens $20,000 in sanctions. But through other appeals, thematter was still alive at the time of Mr. Young's death.   Henry Cohen, the Beugens' bankruptcy attorney, startedhighlighting in yellow all the items on the bankruptcy docketsheet that had been initiated by Mr. Young. &quot;You look at thatdocket sheet and it is all yellow,' he says. &quot;It washorrendous the time that I spent.&quot;   &quot;Every single day we would go to the mailbox and there wassomething,&quot; says Mrs. Beugen. Or someone: Attempting to dodgeprocess-servers became something of a Beugen family pastime.Once, when a process-server appeared at their doorstep, Mr.Beugen piled everybody into the car and fled, leading to ahigh-speed chase that the Beugens abandoned only when theycould no longer accept the screaming of a daughter in theback seat.   Mr. Young was certainly resourceful: He apparently usedMr. Beugen's bankruptcy records to randomly dig up possibleallies; alerted the San Mateo County assessor that theBeugens' property assessment might be too low (&quot;the assessorhimself gave us the document to sue {Young} with,&quot; Mrs.Beugen says); and unearthed in court papers the fact thatMrs. Beugen, a former personal shopper at Macy's, had pleadedguilty in 1987 to shoplifting at Nordstrom, something herhusband didn't even know about until last week. Mrs. Beugensays the incident reflected emotional and financial pressuresthat Mr. Young brought to bear.   Mrs. Beugen didn't take any of this well. Court documentsallege she once had this to say to an attorney named ZaideKirtley, who was helping Mr. Young (partly by storing some ofhis legal files in her attic, which she had speciallyre-enforced to keep the load from crashing into her livingroom): &quot;If you don't get out {of these lawsuits} I am goingto burn your house down with you and your dogs in it. . . . Iwant you to withdraw, and I am not bulls--ing you. . . . Ifyou don't, on the life of my children, I will burn your housedown, and your two dogs, and your red truck.&quot;   Says Alan Phillips, an attorney once charged withcollecting money from the Beugens: &quot;If I had to go to waragainst Saddam Hussein with the express mission of takingSaddam Hussein out, I would want Susan Beugen on my team.&quot;   Mr. Young's other suits ranged from the mundane -- actionsfor &quot;declaratory and injunctive relief&quot; and the like -- tothe unexpected. In 1987, Mr. Young sued the Beugens fordefamation for calling him, among other things, &quot;malicious,vindictive and a vexatious litigant.&quot; Mr. Young had also suedthe Beugens for malicious prosecution, which Mr. Beugen'sbankruptcy judge found &quot;if anything, stands the true factsupside down.'   Last year, the Beugens attempted to have Mr. Youngdeclared a vexatious litigant by a court. Under Californialaw, vexatious litigants have to post a bond and get courtapproval before filing more suits. But in August, San MateoCounty Superior Court Judge Harlan Veal declined to interveneapparently because Mr. Young had fallen one case short ofmeeting a requirement of five cases &quot;finally determinedadversely&quot; in seven years.   Yet Mr. Young eventually lost nearly every action hebrought. His response: He sought to disqualify a number ofthe San Mateo judges, including Judge Veal. As part of hismotion, Mr. Young alleged that, during a fruitless settlementconference, &quot;Judge Veal then waved his arms and shouted, `So,you are all bastards] Get out]'&quot; In court papers, Judge Vealcalls that an &quot;absolute, bald-faced untruth.&quot; The judge saysthrough a clerk that he wishes the state's vexatious litigantstatute were tougher.   Mr. Young's final suit against the Beugens was filed onJan. 18. It tried to attach liens on their house. Mrs. Beugenhad bought the house back from a foreclosing Sandamp;L with a loanfrom Great Western Bank and a $50,000 loan from herbrother-in-law. Mr. Young was suing again to enforce some ofhis claims he had purchased. His suit and that of anotherunpaid creditor attempting the same thing prompted GreatWestern itself to sue the Beugens because they had assuredthe bank that the title was free and clear.   The day the suit was filed, Mrs. Beugen's younger sister,the wife of the deep-pocket brother-in-law, diedunexpectedly. Later in the month, her father died after along bout with cancer. Mrs. Beugen says later: &quot;My onlyregret is that they weren't here to share the wonderful joyof {Robert Young's} death.&quot;   That was to occur three weeks later. A little before 7a.m. on Feb. 8, Mr. Young dropped by the Sutter Street homeof Ms. Kirtley to borrow her red truck to drive to a hearing.As he stepped into the cab of the pickup, a gunman approachedand fired once. The bullet struck Mr. Young in the rightside, tearing through his body before settling in the leftshoulder. Paramedics rushed him to the hospital, but he dieden route, still clutching the keys.   At 9:20 a.m. that day, Judge Veal called Case No. 341830,Hartford vs. Beugen. When Mr. Young failed to appear, JudgeVeal denied Mr. Young's latest subpoena request for moreBeugen records, and awarded sanctions against him of $740.   On April 12, a San Francisco federal appeals courtdismissed Mr. Young's bankruptcy claims against the Beugens.This &quot;is an outrageous and atypical case,&quot; the court wrote.&quot;Young's continued and relentless harassment of Beugen, forthe sole purpose of inflicting `punishment and discomfort,'is not, by any means, a legitimate use of the judicialprocess.&quot;   Looking back, Mr. Young wasn't crazy, just driven by&quot;bone-marrow hate,&quot; says David White, one of Mr. Young's twolongtime roommates. Adds Mr. Mun: &quot;Before Robert died, Isaid, `This is too much. Let it go] Let it go]'&quot;   On the other hand, &quot;the Beugens did not approach this anymore rationally than Robert,&quot; contends Thomas Hunt, aSacramento, Calif., attorney who represented a Beugencreditor.   Curled up in a satin blue winged-back chair in her home,stroking a pet poodle, Mrs. Beugen quietly acknowledgesfeeling terrible anger. &quot;I am not the same person I was eightyears ago,&quot; she says. &quot;I feel like I've been through theringer.&quot; But she says Mr. Young's ability to get under herskin finally faded. &quot;The last couple or three years he hasbeen just like a gnat,&quot; she says, swatting the air.   That assertion doesn't fit with her unalloyed joy over hisdeath, or with the letter to this newspaper, saying she mightbe justified in killing Mr. Young. She dismisses the letter,saying simply, &quot;I wanted publicity,&quot; and says she borrowedthe phrasing about murder from &quot;that fellow who was marriedto Madonna,&quot; actor Sean Penn, who was quoted as saying asmuch about a harassing photographer.   &quot;If this was 1986-1987, then it might be more reasonableto believe we might have done away with him,&quot; Mr. Beugenadds, throwing a log on the fire. He notes that Mr. Youngowed them $30,000 in court-ordered sanctions and that anumber of his cases had been resolved or were winding down atthe time of his death. &quot;Whoever did kill him did society ahell of a favor, I can tell you that,&quot; he adds later.   Robert Young was cremated. A memorial service was heldlast month at a local Unitarian church. On March 1, Ms.Kirtley, representing his estate, wrote the Beugens and theirattorneys, saying she wanted to dismiss all his pending courtmatters. &quot;It is my wish to minimize your time and the courts'time with these cases,&quot; she wrote.   On March 8, to mark the one month anniversary of RobertYoung's death, David Beugen brought his wife flowers.</TEXT></DOC>