<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910215-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>910215-0059.</DOCID><HL>   Bush Will Seek Additional Defense Funds   Of $55 Billion for War Through March 31   ---   Battle Assessments Suggest   Ground War Could Start   By the End of February   ----   By Andy Pasztor and Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2</SO><CO>   JAPAN EUROP MDEST G.SIE F.CIU NIPNY</CO><IN>TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)</IN><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The White House next week will ask Congressto approve more than $55 billion in additional spendingauthority to cover the cost of the Persian Gulf war throughMarch 31, but some Pentagon estimates peg the cost at morethan $65 billion.   The Bush administration, as part of its first officialprojection of the cost of the conflict with Iraq, also willtell lawmakers that more than $42 billion is expected to becovered by pledges of financial assistance from Saudi Arabia,Japan, Germany and other allies.</LP><TEXT>   At the same time, the Pentagon's latest battlefieldassessments suggest that ground attacks against Iraqi troopscould begin as early as the end of the month, or sooner thanmany people have expected. In the past few days, U.S. pilotsstepped up destruction of Iraqi tanks, artillery and armoredvehicles in defensive positions throughout Kuwait andsouthern Iraq.   The Pentagon said air raids have destroyed nearlyone-third of Iraq's tanks, armored vehicles and artillerypieces in the battle zone. Officials said the overall damagemay be approaching 50% of Baghdad's arsenal, consideringweapons that military analysts assume are severely damaged,but not destroyed. Good weather, increased emphasis onpounding such equipment, and additional pilot experience inspotting Iraqi decoys are among the reasons recent airstrikes have proved so successful, military officials said.   The latest claims are significant because U.S. officershave maintained that a roughly 50% reduction of Iraq's combatcapability would be required before they would feelcomfortable turning to ground action. Destruction of weaponryis an important, but not the sole, factor in assessing Iraq'sremaining fighting ability.   In another sign that the war may soon intensify, the Navymoved a fourth aircraft carrier, the USS America, into theGulf. The carriers would provide air cover for an amphibiousassault by Marines against Iraqi forces in Kuwait.   Some military experts and U.S. officials have speculatedthat the ground battle could start in the next week or sobecause the skies over Kuwait will be moonless and tides willbe favorable for an amphibious landing of Marines. But asenior Pentagon official said a ground war wasn't likely tobe governed by the moon and tides. &quot;The lack of illuminationat night isn't as important to us as taking more time to bomb(Iraq's) tanks so they can't kill Americans,&quot; he said.   Pentagon officials reiterated that no date has been setfor the start of a ground war and that President Bush hasn'tdecided to launch a land assault on Kuwait. White Housespokesman Marlin Fitzwater told reporters that the ground warcould begin &quot;at any time.&quot; He said that was the messagePresident Bush intended to send when he said this week theair war would continue &quot;for a while.&quot;   Pentagon officials said the military would like to use thenext phase of bombing not only to destroy more battlefieldarmor but also to wreck further military and industrialfacilities. Iraq's chemical, biological and nuclear plantshave been hit hard, but the allies only now are gettingaround to bombing plants that build conventional weapons.British forces recently bombed a rocket-fuel plant and saidIraq's stocks of rocket fuel may be deteriorating.   In addition, military officials speculate that Iraq may berunning low on Scud missiles because the last group of Scudsfired at Israel and Saudi Arabia appeared to be of such poorquality that they broke up in flight.   Despite such upbeat assessments, the issue of how to avoidcivilian casualties while going after strategic targets --including Iraq's remaining command and communications sites-- continues to plague Pentagon officials. Maintaining thatthe U.S. had no idea women and children were inside a Baghdadbunker hit by precision-guided bombs Wednesday, ahigh-ranking Pentagon official said communications sitesremain among the Air Force's highest bombing priorities.   The bombing incident refocused attention on the extensiveunderground communications system within Baghdad and runningsoutheast to Basra Province, where army units are based. Thenetwork highlights Saddam Hussein's investment in Westerntechnology with the European and Japanese companies that hadcontracts with Iraq turning into intelligence resources forthe allies.   This information sharing is sensitive for multinationalcompanies with investments elsewhere in the Arab world, butindustry sources in Europe confirm that the French DefenseMinistry, for example, collected data from Frenchcorporations about contracts in Iraq.   The communications system, on which the bombardment hastaken a heavy toll, is described as both redundant andsophisticated. Modern fiber-optic lines complement oldercable. Between Baghdad and Basra, the system is said tofollow two paths on either side of the Tigris and EuphratesRivers with multiple switching points -- 34 on one side, 10on another.   Siemens AG of Germany and Alcatel CIT of France wontelecommunications contracts in Iraq in the past two years,but they said much of their work had been put off because ofthe current crisis. Alcatel confirmed it provided switchingequipment under a separate contract in the early 1980s, andone of its German subsidiaries was involved in work at Basraairport. While providing few details, Tokyo-based NEC Corp.confirmed that it also had contracts with Iraq, including theprovision of fiber-optic and other telecommunicationsequipment.   Back in Washington, administration officials said thesupplemental spending request covers all but $2 billion ofthe additional operating and procurement costs stemming fromthe war, including the hefty costs of shipping and supportingmore than 500,000 troops and their weapons in the Middle Eastsince last August.   The package will spell out personnel costs and project thecost of continuing the intense air campaign against Iraqiforces. But it isn't clear what assumptions administrationbudget officials have used concerning the timing, durationand intensity of ground combat to liberate Kuwait. Under somescenarios, replacing destroyed U.S. equipment andtransporting troops back to U.S. and European bases easilycould boost costs by $10 billion.   As a result, administration officials are expected toemphasize that many of their projections should be consideredas ranges or preliminary estimates, which are likely to beadjusted as battlefield changes warrant. And the White Houseplans to provide detailed background material to reassureskeptical lawmakers that the request hasn't been padded bynon-Gulf costs.   Administration officials haven't disclosed how much of theallies' financial commitments for 1991 have been collected.But for 1990, Saudi Arabia, Japan, Germany and the otherallies have provided more than $7 billion of the $9.7 billionthey promised.   Meanwhile, the United Nations Security Council began itsfirst debate on the war since authorizing the use of militaryforce against Iraq in November. The debate occurred in theSecurity Council's first formal closed-door session in 15years.   ---   David Wessel and David Rogers contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>