<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911101-0179</DOCNO><DOCID>911101-0179.</DOCID><HL>   Arctic Dogfight:   Battle Over Oil Hunt   In a Wildlife Refuge   In Alaska Gets Nasty   ---   Firms' Resort to Surveillance   Of a Longtime Opponent   Angers Some in Congress   ---   A Toy Dune Buggy's Big Job   ----   By Allanna Sullivan   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AHC ARC BP MOB P WAK XON</CO><MS>ENERGY (ENE)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>OIL-DRILLING AND EXPLORATION (DRL)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)INDUSTRIAL andamp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)OIL-EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES (OIE)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)OIL-SECONDARY (OIS)PETROLEUM (PET)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)NEW PRODUCTS andamp; SERVICES (PDT)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><RE>ALASKA (AK)CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FLORIDA (FL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)OKLAHOMA (OK)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)VIRGINIA (VA)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   MARSH CREEK ANTICLINE, Alaska -- Should the oil industrybe allowed to drill here in the Arctic National WildlifeRefuge?   &quot;This is the issue of the decade for the oil companies,&quot;says Lawrence Goldstein, president of the Petroleum IndustryResearch Foundation. &quot;And for environmentalists, it's whatnuclear power was to their movement during the '70s.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Neither Big Oil nor Big Environment is pulling any punchesin this fight, which in some circles sparks debate aspassionate and polarized as the abortion issue. The industrywants to drill for the estimated 3.2 billion barrels of oilthat may be under the refuge; preservationists vow to protectthe one-of-a-kind ecosystem on top.   The issue has again reached Congress. The Senate today ispoised to begin a bruising battle over whether to approve oilexploration in the wildlife refuge as part of a comprehensiveenergy bill. Opponents of drilling there are planning afilibuster.   Meanwhile, a curious combination of personalities,politics and failed public relations might well forceCongress to strip out the refuge question, perhaps tablingthe issue for years. On top of the usual brawling between BigOil and environmentalists, there is emerging a convolutedtale of a panicky industry resorting to surveillance andsting tactics to trip up a longtime foe who, it believes,might hurt its chances at getting into ANWR. That foe,Charles Hamel, has zeroed in on Big Oil's weak spots inAlaska with uncanny precision and fed accusations of industrymalfeasance to the press, environmentalists and Congress.   Ironically, the industry's heavy-handed attempts to stopMr. Hamel, a former shipping broker, may have harmed itscause more than he has. To some, its actions smack oftampering with a congressional witness. At the very least,the industry has gotten another black eye just when it has toappear squeaky clean.   Some lawmakers who will decide the issue are outraged.&quot;We're really not happy with what the oil companies have doneregarding surveillance on a private citizen,&quot; says Rep. DonYoung, an Alaska Republican and usually an industrysupporter.   Environmentalists are gleeful. &quot;There's a real sleazefactor to it that will make politicians want to distancethemselves from the oil industry,&quot; says Michael Matz,chairman of the Alaska Coalition, an organizationrepresenting 75 conservation groups opposed to any drilling.   At the heart of the issue -- and what Mr. Hamel has usedso expertly -- is the industry's environmental record inexploring for and producing oil in the rest of the AlaskanNorth Slope. Tracks made by exploration vehicles 20 years agoremain unhealed on the delicate tundra. Abandoned sites atPrudhoe Bay have been cited by Alaskan officials asenvironmental calamities. And attempts to freeze drillingwaste and other debris in ditches hacked out of the frozenearth have angered environmentalists, who call the landfills&quot;toxic popsicles.&quot;   Only 60 miles away is the wildlife refuge, a sliver ofcoastline 20 to 40 miles wide. Slightly bigger than WestVirginia, it stretches from the base of the Brooks Range onthe south to the Beaufort Sea on the north. In winter, it's awhite wasteland, with winds blasting across the plain andtemperatures plunging to 50 degrees below zero in 24-hourdarkness.   But this seemingly desolate place is home to bears, moose,musk oxen and 180,000 caribou known as the Porcupine Herd.And during the summer, even with pack ice still floating justoffshore, hundreds of species of birds light on the coastalplain. On just a square foot of spongy turf here at MarshCreek, the bright yellow blossoms of Arctic poppies perchdelicately on their stems, surrounded by three differenttypes of grass, moss and tiny willow plants.   It's also here at the Marsh Creek Anticline that thesandstone is stained brown by oil trapped eons ago.Federal-government surveys show 36 geologic formations thatcould contain giant fields like those usually found only inthe Mideast.   &quot;The oil is there,&quot; says David Hite, an Atlantic RichfieldCo. geologist. &quot;I'm dead certain of it.&quot; Seismic data tellhim that Prudhoe Bay formations can be tracked into therefuge for at least 12 miles before disappearing undergeologic folds and fractures. Oil men want to force theirdrill bits through almost a thousand feet of permafrost totap the oil.   Three years ago, they thought congressional approval todrill in ANWR was assured. A Senate bill was ready for avote, and the House was set to write its own version. Thenthe Exxon Valdez hit the rocks, dumping almost 11 milliongallons of crude into Alaskan waters and deep-sixing the pushinto the refuge.   This time around, it's largely the imbroglio aboutsurveillance that could push the industry's chances ofdrilling in the refuge over the edge, says Mr. Matz, whomonitors congressional sentiment for the Alaska Coalition.The oil companies themselves concede that they went too farin hiring Wackenhut Corp., the security company, to shadowMr. Hamel and others. Alyeska Pipeline Service Co., aconsortium of oil companies, ran a full-page ad in Alaskanewspapers to apologize.   &quot;The owners and I concluded unanimously that theinvestigation was wrong and should be terminated,&quot; Alyeska'spresident, James Hermiller, said in the ad. He also contendedin the ad that he didn't intend &quot;to interfere with anyone'scommunications with Congress or to investigate any member ofCongress.&quot; Alyeska is owned by Exxon Corp., BritishPetroleum, Atlantic Richfield, Unocal, Phillips PetroleumCo., Mobil Corp. and Amerada Hess.   What Alyeska apologized for has all the intrigue of aJames Bond movie. One night last year, Mr. Hamel noticed aman in a ski mask stealing his garbage outside his Arlington,Va., home. But not until he got a call from Rafael Castillo,a former employee of Wackenhut's Special InvestigationsDivision, did Mr. Hamel learn he had been the target of asurveillance operation that allegedly included the creationof two bogus companies and electronic spying on his home andhotel rooms.   The oil men wanted to know what Mr. Hamel knew and who wastalking to him, Mr. Castillo told him. In an effort to getinformation from Mr. Hamel, Wackenhut set up a sting bycreating an ecological-litigation firm called Ecolit, whichoffered to join with him in his work regarding oil-companywrongdoing. A camera hidden in Ecolit's offices videotapedMr. Hamel's meetings with Wackenhut operatives.   Then, recordings of the encounters were received andprocessed in the offices of a second phony company down thehall called International Overseas Trading. To put in thewires, the Wackenhut people used a remote-controlled toy dunebuggy to drag them above the ceilings over the interveningoffices of two other companies. And in another effort totrack Mr. Hamel, Wackenhut operatives sat in a recreationalvehicle outside his home for more than a month andelectronically monitored his movements and conversations.   A Wackenhut spokesman says that &quot;during the investigation,everything was done legally, using accepted investigatingtechniques.&quot;   However, Rep. George Miller, a California Democrat,contends, &quot;The goal of this activity was to chill any furtherefforts to detect and expose violations of environmentalhealth and safety laws.&quot; Rep. Miller, who heads a Housecommittee with oversight on oil-industry operations inAlaska, adds: &quot;Alyeska has apologized publicly . . . and haspromised never to conduct such activities again. That is agood start but not sufficient.&quot;   The Miller committee is investigating Wackenhut'ssnooping, which the panel's staffers say also targetedcongressmen, including Rep. Miller himself, and Trustees ofAlaska, an environmental-litigation firm. In August, whenRep. Miller asked Wackenhut by letter for all files of itssurveillance, he said his committee was following up onallegations that the surveillance was aimed at &quot;obtaininginformation on and/or interfering with Mr. Hamel'scommunications with the committee.&quot; In a memo written tomembers of the committee, Rep. Miller says the panel hasalready found &quot;substantial&quot; evidence that Wackenhut'ssurveillance activities broke the law. The committee planshearings on the Wackenhut affair early next week.   Alyeska contends that it was trying to find and pluginternal sources of confidential information allegedly stolenand given to Mr. Hamel, who provided regulators with leadsthat resulted in citations by the Environmental ProtectionAgency against Exxon and British Petroleum for allegedviolations of the Clean Water Act in Alaska. He also suppliedmaterial used in a General Accounting Office report issued inJuly and charging that the system for detecting leaks in theTrans Alaska Pipeline was faulty, that the pipeline wasseverely corroded and that neither federal nor stateregulators were adequately monitoring its operation.   Mr. Hamel's involvement in the environmental dispute beganwith his own bitter, decade-long brawl with the oilcompanies, which, he contends, drove him out of histanker-brokering business. To that, an Alyeska spokesmanreplies: &quot;The Alaska Public Utilities Commission conducted alengthy review of Mr. Hamel's charges and found no merit.&quot;   Mr. Hamel also is engaged in a separate legal battle withthe companies in federal district court in Houston overwhether they allegedly defrauded him and his partners out oftheir stake in the Point McIntyre oil field on the NorthSlope. In fact, Mr. Hamel told Wackenhut employees who havesince turned informants that he was going to expose anindustry attempt to hide the Point McIntyre discovery fromCongress during the last round of ANWR hearings; thatmaneuver would have buttressed the companies' argument thatthe nation's need for oil required drilling in the wildliferefuge.   Oil industry critics say Mr. Hamel could never have beenso effective if the industry hadn't provided him with so muchammunition. &quot;The oil companies on the North Slope wereirresponsible,&quot; says Robert Briggs, an attorney for theSierra Club Legal Defense Fund in Alaska.   The Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation listsat least 85 hazardous-waste sites on the North Slope; 46 ofthem are readily linked to oil-industry activity. Some, suchas an ARCO storage-tank property where spills occurredfrequently for 17 years, are being tended to as the industrytries to clean up its act. Regulators have noticed a &quot;suddensurge&quot; of cleanup activity, which they view, cynically, as apublic-relations ploy. Mountains of debris, including adiscarded tugboat and a layer of contaminated gravel, werecarted away just before Alaska's Gov. Walter Hickel andEnergy Secretary James Watkins visited one abandoned site.   But the more serious problem is these abandoned sites,largely because no one has taken responsibility for them. Inwhat was once Prudhoe Bay's version of downtown sits a thickgravel slab, known as the Forward Pad, only yards from NanaReservoir, the source of drinking water for many localresidents.   During a recent visit, a government regulator pointed out500 barrels of what he identified as hazardous waste, some ofthem leaking, stacked up inside an abandoned warehouse there.A huge mound of contaminated earth was in another section ofthe building. Regulators also found radioactive material usedin oil-drilling operations illegally stashed in an abandonedtrailer. And officials found &quot;extensive&quot; diesel fuelcontamination at the site.   Oil executives contend that most such abandoned sites wereoccupied by oil-service firms, not major oil companies, andthat many of the small firms have folded. &quot;But it does comeback to us, I guess,&quot; says Scott Ronzio, manager forenvironmental sciences at ARCO Alaska Inc. &quot;If we weren'there, they wouldn't be here.&quot;   After abandoned sites, the industry's toughest problem onthe North Slope may be the more than 400 waste pits in theoil fields that hold the cuttings and drilling mud spit upduring the drilling. Critics say some of it is toxic; theindustry says most of it isn't. But protests have forced theindustry to seek alternative cleanup techniques consideredjust as nasty by some environmentalists.   One experimental approach, burying this waste in pits sunkinto the permafrost, is opposed by environmentalistscontending that coastal erosion of at least one foot a yearand a possible warming of the Earth's climate could causethese &quot;toxic popsicles&quot; to melt years from now. Even a changein a river pattern could pose a problem, they say. Thecompanies dismiss these worries as far-fetched.   Both BP and ARCO are working on another way to eliminatedrilling waste. They are cementing the waste in the spacebetween the outer and inner pipes that make up the walls ofproduction wells. They contend that within four years, allthe waste pits might be gone, their contents poured into thewells. Because waste pits take up a lot of space, the newdisposal method, which has already been used at one location,reduced the size of the drilling pad from 42 acres to 13.5acres. And, they say, waste pits wouldn't scar the refuge.   In fact, the industry argues that general advances intechnology would mean much less damage to the wildlife refugethan the rest of the North Slope has seen. Already,oil-service companies at Kuparak, a major oil field west ofPrudhoe, lease locations from the oil companies, whichmonitor them closely. And they are all gathered in one55-acre location rather than scattered across 1,000 acres, asat Prudhoe.   Production wells drilled 120 feet apart when Prudhoe wasfirst developed can now, in some cases, be put as close toeach other as 10 feet. Thus a site that once would haveoccupied 65 acres would now need only 11 acres, one oil mansays. And when oil-company vehicles do travel the nakedtundra, they use fat, low-pressure tires, called rolligons,that leave the flora almost unscathed.   Even the caribou are happy, oil men say. Although femalesabout to give birth are skittish about being near oilfacilities, they readily join the herd at other times andscale the land bridges traversing the pipelines. Theysometimes even hover under an oil structure to escape theArctic mosquitoes. Indeed, with a life span of about 15years, none of the caribou near Prudhoe and other North Slopeoil facilities have known the tundra without oil wells.</TEXT></DOC>