<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900709-0021</DOCNO><DOCID>900709-0021.</DOCID><HL>   Economic Summit (A Special Report): On the Agenda   ---   A Full Plate:   The Summiteers Face a Host of Complex Problems,   Including German Reunification, a Cash-Starved   Eastern Bloc and the Increased Importance of Trade   ----   By Peter Truell</HL><DATE>07/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R4</SO><CO>   EUROP JAPAN CANDA FREST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)BANKS (BNK)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   FIRST, A LITTLE back-patting all around seems in order.   As they gather today in Houston for the 16th annualeconomic summit, the seven leaders of the capitalist worldcan be forgiven for feeling smug. With the astonishingcollapse of communism in Eastern Europe, their former foeshave practically overnight become converts to free markets --devouring tracts by Adam Smith and clamoring for membershipin major capitalist economic clubs like the World Bank.</LP><TEXT>   And why not? While Communist economies have simply fallenapart, the free-world economy dominated by the Seven -- theU.S., Japan, Britain, France, Italy, Canada and West Germany-- has shown both durability and flexibility. It hascontinued to chug along, posting reasonable growth, avertinginflation for the most part, and overcoming nastystock-market nose dives in the U.S. and Japan. So break outthe champagne.   But now comes the hard part.   The very victory of free-market forces has made thiseconomic-summit agenda one of the most challenging andcomplex ones ever. Once the Seven needed to tend mainly totheir own knitting. Now they must find ways to financereconstruction of the failed &quot;command economies&quot; of the oldEast Bloc.   They also must discuss the massive changes in East-Westrelations that are taking place, and when -- and on whatterms -- they will help the ailing Soviet Union. West Germanyand France are more eager to support the $20 billion Westernlifeline that Moscow is seeking. But the U.S.-backed byJapan, Britain and Canada -- wants to wait for more politicaland economic reform in the Soviet Union.   The Seven also must nurture the birth of the new unifiedGermany without unleashing inflation. The U.S. and Japan alsowill want to show their summit partners that they havesuccessfully negotiated differences over their economicrelationship in their yearlong dialogue -- the so-calledStructural Impediments Initiative. And, perhaps above all,the Seven must ready their nations for a new world in whichtrade will define relationships between nations more thanadversarial superpower politics will.   Specifically and immediately, this means agreeing on theimportance of current GATT talks and ensuring that theysucceed, at least to the extent that the seven most powerfuleconomies in the free world can make that happen. GATT (theGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world's mostcomprehensive trade organization) could use a kick in thepants.   Its current talks, the so-called Uruguay Round, aresupposed to be completed in December but are proceeding at astately pace -- too stately, according to many. &quot;Thepotential gains from a good {GATT} agreement are extremelyhigh, but the sense we get is that this is an agreement thatis behind schedule,&quot; says David Germany, an economist atMorgan Stanley andamp; Co.   In previous rounds of talks, GATT has dealt generally withtariffs on manufactured goods. In the current round, thenegotiators of 97 nations are attempting a vast expansion ofthe treaty to cover the one-third of world trade, about $1trillion, that is outside the agreement now.   This round is expected to cover no fewer than 15 differenttrade segments, including completely new ones such asintellectual property (software, for example), services,finance and investments, textiles, and agricultural products.At the same time, the negotiators will be trying to toughendisciplinary measures so that violating the rules will be farcostlier. This, advocates say, is needed to reverse acontinuing backward drift toward protectionism and to end theneed for unilateral trade legislation.   The wide scope of the current talks and the touchy natureof some of the issues only compound another chronic problem-- the tendency of negotiators at meetings such as GATT to goon talking in circles until their political masters tell themit's time to fish or cut bait. The Houston summiteers won'tbe dealing in details of the treaty, but the U.S., for one,is expected to demand that the summit participants committhemselves as a body to giving their minions at GATT thatneeded kick in the pants.   &quot;We'll insist very strongly that the importance of thistrade negotiation be recognized and it be given impetus fromthe highest levels, &quot; says David Mulford, the U.S. Treasuryundersecretary for international affairs. That's as it shouldbe, says Allan Meltzer, an economist at Pittsburgh's CarnegieMellon University. &quot;The biggest stimulus to world growth ofthe past 40 years has been trade,&quot; he says, noting thatprosperity from commerce also tends to consolidate democraticmovements.   So the desired goal is to get from the summit anunequivocal commitment to the success of the GATT talks(meaning an agreement that covers the maximum amount oftrade) and to their completion on time, come hell or highwater.   Getting such firm backing will be harder than it mightseem, for everyone at the summit table will have constituentsto protect. European nations and the U.S., for example, stillshield their textile industries against developing nations,which are pressing to have trade barriers lowered so thattheir advantages in labor costs can come into play.   Agriculture is even more sensitive. The Houston summit maybe the last chance for Europe and the U.S. to resolve theirconsiderable differences over farm commodities. Theseagricultural commodities are still heavily subsidized byWestern European powers and the U.S. But the Europeans haveso far been reluctant to cut or abandon export subsidies inparticular and thus expose their farmers to greaterfree-market pressures.   If the Europeans don't endorse a GATT agreement that wouldinclude freer trade in commodities and many other products,the fortunes of the East Bloc countries will be hurt. Theirstruggling new governments desperately need open markets ifthey are to earn the hard currency required to climb out ofthe hole they've dug themselves into over the past 45 years,and agricultural exports in particular would help a lot.   The entire spectrum of East Bloc problems will consume alot of discussion time at the summit. How to clean up adegraded environment -- and how to pay for it -- is one ofthe biggest individual issues.   Under a Communist rule that emphasized production aboveall, much of the region has become an environmental sinkhole.Lacking control devices, its power plants and factories belchpoisonous fumes and particulates into the atmosphere, and itswater supplies are degraded. Poland is a mess, and EastGermany, with 17 million people, produces more acid rain thanWest Germany, which has 60 million. In the Soviet Union, thepopulation is just starting to learn of and respond to theenormous consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster offour years ago.   Initiatives addressing a reeling Soviet economy willcertainly be raised, and not just for the sake of the Sovietsthemselves. Because of Eastern European dependence on Sovietenergy and markets, &quot;Soviet economic collapse presents thegreatest threat to the new democracies of Eastern Europe andcould even derail their progress toward democraticmarket-based economies,&quot; says Robert Hormats, vice chairmanof Goldman Sachs International and a member of the U.S.delegation at eight consecutive economic summits during theCarter and Reagan administrations.   In another initiative, the U.S. is certain to press for awider and deeper level of cooperation in battling the drugscourge. It will probably want greater commitment tointernational campaigns against drug traffic, particularlyefforts to hunt down money-launderers.   On top of all this, the Seven will have the usual -- andvitally important -- task of ensuring that their own economicmachinery, which dominates the world economy, continues torun smoothly. The current economic expansion, mature andsomewhat sluggish after eight years, shows no sign of endingimminently. But it has slowed down; growth is expected to beonly 2% to 3% this year.   As always, the summit participants will have to steerbetween the twin threats of inflation and recession. Theformer has been a greater concern lately; a combination ofstronger inflationary pressures and greater competition forcapital has led the major central banks to tighten theirmonetary policies in recent months. The ensuing higherinterest rates have crimped growth projections, causing someeconomists to shave their estimates for expansion this year.   But the summiteers will probably be reluctant to loosenthe reins; continuing vigilance will be needed because theeconomic integration of the two Germanys has the potentialfor increasing inflation. So interest rates are expected toremain fairly high.   Instead, the participants may seek to revitalize the worldeconomy by calling for higher rates of savings andinvestment. And Japan and the European allies will probablypressure the U.S. to reduce its budget deficit.   They'll be preaching to the converted. &quot;A budget deal isessential for continued strong growth,&quot; says economist JohnTaylor, a member of President Bush's Council of EconomicAdvisers. To get the nation's long-term savings rate up, headds, reduction of the deficit is essential.   The Seven will probably not need to take any sweeping,sudden steps to reduce trade imbalances, though fine-tuningwill probably be discussed. These imbalances, thoughpersistent, have remained under control, and there is nostrong evidence that they will suddenly and significantlyworsen.   So far, the surge of the dollar against the yen hasn'taggravated the trade imbalance between Japan and the U.S.,and the two nations have recently agreed on steps to whittleit down. The projected revival of Eastern Europe and theeconomic integration of Western Europe in 1992 are expectednot only to increase growth but also to slim down Germany'sbig trade surplus.   The economic integration of the two Germanys willcertainly be discussed, including the likely effects of itscurrency union, which officially took effect last week.Germany (shedding the &quot;West&quot;) has a lot on its plate. &quot;Muchof our capacities will be devoted to developments east of theElbe,&quot; says Stefan Auwaerter, international economist atDeutsche Bank AG in Frankfurt. He says that his country'sprimary goal will be to ensure that &quot;the transformation to amarket economy proceeds without too much shake-up&quot; in theform of unemployment or excessive emigration from the East.   Don't expect, however, any summit agreement on anothermuch-touted step toward economic integration -- a singleEuropean currency. &quot;It's something of a pipe dream,&quot; says TimCongdon, economist at the London bond firm of Gerrard andamp;National PLC. Unifying German currencies is one thing. Tryingto convert the long-term debt markets of several majorcurrencies into a new Euromoney is another thing entirely, hebelieves.   &quot;The United States of Europe will be a long time coming,&quot;he adds, &quot;and certainly in the British case we don't want tobe a member of the United States of Europe.&quot;   ---   Mr. Truell is a staff reporter in The Wall StreetJournal's Washington bureau.</TEXT></DOC>