<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910212-0014</DOCNO><DOCID>910212-0014.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>02/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   BUSH DECLARED the allies will press their air war againstIraq &quot;for a while.&quot;   The president described the air campaign as &quot;very, veryeffective.&quot; But, after hearing a report from Cheney andPowell, the president also implied that he expects commandersto make a request to launch ground operations before long.Meanwhile, Israel's defense minister warned Bush that hiscountry's patience is wearing thin over Iraqi Scud missileattacks. In the Gulf, allied jets stepped up their bombingraids against Iraqi targets, and the city of Basra was againpounded. Soviet envoy Primakov arrived in Baghdad for ameeting today with Saddam Hussein.</LP><TEXT>   Iraq's religious affairs minister said &quot;thousands&quot; ofcivilians have been killed or wounded in the bombing. It wasthe first time a senior Iraqi official had spoken of suchhigh civilian losses.   ---   MANDELA'S WIFE PLEADED innocent to kidnap charges as awitness vanished.   Winnie Mandela's trial on kidnap and assault chargessuddenly was halted when prosecutors in Johannesburg said akey witness -- one of the alleged victims -- had beenabducted. Announcement of the disappearance of the witnesswas made after Mrs. Mandela, wife of South Africananti-apartheid leader Nelson Mandela, and three co-defendantspleaded not guilty in the 1988 kidnapping of four young men,one of whom was later found dead. The case was adjourneduntil today while police investigated the incident, whichofficials feared could frighten the other youths fromtestifying.   The case suffered an earlier setback when four additionaldefendants who were scheduled for trial skipped bail. Theyare still being sought by police.   ---   Lithuania's Parliament voted to make a declaration of anindependent, democratic state, as final figures from aweekend plebiscite showed that 90% of those voting supportedthe Soviet republic's independence drive. PresidentLandsbergis said he feared the Kremlin may crack down onLithuania unless the West shows more support.   ---   Negotiators from 22 nations met in Vienna to discuss thesecond stage of an accord to cut conventional forces inEurope. The talks have been overshadowed by U.S. accusationsthat the Soviets are trying to circumvent the treaty byreclassifying ground forces as naval units and by shiftingweapons to areas outside the treaty zone.   ---   The World Council of Churches debated its policies towardwomen at a meeting in Australia as the council's presidentaccused members of sexism. The Rev. Lois Wilson cited thefact that the percentage of women delegates at the assemblyfailed to reach the 40% quota that had been set at theorganization's last meeting seven years ago.   ---   Japanese technicians delayed action during a mishap at anuclear plant Saturday because they suspected that a gaugemeasuring radioactivity was broken, Tokyo officials said. Anegligible amount of radiation escaped into the atmospherebefore an emergency system shut off the plant in Fukui,according to the plant's operator.   ---   German authorities began investigating officials ofStrabag Bau AG on suspicion that the construction companyviolated a U.N. embargo against Iraq, the local prosecutor'soffice said. The probe by the state of North Rhine-Westphaliainvolves maintenance work allegedly done by the company at anairport it built in the city of Basra.   ---   South American nations banned food imports from Peru andbegan border medical controls to prevent the spread of acholera epidemic that has killed more than 60 Peruvians in aweek. The World Health Organization warned that the outbreakcould spread throughout most of Latin America.   ---   Doctors in 13 states soon will be allowed to see thegovernment's standards for reimbursing physicians underMedicare. Beginning next month, the doctors will be given theinformation as part of a yearlong experiment to determine howknowledge of the standards will affect billing practices.   ---   Illiteracy is climbing among blind students because manyaren't learning Braille in public schools, the head of anational parents group said. Nearly half of all blind andvision-impaired students read Braille in 1965 but by 1989,the number had dropped to 12%, according to figures providedby the American Printing House for the Blind.   ---   Washington announced it is giving $82 million in aid tohelp Haiti complete its transition to democracy. Thestatement by the Agency for International Development cameless than a week after leftist priest Jean-Bertrand Aristidewas sworn in as Haiti's first democratically electedpresident.   ---   Salvadoran rebels killed two military officers and atleast 11 other soldiers in a apparent rout of any infantryunit in a northern province of El Salvador, the army said. Itsaid 20 other soldiers were wounded in the fighting, whichoccurred Sunday.   ---   U.S. and Philippine negotiators opened a fifth round oftalks on the future of American military bases in thePhilippines with both sides voicing guarded optimism for anearly agreement. A lease on the bases expires in Septemberand differences on compensation for further U.S. use of thefacilities has blocked a new treaty.   ---   Died: William Randle Barnett, 82, former chairman ofBarnett Bank of Jacksonville and former director of BarnettBanks Inc., Sunday, in Jacksonville, Fla.</TEXT></DOC>