<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920302-0200</DOCNO><DOCID>920302-0200.</DOCID><HL>   The Modern Okies:   Industrial Migrants   Scour U.S. For Work,   With Dwindling Luck   ---   Jackie Vanya, a Steelworker,   Uproots Family 4 Times,   Ends Up Home and Broke   ---   Why He Shot Diablo the Dog   ----   By Dana Milbank   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/02/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   HOUSTON -- The gold rush had the Forty-niners, the GreatDepression the Okies. Now, there are the Vanyas.   Four times since 1975, Jackie Vanya has uprooted his wifeand children searching for work in the steel industry. Andwith each move, he has left behind a little piece of himself:friends in Texas, children in Oklahoma, belongings inPennsylvania.</LP><TEXT>   But the worst moment came a year ago, in Milton, Pa. Mr.Vanya couldn't find space for his dog Diablo on his trip backhome to Houston. So he dug a hole in the back yard, calledDiablo for the last time, and shot him.   The odyssey has taken its toll. The 43-year-old formerstar fullback on his high-school football team -- nicknamed&quot;Bear&quot; because of his ferocious play -- is once againunemployed. He has endured a heart attack and wears anitroglycerin capsule around his neck. His wife has wrestledwith a drinking problem.   The family lives here in his father's home these days,collecting food stamps and wondering what's next. &quot;Each timeyou move it seems like something for the better,&quot; he says,&quot;and each time it ends in disaster.&quot;   That is the lament of today's industrial migrants --displaced workers who travel the country in search of work.Over 1.3 million unemployed pulled up stakes in the 1980s,according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Many were partof a broader exodus leaving depressed economies in Michigan,Ohio and Pennsylvania. But increasingly, the migrants comefrom the ranks of white-collar and service workers.   While often reluctant to move, the new migrants see littlealternative: Many job losers who refuse to leave home wind upin minimum-wage, part-time jobs, or seeking relief on welfarerolls or even in homeless shelters. They have become &quot;a lostgeneration&quot; without any solutions, says Carrie Leana, aprofessor at the University of Pittsburgh's business schoolwho has studied unemployed steelworkers.   Migrants do better economically. Of people who lost jobsbetween 1985 and 1990, 87% of migrants found new jobs; only70% of non-movers did, according to the Bureau of LaborStatistics. &quot;A guy who goes where the jobs are may not makeas much money as he once did, but at least he's working. Andwork does something for people,&quot; says Joseph C. Anderson, whoruns the United Steelworkers' re-employment office inHouston.   Something, but not necessarily enough. A continuing BostonCollege study of a General Motors Corp. plant in Fort Wayne,Ind., where most of the 2,900 workers had earlier lost theirjobs at other GM plants, has found fierce resentment amongmigrants. Many must settle for lesser jobs or shifts thanthey worked before. Their presence has fueled such antagonismwithin the local union and among natives that researcher RussEckel, who is conducting the Boston College study, contendsmigrancy is the chief cause of the plant's problems. Themovers also have higher rates of drug and alcohol abuse anddivorce than other auto workers.   A GM spokeswoman says the Fort Wayne plant has one of thebest quality records in the company's truck and bus group,and that its &quot;management-union relationship is very good.&quot;   But Mr. Eckel says: &quot;The experience of migrants isantithetical to building a new, trusting labor-relationssystem that everyone says we need to be competitive. Peopleare much more disaffected and alienated, and they are muchless willing to make a commitment to a particular plant,community and corporation.&quot;   Mr. Vanya never expected to be a migrant. He was born onHouston's east side in 1948, the grandson of a refineryworker and son of an Armco Inc. steelworker. The oldest offive boys, Jackie helped his dad, the local union president,organize mills on weekends, earning a nickel for eachpamphlet he handed out. After two years of junior college andtwo years playing semipro football with the TulsaThunderbirds while working in a sporting-goods store, hereturned to Houston as an apartment manager.   Soon, with his father's help, he landed a coveted job as ajanitor in Armco's No. 1 melt shop, where scrap steel wasturned to molten metal at temperatures higher than 3,100degrees. Melt-shop work paid best, and Mr. Vanya early onresolved to become a melter himself. But it was also thetoughest and most dangerous work in the mill: Over the years,Mr. Vanya has been scarred by stray drops of molten steel andonce lost a friend who fell into a vat of the fiery liquid.   Back then, in 1973, Mr. Vanya was confident that theplant, which employed 6,000, would sustain him for alifetime. The plant stretched for six miles along the Port ofHouston and was an entire community. Houses were built sideby side, down the street from the fancier homes of managers.Workers prospered and had their own shooting range, bowlingleagues and softball teams.   But Armco's own prosperity was waning. Orders beganfalling, and the company didn't have the expensive newpollution controls that would soon be required. So inNovember 1975, when it came time for the yearly furlough, Mr.Vanya was told he wouldn't be called back. He found temporarywork on the graveyard shift at a local tool company, but thatjob, too, disappeared in February 1976.   He resolved to leave Houston to support his growingfamily. His two boys, ages seven and five, had been joined bytwo more children, ages four and two, who he adopted when hemarried a local woman, Paula. &quot;There was always another jobup the road, and I was young,&quot; recalls Mr. Vanya. &quot;Whenyou're young, you think you can lick the world.&quot;   He had little trouble finding a new job 90 miles up theroad in Beaumont, Texas, at Korf Industries' Georgetown TexasSteel wire mill. His family was homesick and lived in atrailer park at first, but soon made new friends -- and Mr.Vanya made money. He became a first-line supervisor in themelt shop and earned up to $34,000 a year.   But this didn't last, either. Mr. Vanya lost his job in amanagement cutback in 1981. And the job scene in Texas hadbecome bleak, with local mills hurting and migrants from theNorth pouring in. An ad in the Houston Chronicle for jobs atSoule Steel Co. in Carson, Calif., offered a way out, and Mr.Vanya took it.   As in his first move, Mr. Vanya was able to find higherpay at his new job, earning up to $44,000 as a foreman. Soulewas touted as a secure mill, a &quot;showcase&quot; stocked with newJapanese equipment that made bar for construction. Mrs. Vanyalooked forward to days on the beach, and the children wouldlearn to ride skateboards.   But the move proved more difficult than the first. Theirinfant, J.R., got sick on the drive to California, and theywere stranded in the Texas plains outside Fort Stockton whenthe engine in the '76 Monte Carlo died. The 26-hour trip tooka week. Mr. Vanya began work at Soule late and $2,000 indebt. &quot;Every time you move you start new,&quot; he says. &quot;You'reliving from check to check and you don't get a chance tobuild something for the future.&quot;   Once in California, their former $250-a-month rent inBeaumont became $600, and Mr. Vanya found his higher payquickly disappearing. Mrs. Vanya, who had never venturedfarther than Louisiana before, grew unhappy when she realizedthey could only afford to visit family members in Texas everytwo years.   Worse, after he finally settled in, Mr. Vanya's &quot;showcase&quot;employer fell on tough times. In May 1985, five years afterhe arrived, the company said it would liquidate the plantimmediately.   Mr. Vanya called friends and sent his resumes everywhere.This time, nothing surfaced at first. He and his wife tookminimum-wage jobs operating printing presses. He did yardworkwith the boys, $25 a lawn. He tried painting houses. Finally,a friend called with a tip: There was an opening for a meltshop foreman. Problem is, he would have to take a $4,000 paycut -- and the mill was 3,000 miles away, in tiny Milton, Pa.   When the '76 Monte Carlo turned east, only three Vanyachildren climbed aboard. Two others, his 17- and 15-year-oldsons, had decided not to come along and moved in with theirmother's father in Oklahoma. In Pennsylvania, the Vanyasbegan to feel the full weight of migrancy. Mr. Vanya crashedhis car three times in the unfamiliar snow that winter, andfinally had to buy a new van.   The couple grew increasingly homesick. They would drive 35miles for okra, or a box of grits. They didn't make manyfriends, and rarely left home. &quot;After you move, you harden ateach place,&quot; Mr. Vanya says. &quot;You don't want to get tooattached, because saying goodbye gets more emotional.&quot;   Their son, Sean, had to repeat a year in high school andwas sullen at home. Mrs. Vanya stopped taking care of thehouse and the bills, and her husband soon discovered theliquor bottles she had stashed in the basement. &quot;I couldn'tface getting up every day,&quot; she recalls. They considereddivorce. Mr. Vanya applied for other jobs in New Jersey andVirginia, and was offered a position in Illinois. But hewithdrew. &quot;It wasn't going to get me any closer to Texas,&quot; hesays.   The stress began to show at work. Cargill Inc.'s NorthStar Steel had bought the plant, which had begun to struggle,and Mr. Vanya, anxious about keeping his job, workedconstantly. In return, he faced resentment. More than oneworker told him, &quot;If you did it so good at your last plant,how come it liquidated?&quot;   Mr. Vanya, like the other migrants, became afraid tosuggest changes and had trouble winning co-workers' respect.&quot;You could see the tension in {the migrants},&quot; says a formermelt shop supervisor, himself a migrant from Ohio, Pittsburghand South Carolina. &quot;They were tougher on their people, andthey were always looking over their shoulders.&quot;   In September 1987, Mr. Vanya began fainting on the job. Adoctor figured it was stress. Mr. Vanya was in the parkinglot of a hospital, heading in to see the doctor again aboutthe fainting, when he had his heart attack that winter.   Within a month, though, Mr. Vanya was back working at themill; his insurance had run out and, in any event, thecompany needed his help during a labor dispute. &quot;You couldtell Jackie was pushing himself too hard and he was very highstrung,&quot; says the former supervisor. But the plant's lossesbegan to grow, and by the time the recession arrived in 1990,it seemed doomed. The all-too-familiar day came on Feb. 24,1991. Mr. Vanya says he was told that the plant would beclosed by noon, and that he wouldn't get severance pay.   More desperate than ever, Mr. Vanya found temporary workas a forklift operator for $5.50 an hour. Mrs. Vanya'spart-time day-care work couldn't make up the difference, andby the fall, the couple had no choice but to return to Texas.With no company to pay for the move, they left theirbelongings with their daughter, who decided to stay inPennsylvania.   Still, there was no way to take Diablo along. A stray thatused to run around outside the mill, he was in bad shape whenMr. Vanya took him in and nursed him back to health. When itwas time to go, though, the dog was too wild to let loose orgive to a friend. The pound would have killed him anyway, Mr.Vanya reasoned. So he shot him. &quot;It's the saddest thing I hadhappen to me,&quot; he says.   Thirty family members came for a reunion on Lake Houstonon their first day back. But the community they had yearnedfor had changed. These days, the wind blows dust past themostly deserted mill onto an equally empty Industrial Road.Theaters, bowling alleys and skating rinks have closed. TheArmco plant closed for good in 1982. One former steelworkerdelivers flowers; another fills bags at the grocery store.   For the first time, the Vanya family relies on foodstamps, and Medicaid for his heart medicine. Mrs. Vanya usesthe food stamps; Mr. Vanya is too ashamed to shop with them.He closed his retirement account to pay for the trip down,and he is $7,000 in debt and two months behind on paymentsfor his van.   But he isn't quitting. &quot;I could just cry in my beer, but Iwon't do it because I have pride,&quot; Mr. Vanya says. &quot;I'drather put up a fight. I want to set an example for mychildren.&quot; The options, though, have become thin. He's calledand written steel mills throughout the country, but mostaren't hiring, and those that are want younger managers withbusiness degrees.   He would like to settle in Houston, where he has appliedto local refineries and paper companies, and has looked intomanaging local stores, without success so far. He is workingodd jobs and may move the family into a trailer. &quot;This iswhere I was born and raised, and this is where I want tostay,&quot; Mr. Vanya says. But he knows better. &quot;If somebodycalls up and says, `I've got a job for $35,000 or $40,000,'I'll go. I've got to take care of my family.&quot;   And, luckily for this migrant, his family takes care ofhim. &quot;I wish we could have all these years back,&quot; Mrs. Vanyasays, sitting in their borrowed kitchen, a Marlboro in onehand and her husband's hand in the other. &quot;But I'm with him.If we have to go, we will.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>