<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910513-0068</DOCNO><DOCID>910513-0068.</DOCID><HL>   For a Higher Share Price, Focus Your Business   ----   By Gregg A. Jarrell</HL><DATE>05/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)</IN><NS>STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)</NS><LP>   Corporations restructured in record numbers during the1980s. Spurred by the threat of hostile takeovers andrelatively easy access to large amounts of debt, numerouspublic companies engaged in high-leveraged recapitalizationsand asset restructurings. Invariably, these restructuringsgenerated substantial stock-price gains.   The question is whether the gains were the result of thehigh financial leverage or of the restructuring. In a studywe've just completed, my colleague Robert Comment and I findthat the stock-price gains were generated by real economicefficiencies, specifically decreased diversification.</LP><TEXT>   Corporate diversification -- the practice of combiningdifferent businesses under common corporate management -- haslong been supposed to create value for shareholders. The manybenefits claimed for diversification include reducing overallcompany risk (&quot;earnings smoothing&quot;) and achieving managerialand financial economies of scale and scope. Diversificationthrough conglomerate mergers became a popular policy forgrowth during the 1960s and '70s. While some growth bydomestic firms may have been channeled in this direction bytight antitrust restraints against mergers within the sameline of business, diversification has also been popular inJapan, where these restraints never applied.   The 471 companies in the Federal Trade Commission's Lineof Business Survey, for example, increased their number oflines from an average of fewer than three in 1950 to morethan seven in 1975, while the top 200 companies increasedtheir average number of lines from 4.8 to 10.9 over the sameperiod. By 1980, diversification had become a widely acceptedbusiness strategy for risk reduction and profitable growth.   Today, however, the conventional wisdom on diversificationhas been completely reversed. Managers now are advised toeschew diversification and restructure the far-flungenterprise that resulted from past diversificationstrategies: to &quot;focus,&quot; that is, specialize in &quot;core&quot;businesses.   This elevation of corporate focus is a lesson learned fromthe hostile takeovers of the past decade. The high-leveragetakeover artists preyed especially on the more diversifiedpublic firms. The message to management was thatdiversification would attract takeovers.   The critical re-examination of diversification has beenfueled largely by the experiences and anecdotes of thoseinvolved in the takeovers and restructurings of the 1980s.Anecdotes are important and useful sources of knowledge. But,as the Nobel laureate George Stigler tells his students, theplural of anecdote is data. In this spirit, we analyzed dataon more than 3,000 firms listed on the New York and Americanstock exchanges between 1979 and 1988 to test severalpropositions regarding corporate diversification. Our resultsoffer lessons important to economists and managers alike.   Our research answers two basic questions: First, did U.S.corporations increase operating focus during 1978-88; second,how important is a change in focus, compared with a change infinancial leverage, in determining stock returns?   As the accompanying chart shows, the answer to the firstquestion is &quot;yes&quot; (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ May13, 1991). The chart plots an average measure of focus forevery year from 1978 to 1988. (Companies that became takeoverand merger targets were excluded from the sample in the yearof their purchase, thereby eliminating virtually all mergerand tender offer premiums from these figures.) The focusmeasure is the percent of firms that have a single businesssegment, that is, are totally focused. There is a steadyincrease in focus over the entire period, with the percent ofsingle-segment firms rising from 35.6% in 1978 to 54.3% by1988. (The same story is told by the five other focusmeasures that we considered.)   Clearly, the modern emphasis on corporate focus is not amere cliche, but instead reflects a fundamental,across-the-board policy shift in policy among publicly tradedU.S. firms. Our formal statistical tests indicate that focusincreases have a relatively large positive influence on stockreturns. The firms that experienced significant increases infocus out-performed the general market by about 2 to 4percentage points in the year of the focus change, while thefirms that decreased their focus underperformed the market byabout 4 percentage points. This is quite a swing inperformance.   Our study also shows that increases in focus are indeedassociated with increases in company risk. Put differently,our statistics support the proposition that diversificationactually does tend to smooth earnings and reduce thevariability of net cash flows. Despite this earningssmoothing, however, diversification does not generallyprovide a net benefit to shareholders. This is no surprisebecause, in reasonably efficient capital markets,diversification can be accomplished by shareholders throughthe simple expedient of holding stock in portfolios. Ourresults suggest that the historical pursuit ofcorporate-level risk reduction through diversificationstrategies has been motivated more by the interests of&quot;stakeholders&quot; than by the interests of owners.   There are, though, reasons for believing thatdiversification might have been relatively efficient forshareholders in earlier times, but not today. Yale lawprofessor Oliver Williamson has proposed a theory thatinternal capital markets can provide for organizationalefficiencies in allocating capital across uses, and thatfirms can reduce their reliance on relatively inefficientexternal markets by diversifying.   Recently, Michael Jensen of Harvard has suggested thatProf. Williamson's theory implies that improvements in theefficiency of capital markets, including the development ofactive markets for collateralized debt and junk bonds, andthe deregulation of brokerage commissions, should haveresulted in reductions in corporate diversifications. Also,the tax reforms of the 1980s, by reducing the tax wedgeassociated with dividend payments to shareholders, reducedthe relative tax burden of paying out dividends rather thanreinvesting retained earnings.   In addition, the pro-merger antitrust policies of theReagan administration removed what had been rather strictrestrictions on horizontal mergers. With this bureaucratichurdle removed, firms dedicated to growth by merger have beeninclined to consider acquiring firms in the same business.   While we can only speculate as to the fundamental economicreasons why the increase in focus during the 1980s improvedstock performance, our statistical tests rule out financialleverage as being an independent causal factor. True, at thesame time as they were becoming more focused, the companiesin our sample were taking on more leverage. But in fact,higher leverage is associated with reduced stock returns,after accounting for changes in focus and other operatingfactors.   While this result may sound shocking to some, it reallymakes good sense. Financial leverage is not some magic potionthat, in and of itself, creates significant value forequityholders. The experiences of highly leveraged companiesduring the recent recession testify to this point.   Indeed, it is a basic proposition of financial economics-- called the Mandamp;M proposition for its two Nobel prize-winninginventors, Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller -- that thevalue of the company is independent of its financialleverage, given the production and investment decisions ofthe company. This means that the value of the company dependsonly on its real economic prospects, as judged by the capitalmarkets. Financial leverage can influence company value onlyif it affects the market's assessment of these real economicprospects. Our statistical tests conform to the Mandamp;Mproposition.   Our finding that increased operating focus, not financialleverage, generates stock returns, is also consistent withthe free-cash-flow theory of Michael Jensen, which postulatesthat high leverage can be a powerful disciplining device,because it forces top management to undertake value-enhancingstrategic changes. Since most of these value-enhancingmeasures translate into increasing operating focus, ourempirical results are quite consistent with Prof. Jensen'stheory.   We have documented a profound shift in corporate policyaway from diversification. This shift is associated withsignificant shareholder gains. These shareholder gains seemto have been generated by real economic efficiencies.   ---   Mr. Jarrell is a professor at the University ofRochestor's Simon School of Business.</TEXT></DOC>