<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0083</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0083.</DOCID><HL>   Ending Abuse of Death Penalty Appeals   ----   By Charlotte Low Allen</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   These days, a sentence to death is more like a sentence toa decade on death row. The average capital case takes 106months from crime to execution, a committee headed by formerJustice William Lewis F. Powell Jr. reported in a studyissued last September.   The investigation of the crime, the trial and sentencing,the direct appeal to the highest court in the state followedby a bid for U.S. Supreme Court review -- all this accountsfor only 48 of the 106 months. Most of the remaining timegoes to fashioning, presenting and litigating petitions forhabeas corpus.</LP><TEXT>   Inmates in state prisons can file their petitions in bothstate and federal court. But state courts tend to give thepetitions short shrift, especially second and third petitionsafter the first has been denied. The major delaying factor indeath cases, accounting for more than 80% of the average timecapital inmates spend on habeas corpus, is the federal writ.There are no time deadlines for habeas corpus. The typical&quot;deadline&quot; in capital cases is a looming execution date,which usually sets off a new round of writs.   This ability to spend years in the federal court systemlong after a conviction has become final is a bonanza of theEarl Warren era. In 1963, the Supreme Court handed down twoimportant rulings that opened the floodgates for writpetitions from state prisoners. The first relaxed aonce-ironclad rule that required them to exhaust state-courtremedies first. The second allowed prisoners to raiseconstitutional issues piecemeal over a series of writs,trying out some issues in the first writ, others later. Theonly bar is &quot;abuse of the writ,&quot; deliberately holding back aclaim in order to manipulate the legal system.   Few death row prisoners are executed these days withouthaving made at least two trips to the Supreme Court onfederal habeas corpus writs. Few prisoners are executed,period. Since 1976, when the Supreme Court reapproved thedeath penalty in a Georgia case, there have been only 124executions. Most of the rest of the total U.S. death rowpopulation of more than 2,327 is in court. In Georgia,prosecutors and defense lawyers are still litigatingexecution cases dating from 1974, when its new death law wentinto effect.   This has led to calls for reform in the federal habeassystem. Next week the Senate is scheduled to hear twoseparate and competing reform packages by Senate JudiciaryChairman Joseph Biden and ranking Republican Strom Thurmond.Both packages would set time deadlines -- strict in theThurmond bill, less so in the Biden bill -- for filing writpetitions. In the House, the Judiciary Committee's courtssubcommittee plans to start hearings Wednesday on habeascorpus.   But congressional reforms may not be necessary. In fact,if Congress passes the Biden bill, the effect may well be tosabotage the gradual course of federal habeas corpus reformthat the Supreme Court has undertaken on its own startingwhen Warren Burger replaced Earl Warren, and acceleratingsince William Rehnquist succeeded Mr. Burger.   The court has removed entire congeries of legal issues,such as those pertaining to the legality of state searchwarrants from federal habeas corpus purview. In a doctrinecalled &quot;procedural default,&quot; the justices have refused to letfederal courts review questions that the defendant's lawyersdid not raise properly at earlier stages in the proceedings.   In February 1989, the Supreme Court handed down a sleeperdecision, Teague v. Lane, holding that state prisoners couldnot use federal habeas corpus as a vehicle for making newconstitutional law unless the proposed new rule (with someexceptions), pertained to &quot;bedrock&quot; constitutional rights,presumably on the order of the right to counsel. The rulingeffectively told state inmates to raise such claims in statecourt on direct appeal or forget about them.   On March 5 of this year, the justices issued two morerulings extending Teague v. Lane to capital cases. Two otherdeath cases with Teague issues were argued in February andApril and are awaiting decision.   The seemingly endless case of Robert Alton Harris, set forargument Monday before the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appealsis a case study in the way the current open-endedpost-conviction review system works in capital cases. Mr.Harris was tried and sentenced to death in 1979 for themurder of two teen-age boys at Miramar Lake near San Diego inJuly 1978. In 1981, the California Supreme Court affirmed hisconviction and sentence -- one of only four such affirmationsduring the tenure of liberal Chief Justice Rose Bird.   The gruesome details of the murders and of Mr. Harris'scriminal career in general -- the eight shots he plugged intothe boys before finishing off the hamburgers they had beeneating, the fact that he was already on parole for beating aneighbor to death and trying to set him afire, the forciblesodomy he committed on a fellow inmate while awaiting trial-- can be read in the California high court's 1981 opinion.Suffice it to say that Mr. Harris's wife testified for theprosecution at his sentencing hearing.   During the 11 years since his conviction, Mr. Harris andhis lawyers have filed seven petitions for habeas corpus,four in state court, three in federal court. Over the yearshe has alleged: that his sentence was out of proportion tohis crimes; that the trial judge refused to give a&quot;diminished capacity&quot; instruction to the jury based on Mr.Harris's smoking two joints of marijuana before the murders;that, although Mr. Harris is white, he was the victim of aracially discriminatory capital sentencing system inCalifornia. He won some court victories that higher courtslater reversed. By the end of last year, it seemed he hadexhausted all possible avenues of legal relief. An April 3execution date was set. He was to be the first criminal to goto the gas chamber in California since 1967.   Just a week before Mr. Harris's scheduled execution date,his attorneys filed the seventh and latest petition, winninga stay of execution. The grounds for the newest writ? Twocourt-appointed psychiatrists who examined Mr. Harris beforethe sentencing hearing failed to discern any signs of organicbrain damage. His lawyers now say that Mr. Harris was avictim of fetal alcohol syndrome, hyperactivity and otherbrain disorders.   In 1985, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a defendantfacing a death sentence has a right of access to the servicesof a &quot;competent&quot; court-appointed psychiatrist. So why didn'tMr. Harris raise this ground in 1985 or earlier rather thanon the eve of his execution in 1990? &quot;We've been trying toget the court to pay for an EEG since 1982, but the courtrefused,&quot; is the response of Mr. Harris's lead lawyer,Charles Sevilla. &quot;Finally last year, we paid for oneourselves.&quot;   The issue of Mr. Harris's mental state now and in 1978 ismurky. He raised an alibi defense at trial and a marijuanaintoxication defense sometime later in the writ process. Anelectroencephalogram administered to him before the 1979sentencing hearing yielded normal results, although a 1971EEG had shown abnormalities a probation officer attributed tochronic glue-sniffing. At any rate, the murders, whichoccurred so Mr. Harris and his brother could obtain a getawaycar for a bank robbery they had planned and rehearsed forweeks, did not exactly bespeak a disordered brain.   The Harris case has all the earmarks of a candidate forquick termination under Teague v. Lane: an attempt toestablish a new rule of law via federal habeas corpus longafter the time for direct appeal has expired. That is wherethe Biden bill would come into play. While setting a one-yeartime limit at the end of direct appeal (subject to numerousexceptions) for getting all federal habeas claims on file, italso contains language that effectively overrides both Teaguev. Lane and the procedural default rule the Supreme Court setearlier. The Biden bill is to the Supreme Court's recenthabeas corpus decisions what the pending Kennedy-Hawkinscivil rights bill is to its affirmative action rulings.   Fortunately for prosecutors, the Biden bill has littlechance of passing, mostly because of a controversialamendment by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) that wouldeffectively bring racial quotas to state death penalty lawsby allowing statistical challenges to them. (The tougherThurmond bill is also said to have little future.) This maybe all for the best, for the Supreme Court seems to be movingefficiently on its own toward putting an end to open-endeddeath appeals.   ---   Mrs. Allen is an editor at Insight magazine.</TEXT></DOC>