<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910122-0105</DOCNO><DOCID>910122-0105.</DOCID><HL>   Why Arabs Aren't Rioting   ----   By Daniel Pipes</HL><DATE>01/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   After six days of war against Iraq, the Arab masses in theMiddle East are virtually silent. The West Bank is not inturmoil, the U.S. Embassy in Jordan is not burning, thestreets of Cairo are not filled with overturned cars, andSyrian troops are not mutinying. Where is the rage? Itsabsence, especially in those countries allied with the U.S.,is perhaps the most surprising development since hostilitiesbegan.   Only where the authorities smile on anti-Americanactivities (Tunisia, Libya, Sudan, Lebanon and Jordan), haveany significant protests taken place. This quiet isunexpected because a consensus had formed since August to theeffect that the U.S. government would pay a terriblepolitical price for making war on Saddam Hussein. From theMiddle East itself came hair-raising forecasts about thefuries of anti-Americanism and the price to be paid by U.S.allies.</LP><TEXT>   In the West, journalists echoed these warnings. Justbefore war broke out, Peter Ford and George D. Moffett IIIwrote in the Christian Science Monitor: &quot;Even if Israel isnot involved, a U.S. victory could unleash a wave ofpolitical radicalism, threatening Arab regimes friendly tothe U.S.&quot; Robin Wright of the Los Angeles Times went further,portraying even an allied victory over Iraq as futile. Herreasoning? &quot;The long-term cost-benefit ratio on a host ofother fronts&quot; is tipped against the U.S. Many Middle Eastspecialists shared these fears. Ann Mosely Lesch of VillanovaUniversity, for example, cautioned that war against Iraq&quot;would arouse widespread popular opposition&quot; in Egypt.   These analysts all worried about the re-emergence of the&quot;street&quot; as a powerful factor in Arab politics. They sawSaddam Hussein's belligerence making him a successor to GamalAbdel Nasser in the eyes of many Arabs, a man capable ofuniting the Arabs and standing up to the West. Then camereports of anti-government and pro-Saddam riots in Syria,suggesting much trouble to come; a ban on all streetdemonstrations in Egypt -- even those favoring governmentpolicies -- pointed to the depth of fears among theauthorities in another American ally.   But the street has not risen in Saddam's support, at leastnot in the first days of war, when it would have been mostexpected and most alarming. Why were the analysts wrong? Whatdoes quiescence suggest for U.S. policy?   The experts ignored three important facts about the MiddleEast:   -- The prevailing mood of apathy. For years, Arabs havenot rioted for transnational causes; they took matters intotheir own hands only when an issue was of direct personalconcern. Arabs have proven themselves unusually prone to riotagainst currency adjustments, subsidy cuts and otherausterity reforms -- as shown by disturbances in Morocco,Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Sudan and Jordan. Indeed, they havewon a reputation at the International Monetary Fund for anunwillingness to tolerate even the most modest economicadjustments.   But abstract causes are another matter. Amuch-disappointed people no longer has the energy to take tothe streets. Arabs have been in what historian Hisham Sharabidubs a &quot;paralyzing trauma&quot; since 1967, when Israeli forcessimultaneously defeated Syrian, Jordanian and Egyptian forcesin a mere six days.   Khomeini's expectations to the contrary, the IranianRevolution failed to mobilize fundamentalist Muslims in suchcountries as Iraq and Egypt. Ironically, Israelis were theonly ones in the Middle East to demonstrate against theirgovernment's activities in the 1982 Lebanon war and themassacre at Sabra and Chatilla. &quot;The Satanic Verses&quot; promptedriots in Pakistan and India (and among their kinsmen inBritain) but not in the Arabic-speaking countries. In thehopes of stimulating more activism, Arab activists scathinglycondemn this apathy. In one memorable passage, Halim Barakat,a sociologist, wrote that &quot;the Arab world stretches acrosscontinents like a huge stranded octupus, drained of its waterof life and indignation.&quot;   -- The raw power of today's regimes. While Iraq has themost notorious repressive apparatus of any state in theMiddle East, comparable institutions exist in nearly allArabic-speaking countries. Even such apparently fragilegovernments as those of Saudi Arabia and Jordan engage inwhat Michael Hudson of Georgetown University has dubbed&quot;monarchy by mukhabarat {security apparatus}.&quot; In most cases,protesters cannot reach the streets, much less cause damageor challenge the regimes' bases of power.   The intifada in the occupied territories is testimony notonly to Palestinian anger but to Israeli tolerance ofpolitical protest. What little dissidence is permitted inArab lands exists to prove the regime's liberal credentials.More often, the leaders schedule street demonstrations tobolster their shaky policies; thus, Moammar Gadhafi himselfparticipated in a procession three days ago in Libya.   -- Respect for a winner. Saddam went into battle exudingconfidence, threatening to set a fire that would &quot;devour onehalf of Israel&quot; and predicting that American soldiers wouldsoon &quot;swim in their own blood.&quot; Not for the first time, manyin the Middle East let emotions of the moment carry themaway. Neglecting the lopsided balance of power -- includingthe economic sanctions against Iraq, the forces from 28countries arrayed against it, and the allies' overwhelmingsuperiority in arms -- they dreamed of victory.   Now that war has begun, some of Saddam's partisans areintent on deluding themselves about its course. Obsessed byhatreds, they see only his accomplishments -- especially hispurposefully unsurgical strikes against Israel's cities. (AJordanian mother of two small children told the PhiladelphiaInquirer: &quot;I can't begin to explain how happy I am. . . . Itdoesn't matter if I die now. For the first time I've seencasualties in Tel Aviv caused by an Arab country.&quot;)   But reality is slowly setting in. The missiles againstIsrael have so far wreaked breathtakingly little damage and amere handful of American soldiers have lost their lives. Incontrast, Iraq is subjected to the heaviest air bombardmentin history. Bravado aside, the Middle East is characterizedby an acute respect for power. A dread of ending up on thelosing side has cooled the ardor for Saddam's cause. As anArab proverb puts it: &quot;Kiss the hand you cannot bite.&quot; Today,that is the American hand.   The fact that a U.S.-led war against Iraq failed to promptriots has implications both for Operation Desert Storm andfor American policies after hostilities end.   For Desert Storm, it suggests that American forces enjoymore leeway than was previously thought. Should combat leadto substantial losses of life on the Iraqi side, Americangenerals need not feel restricted by worries about MiddleEast reactions. The occupation of a city like Basra, insouthern Iraq, should be feasible for at least a few weeks.   As for the postwar period, assuming that allied forcesprevail, the U.S. government will exert extraordinaryinfluence in the Middle East for a period of months. Far frombeing enraged at Americans, Arabs will respect them more thanever before: We did what we said we would do.   At that point, the critical goal for the U.S. governmentwill be to exploit an ephemeral opportunity and not tosquander it -- as it did the last time such a chance existed,in late 1982. Then, Israel's successes in Lebanon offered theU.S. government the possibility to reconstitute the sickLebanese polity. Instead of this, however, Washington shuntedLebanon aside and announced the Reagan Plan for resolving theWest Bank imbroglio. Nothing came of the Reagan Plan, but bythe time this became apparent, the moment had passed to makea difference in Lebanon.   Unfortunately, the Bush administration's diplomatic recordover the past two years suggests that, under intense Saudipressure, it will repeat this mistake and, once hostilitiescease, turn its attention to the Arab-Israeli conflict. Thatwould be a tragedy. Instead, it should concentrate onsettling matters in the Persian Gulf.   Among other goals, this means making sure that Iraq willbe stable, defensible and non-bellicose; that Kuwait need notagain fear invasion; and that a balance of power exists inthe Gulf between Iraq and Iran. The attainment of these goalsis necessary to ensure that American lives and treasure werenot sacrificed in vain.   ---   Mr. Pipes, director of the Foreign Policy ResearchInstitute in Philadephia, has published &quot;The Rushdie Affair&quot;(Birch Lane) and &quot;Greater Syria&quot; (Oxford).</TEXT></DOC>