<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910405-0178</DOCNO><DOCID>910405-0178.</DOCID><HL>   History's Victims:   Now Dying in Iraq,   Kurds Have Suffered   At the Hands of Many   ---   Quest for a Homeland Spawns   Arab, Turk Repressions;   Long U.S. Indifference   ---   Snubbed at State Department   ----   By Geraldine Brooks and Robert S. Greenberger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>IRAN (IR)</RE><LP>   In the panic before Iraqi government troops stormed intothe city of Irbil, a desperate Kurd poured kerosene into hisempty gasoline tank, knowing the makeshift mixture probablywouldn't get his car to the edge of town, much less to theborder.   &quot;Please, tell me,&quot; he said, grinding a fist into hisfurrowed brow. &quot;Why is George Bush fishing while we wait hereto die?&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Now, caught between the ruthlessness of Saddam Hussein andthe indifference of others, Kurds are dying by the thousands,under Iraqi fire or of exposure at icy mountain borders. Itis only the latest chapter for a people whose history hasbeen dogged by violence and repression.   Iraqi Kurds were stunned when the U.S. failed to supporttheir uprising. They didn't realize that the Bushadministration had signaled its indifference long ago. Backin February, a Kurdish delegation arrived for a meeting atthe State Department with Richard Schifter, assistantsecretary of state for human rights. But having invited theKurds, Mr. Schifter didn't meet with them. His superiors atthe State Department were uneasy about such a high-levelsession. Instead, two lower-ranking aides hustled the Kurdsout of the building -- and took them for coffee at a nearbyhotel sandwich shop.   The reception was the administration's way of saying theU.S. wouldn't support a Kurdish rebellion. But the Kurds,with little diplomatic experience, listened instead to whatthe president was saying. Only days before the meeting, hehad stated that &quot;the Iraqi military and the Iraqi people{should} take matters into their own hands to force SaddamHussein the dictator to step aside.&quot;   Mr. Bush's postwar plans, however, apparently were basedon the hope that Saddam Hussein would be overthrown by theIraqi military, not by restless minorities that mightthreaten Iraq's geographic integrity -- and rattle itsneighbors. Moreover, Washington fears getting bogged down inan Iraqi civil war.   President Bush insists the U.S. never made any commitmentto support insurgents in Iraq. At a press conference inCalifornia yesterday, Mr. Bush raised his voice for emphasisand said: &quot;I have not misled anybody.&quot; In addition, &quot;It wasnever a stated objective of the coalition to intervene in theinternal affairs of Iraq.&quot;   He said he deplored the killings but added: &quot;We are notgoing to get sucked into this by sending precious Americanlives into this battle. We've fulfilled our obligations.&quot;   The latest tragedy of the Kurds is taking place in astriking landscape. A girdle of snow-dusted crags encircleslush green hillsides and rolling, fertile valleys. At thistime of year, the air is fragrant with blossoms.   This is Kurdistan: a country that doesn't exist. Forthousands of years, Kurds have worked the soil and grazedtheir animals here. By the seventh century, they were writingpoems in their own language and introducing music to thepalaces of Arab princes. Kurds have a cuisine, a literature,even a unique carpet-soled shoe perfect for trekking theirrocky hillsides. But they never have flown their own flag.Now, parts of ethnic Kurdistan lie in Iraq, Syria, Iran andTurkey.   In each of these countries, the Kurds stand out. These 20million people are as handsome as their land. Lustrous-hairedwomen wear long bright dresses of reds and golds, theirgenerous sleeves tied up as they work. The men are strikingin pantaloons caught at the waist with thick patternedsashes; they often carry flowers in one hand and Kalashnikovrifles in the other.   Also in each of these countries, Kurds are kept down.Turkey, having shrunk from its imperial grandeur, fearsKurdish separatism and until recently jailed Kurds just forsinging Kurdish songs. Syria sees its Kurds as irrelevant toits Arab-nationalist identity, denying many full citizenship.Iran -- Shiite and fundamentalist -- dislikes the secularismof the easy-going, predominantly Sunni Muslim Kurds. Iraq'sSaddam Hussein fears them as one of the few dissident groupshe has been unable to extinguish.   &quot;Nobody wants to see the Kurds get their state,&quot; says aEuropean diplomat. &quot;It would destabilize too many countries.But, at the same time, they are such a convenient tool. Givethem some weapons and they are always ready to fight.&quot;Divided amid countries often at odds with each other, theKurds for years weakened their own cause by becoming pawnsfor their various regimes, sometimes even turning their gunson one another.   Farman Mohamed, an Iraqi Kurdish rebel, named his daughterSevres after the 1920 Treaty of Sevres that supported ahomeland for the Kurds in the postwar carve-up of the OttomanEmpire. Resurgent Turkish power blocked that plan. Now, likemany Kurdish families, Sevres and her father are divided by anational border. During Saddam Hussein's lethal poison-gasattacks on the Kurds in 1988, she and her mother fled toIran. Her father, a geologist, hid out in the mountain caveswith the guerrillas who call themselves Pesh Merga -- We WhoFace Death.   Saddam Hussein tried everything to obliterate theseKurdish rebels: razing some 5,000 villages so localsympathizers couldn't feed them; burning hundred-year-oldwalnut trees and choking springs with concrete so theycouldn't live off the land; deforesting the hills toeliminate hiding places. But all this, and even thechemicals, didn't end a struggle for autonomy that has goneon now for 100 years, sometimes as hit-and-run guerrillaoperations, sometimes as full-blown war.   As soon as allied bombs began falling on Baghdad, Kurdsbegan trickling back across the mountains, infiltrating theirold villages and planning rebellion. Hussein Sinjari, aBritish-educated Iraqi Kurd, had abandoned his business suitlast August for a Pesh Merga sash and assault rifle, and madehis way from London to Kurdistan. &quot;I lived in the mountains,like a goat,&quot; he says, &quot;sometimes fighting but mostlytalking.&quot; The talk, in a series of secret meetings, broughtonce-fractious Kurdish factions into a united front. It alsopersuaded Kurds collaborating with the government to throwtheir support behind a rebel uprising.   Now Mr. Sinjari, like many Kurds, feels betrayed:President Bush urged Iraqis to overthrow Saddam Hussein, andthen, at the height of the Kurds' brief and successfulrebellion, the U.S. permitted Saddam Hussein's use ofhelicopter gunships. Rebellion turned to rout.   The sense of abandonment felt by Kurds is all the morebitter for being familiar. In the early 1970s, HenryKissinger and the Central Intelligence Agency worked with theshah of Iran to back a similar Kurdish revolt. The 1976congressional Pike report on the clandestine activities ofthe CIA gives a telling assessment of how the Kurds wereused.   &quot;Neither the foreign head of state {the shah} nor thepresident and Dr. Kissinger desired victory for our clients,&quot;the report reads. &quot;They merely hoped to ensure that theinsurgents would be capable of sustaining a level ofhostility just high enough to sap the resources of theneighboring state&quot; of Iraq. It adds: &quot;Our clients, who wereencouraged to fight, were not told of this policy. It was acynical enterprise, even in the context of a clandestine aidoperation.&quot;   In March 1975, the U.S. and the shah abruptly dumped theKurds. The Iranian border was closed to them in exchange forIraqi concessions on the Shatt al-Arab border line. The Kurdsretreated, embarking on the same exodus into exile they arerepeating today.   Even now, though, most Kurds remain pro-Western. &quot;If theAmericans want a force to balance Shiite fundamentalism, theywill find it in us,&quot; says Mr. Sinjari. Most Kurds say theyare committed to democracy as the only way to safeguard theirrights, especially in Iraq, which they recognize is a fragilepatchwork of minorities.   Even though the Kurds are five times as numerous as thePalestinians, and their quest for self-determination is insome ways analogous, their cause never has drawn the samedegree of international attention. One reason, perhaps, isthat the mainstream Kurdish guerrilla movements never haveresorted to the international terrorism embraced by somePalestinian groups. Yet the Kurds regularly face the mostbrutal of repression.   At an Iraqi prison in Sulimanyia, a so-called raping roomexemplifies the organized brutality used against Kurds. Thesmall, prefabricated building stands in the prison grounds, apile of traditional Kurdish dresses and women's underweardiscarded at the door. Inside is only a single dirtymattress. Women prisoners were brought here as part of theirroutine of torture, former prisoners say. Male prisoners wereforced to watch the rape of sisters, mothers or fiancees.   Arab states have remained mute about this brutality tofellow Muslims. But under Iraqi repression, Kurds themselvesoften use the Palestinians as an analogy for their ownplight. A teacher describes how she used Palestine to teachthe forbidden history of Kurdistan. She would show picturesof Israelis blowing up a Palestinian house. &quot;I would say, youknow how they destroyed it?&quot; Her students, having seen SaddamHussein level their own villages, would chorus &quot;Yes] Weknow.&quot;   Now, the U.S. administration is under increasing pressureto show that it has some plan to aid Saddam Hussein'sopponents.   &quot;It is one thing not to support the breakup of Iraq. It isanother not to bring pressure to bear on Saddam Hussein tostop this slaughter of women and children,&quot; says Rep. TomLantos, co-chairman of the congressional human rights caucus.Amid the mounting pressure, State Department officials thisweek began meeting with Iraqi dissidents, including, lastnight, a Kurdish representative. But at the same time thedepartment's spokeswoman emphasized that the U.S. wasn'taltering its policy.   Some U.S. supporters of the Kurds note sardonically thatthe session may be coming too late. &quot;These meetings,&quot; saysPeter Galbraith, a Senate Foreign Relations Committee aide,&quot;might give a whole new meaning to the word post-mortem.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>