<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910411-0119</DOCNO><DOCID>910411-0119.</DOCID><HL>   Counterpoint:   Why America Can't Save the Kurds   ----   By Daniel Pipes</HL><DATE>04/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>MIDDLE EAST (ML)</RE><LP>   The slaughter in Iraq of Shiites and Kurds sickens me, butI've reluctantly concluded that President Bush is basicallyright not to intervene on their behalf.   It's obvious why we should want to help the Kurds. Notonly could the U.S. military easily stop the massacre ofcivilians, but Mr. Bush has on several occasions encouragedthe Iraqi people to remove Saddam Hussein from office. TheVoice of Free Iraq, a clandestine radio station probablysponsored by the Central Intelligence Agency, has oftenreinforced this message. &quot;We are with you,&quot; it told would-berevolutionaries, &quot;in every heartbeat, in all your feelings,and in every move you make.&quot; To make matters worse, Americanpromises to shoot down Iraqi fixed-wing aircraft were notcarried out.</LP><TEXT>   There is no denying that the U.S. has incurred some moralresponsibility to aid anti-Saddam forces. Nonetheless, theinterest of both Americans and the people in the region are,in the long-term, best served by forbearance.   To begin with, American moral responsibility is limited.The U.S. government all along emphasized that it would notdetermine Iraq's future. Coming just weeks after tens ofthousands of sorties against Iraqi targets, this statementhas an admittedly peculiar ring. But, with the exception ofsome ill-advised (and off-the-cuff) remarks by PresidentBush, Washington always limited the goals of Operation DesertStorm to Kuwait. It specifically excluded Iraq. If the startof hostilities was announced by a rousing &quot;The liberation ofKuwait has begun,&quot; the end came within hours after Iraqiforces had been expelled from Kuwait. As Secretary of StateJames Baker has pointed out, U.S. officials &quot;repeated overand over again that the removal of Saddam Hussein was neithera military nor a political objective.&quot;   There are worse prospects than Saddam Hussein staying inpower. Here are two: an American occupation of Iraq or thedissolution of that country. U.S. government assistance tothe anti-Saddam forces could over-commit Americans in Iraq.What begins with humanitarian and military aid can end up assomething much larger. Providing blankets leads to repairingelectricity grids and roads, shooting down aircraft ends upwith the guaranteeing of international borders. The logic ofpower would eventually induce Americans to topple Saddam.Before anyone realizes what happened, U.S. forces would beoccupying Iraq, with Schwarzkopf Pasha ruling from Baghdad.   It sounds romantic, but watch out. Like the Israelis insouthern Lebanon nine years ago, American troops would findthemselves quickly hated, with Shiites taking up suicidebombing, Kurds resuming their rebellion, and Syrian andIranian governments plotting to sabotage American rule.Staying in place would become too painful, leaving toohumiliating.   Alternatively, there is the danger of Iraq beingdismembered. As Turkish president Turgut Ozal rightlyobserved, this would lead to &quot;incalculable turmoil.&quot; Theworld economy needs a reasonably strong Iraq to balance Iranand assure the free flow of oil from the Persian Gulf. WereIraqi power to disappear, Iran would likely become theregional hegemon, rationing oil according to its whims.Iraq's dissolution also raises the prospect of the Iraniansimposing a fundamentalist Islamic regime on southern Iraq.Not only would this new state want to take Baghdad andreconstitute Iraq as a Shiite-dominated country, but it mightwell revitalize the Islamic revolution in Tehran, leading tofresh outbreaks of Khomeini-style aggression.   Further, the fracturing of Iraq would create chaos fromthe Persian Gulf and to Turkey. This week, the world isglorifying the Kurds. But if they achieve their long-soughtindependence in northern Iraq, some real fun would begin.Persecuted by Kurds, non-Kurds would flee the new state.Large and bloody exchanges of population would follow.Kurdish leaders, eyeing the predominantly Kurdish areas ofIran, Turkey and Syria, would destabilize those importantcountries. Border wars would proliferate, as would terrorism.A headline in the New York Times yesterday dubbed Kurds &quot;thenew Palestinians.&quot; Do we really want to encourage all this?   Iraqis -- including Shiites and Kurds -- are ouropponents. President Bush glossed over this fact when hestated that we were fighting Saddam Hussein, not the Iraqipeople. But, as Daniel Boorstin points out, such adistinction flies in the face of a long-standing Americantradition, which holds the body politic responsible for theactions of its state. Does a people not have the governmentit deserves? True, Iraqis have suffered most from Saddam'styranny, but they also abetted his foul regime for twodecades. Ordinary Iraqi soldiers committed atrocities inKuwait and now stand by Saddam. Substantial numbers ofShiites and Kurds joined the ruling apparatus, serving incapacities ranging from informant to prime minister. Had theIraqi war machine been more competent, Iraqis might havekilled tens of thousands of Americans. While the Iraqipopulation is not exactly an enemy of the U.S., it is by nomeans a friend.   The terrible viciousness of the Middle East is the finalreason not to get involved within Iraq. Consider thisdepressing and predictable pattern of ethnic-based violence:The Iraqi army abuses and murders Kuwaitis. The Saudis expel700,000 Yemenis long-resident in Saudi Arabia because theirgovernment sides with Saddam Hussein. The Kuwaitis get theircountry back and kill Palestinians. The Iraqi army slaughtersits Shiites and Kurds, emptying whole villages and destroyingancient shrines. Meanwhile, the killing goes on, year afteryear, in Chad, the Sudan, Lebanon and Afghanistan.   This awful litany could be extended in time. More to thepoint, were the Shiites or Kurds winning against Saddam, wewould by now surely have witnessed scenes of Sunni Arabsbeing massacred. Do Americans wish to be party to suchbarbarism? There are many ghastly events in the Middle Eastand the U.S. lacks both the means and the will to fix them.That region is politically a sick place; outsiders would dowell to keep a prudent moral distance.   This said, we can do more than watch the slaughter unfold.Washington can take limited steps to protect lives withoutfracturing Iraq or getting embroiled in its affairs. At aminimum, Mr. Bush should condemn Baghdad with much greaterpassion than he has so far done. American forces shouldredeploy their famous logistical capabilities to provideserious humanitarian assistance to the anti-Saddam rebels.Yesterday's White House announcement warning Baghdad not tointerfere with efforts to aid the Kurds is very much theright idea; even better would be further to protect therefugees by declaring exlusion zones in which Iraqi aircraftare prohibited from flying.   Unlike The Wall Street Journal, which sees today's tragedyas a result of not pursuing Saddam Hussein's forces farenough, I see the tragedy resulting from Mr. Bush's verbalover-enthusiasm. Looking to the future, American politiciansshould recall this fiasco and be far more circumspect.   ---   Mr. Pipes, director of the Foreign Policy ResearchInstitute in Philadelphia, is a fellow at the WashingtonInstitute for Near East Policy.</TEXT></DOC>