<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900815-0067</DOCNO><DOCID>900815-0067.</DOCID><HL>   REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):   The Stakes in the Gulf</HL><DATE>08/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   Why are we in Saudi Arabia? We're there to protect theintegrity of the world's oil supply. On that point, there isuniversal agreement. The world cannot tolerate a power withthe capability of imposing a tax on all the West, especiallya power that would use its profits to build nuclear, chemicaland biological weapons to extract more declarations ofsurrender and tribute.   By now it should be obvious, though, that something moresignificant is at stake in this large and increasinglymultinational military intervention. For all thesecond-guessing now starting, the world community is sendingan overdue message that it will not tolerate piracy.</LP><TEXT>   Saddam Hussein is indeed a modern pirate, whose men thisweek were literally looting Kuwait of its material wealth andcarting it back to Baghdad. With the world now being madesmall by the wonders of electronic miniaturization andinstant communication, it has grown extraordinarilyvulnerable to this kind of threat. If in the next century theworld is to realize the promise of the interdependencies ithas begun to create, it will have to learn to suppresspiracy.   Financial transactions for quite some time now have beencarried on electronically across borders, pulling togetherthe world's economic players. But it was really only with theastonishing televised events from China's Tiananmen Square,followed by the fall of the Berlin Wall and communism inEastern Europe, that the world's people began to see thatthey were no longer operating as political and economicislands. Politics, currencies, trade, and yes, basicpolitical values are all being drawn together into anevolving consensus of what constitutes a world order.   The Saddam Husseins of the world would wreck this. Theirpiracy would constantly shatter and retard the aspirations ofworkers at all levels of the world's economic system.Briefing NATO's foreign ministers last week, Secretary ofState Baker suggested that &quot;the world could be plunged into anew dark age&quot; if the Iraqis got away with stealing Kuwait. Anoverstatement? Not really.   Saddam's seizure of Kuwait is only the largestmanifestation of a form of nihilistic politics whose modernroots began with the terrorist movements of the 1970s. Oftenabetted by Communist governments that now lie discredited,these movements wrapped themselves in a camouflage ofideological grievances against the West and in variousirridentist territorial claims. Then they started shooting.And bombing and kidnapping and blowing up the innocent. Thislawlessness boiled itself down into the Iraqi theft of Kuwaitand the threat to Saudi Arabia and the world oil pipelines.At this point, President Bush organized an internationalresistance.   The U.S. has been here before in its history. SaddamHussein is little different from the Bey of Algiers or Pashaof Tripoli in their confrontation with Thomas Jefferson.President Jefferson found he needed a military response tothe Barbary Pirates, and sent the Navy on a long, slow voyageto the far-off Mediterranean. A similar feel for the higherstakes was contained in Mr. Bush's words a fortnight ago:&quot;This will not stand.&quot;   Viewing the events of the past two weeks, it should bepossible to draw some conclusions about the suppression ofpiracy. It requires a leader; if the United States, in theworld leadership role it has held for 40 years, hadn'tstepped forward, Saddam Hussein would be in Riyadh.   Effective leadership, too, requires action. Consensusfollows. Naturally, a leader musters what support he can --European allies, the Turks, various frightened Arabs, a U.N.resolution. But there is no time to wait for ditherers abroador at home. What the world wants to know is whether the U.S.will be there to follow, and this is proved by getting onwith the task.   There will of course be doubters. Senator Sam Nunn's earlydoubts about a long-term Gulf presence cannot have helpedbring wavering allies aboard. Jordan's King Hussein, whovisits President Bush tomorrow, should be told bluntly thatwe will not tolerate Iraqi troops on his territory, with orwithout his invitation. Anyone who mentions Vietnam should bereminded that Iraq has no superpower protector or supplier.   Some of the same people who said the U.S. had no nationalinterests in Vietnam, indeed, are now saying it isconfronting Iraq only out of materialism. With harder days inthe Gulf likely to come, the President and his men should notbe embarrassed to assert that this effort unites thematerialistic goal of oil and the idealistic goal of worldorder. And they should be clear about their purpose: The goalof deterring piracy requires that Saddam be taught a lesson.   The ultimate objective ought to be the overthrow of theSaddam government; peace in the Gulf requires that the Iraqimilitary be cut back to reasonable size and its oil reservesput into the hands of a more reasonable custodian. Judging bythe forces being deployed, the option of an assault onBaghdad is being prepared, but at the moment our stated aimis forcing Saddam to withdraw his forces from Kuwait. Thiswould still require something to make sure that he doesn'tsimply rerun the same strategy at some future date. Underthose circumstances, we presume, the Emir of Kuwait would nolonger reject a sustained U.S. military presence in hiskingdom.   The current Gulf intervention is grounded in theclear-eyed premise that the world remains a dangerous placefor civilized values. After much well-earned celebration overfreedom rising from the ruins of communism behind the IronCurtain, Saddam Hussein's iron aggression is driving home thenecessary lesson that the new, evolving world is susceptibleto aggression. To secure its future, the civilized world mustnow defeat the politics of piracy that Saddam Hussein soclearly represents.</TEXT></DOC>