<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900814-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>900814-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Identity Crisis:   To Repair Bad Credit,   Advisers Give Clients   Someone Else's Data   ---   All It Takes Is a Similar Name   And a Knack for Accessing   Files of Ratings Bureaus   ---   A Nightmare for the Victims   ----   By Michael Allen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   TRW EFX</CO><IN>DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC (FIS)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   HOUSTON -- Margaret Holt, a silver-haired art dealer,thought she had good credit. After all, she had always paidher bills on time. But when she applied for an oil-companycredit card not long ago, she was told she had too manydelinquent debts outstanding.   Her surprise turned to panic when she got a copy of hercredit report from a credit bureau. It showed nearly $40,000in charges made in her name for items she had never ordered,including a fur coat from Neiman Marcus and a leasedMercedes-Benz.</LP><TEXT>   Mrs. Holt hired a private investigator. He traced thespending spree to an unemployed woman with a name similar toMrs. Holt's, but 20 years younger and of a different race.The impostor told Mrs. Holt she had gotten her SocialSecurity number and other credit data from a man whocounseled poor people on repairing their credit.   Now Mrs. Holt is finding it nearly impossible to convincesome creditors that she isn't a cheat. &quot;Somebody's got tohelp me,&quot; she says, her eyes filling with tears. &quot;I can'tstand for people to think those things about me, that I'm adeadbeat.&quot;   Notch up another victim of Houston's infamous &quot;creditdoctors.&quot; Using laptop computers and stolen access codes,these practitioners tap into credit-bureau data bases toextract information -- names, loan histories, Social Securitynumbers -- on people with good credit records. Then they sellthe information to clients with poor records to use whenapplying for credit.   The scam works. Since late 1987, when police beganinvestigating it here, purchases totaling nearly $20 millionhave been traced to phony credit data. The loot includesjewelry, television sets and vacation cruises. A Ford dealersold 90 new cars to buyers with doctored credit, includingeight members of a single family. An unemployed woman wascaught driving a Lincoln Continental outfitted with acellular telephone, and living in a $230,000 house. Anotherwoman bought at least five houses.   Versions of the scam have begun to spread to other partsof the country. In Chicago, the Treasury Department's SecretService has opened investigations of crimes involving theabuse of credit bureau computers. In Los Angeles, a manrecently pleaded guilty to federal charges of mail fraud andassuming a false identity in a scheme to get bank loans usinginformation he obtained on individuals from credit bureausand land deeds.   Some see a dire threat. &quot;Credit doctoring is an epidemic.It's spreading like a virus,&quot; says Joseph LaBranche, aHouston expert in credit-card fraud. &quot;This is the crime ofthe future.&quot;   Warns Ralph Freeman, a security executive at First USAInc., a large Dallas credit-card issuer: &quot;They're crashingthe credit system. There's so much bad information in thecredit bureaus now that if we pull something, we don't knowif it's true or not.&quot;   Credit bureaus deny the problem is critical. &quot;There is notrampant illegal access into our system,&quot; says Susan Murdy, aspokeswoman for TRW Inc.'s Credit Data Division in LosAngeles. The three largest credit reporters -- TRW,headquartered in Cleveland; Equifax Inc., Atlanta; and TransUnion Corp., Chicago -- have invested heavily in securitysystems that flag unauthorized intrusions. They also claim tohave made it more difficult for even legitimate subscribersto browse through files without authorization.   Houston's scams, however, show that technologicalsafeguards aren't foolproof. In some of the schemes,otherwise-legitimate business people greedy for sales -- realestate brokers, auto salesmen, bankers and salesclerks --wittingly or not collaborated. They overlooked obvious fraudsand even referred customers to credit doctors.   The buy now, pay later ethic, say fraud specialists, hashelped create a favorable climate. &quot;Obviously the problem isassociated in an overall sense with the way we market in thiscountry,&quot; says Casey O'Brien, an assistant district attorneyhere who has prosecuted several of the cases. &quot;We appeal inour advertising to everyone, even though everyone isn'taffluent. We make people want things they don't necessarilyneed and then make {the goods} easy to get by extendingcredit.&quot;   In Houston, nobody knew how to get credit better thanWalter B. &quot;Waldo&quot; Hilton, a 70-year-old entrepreneur andsometime Baptist preacher. Authorities regard him as thepioneer of credit doctoring.   A furniture and appliance salesman in the 1950s, Mr.Hilton gained local fame in radio spots as &quot;The Man with thePlan&quot; to help poor folks buy refrigerators on credit. Theplan? Each appliance came equipped with a coin-operated meterthat cut the electricity if the buyer failed to make a dailyinstallment payment of a quarter.   After wig retailing and other ventures, Mr. Hiltoneventually took up one of the healing arts -- creditdoctoring. Often using the alias of &quot;Rev. Jackson,&quot; he mostlyconfined himself to helping people figure out how to pay offtheir debts and get their names removed from deadbeat lists,according to court records and people familiar with hisoperation.   But in 1984, he helped a young woman embellish adepartment-store charge card application with fakeinformation showing her to be a $2,300-a-month accountant athis Creditor and Consumer Service Corp. The woman's realoccupation was undercover detective for the store, and Mr.Hilton was soon persuaded to plead guilty in Harris Countycourt here to lying on a loan application, a misdemeanor. Hewas assessed a small fine.   In partnership with a fellow Baptist preacher, JamesLawson, Mr. Hilton opened an office in a fancy, atrium-stylebuilding. With a $600 Tandy computer, access codes allegedlypurchased from a credit bureau employee, and an angelic newname -- Christian Financial Services Inc. -- the twoproceeded to do unto others.   Through word of mouth, they brought in hundreds of clientswho had lost their credit and were desperate to regain it.For fees that police say ranged between a few dollars and$1,500, the doctors repaired their credit -- sort of. Theyused the codes to access the files of the Credit Bureau ofGreater Houston, now known as CSC Credit Services Inc., andretrieve those on people with names similar to their clients'names. Then they simply chose one with a good credit historyand turned over to their client the information needed tocomplete an acceptable credit application.   A CSC official says the company has since tightenedsecurity: Now a user with an access code must also enterother factual information -- a real consumer's name andaddress, at a minimum -- to call up a file. But police andother security consultants say the doctors can easily jumpthat hurdle by getting the needed information from a phonebook.   A client, Leslie Bianchi, of Humble, Texas, says he foundout about Mr. Lawson from his real estate agent. Mr. Bianchi,who had a shaky credit record, was trying to get a mortgageloan. For $800, he says, Mr. Lawson &quot;assigned&quot; him a newSocial Security number, gave him two credit-card references,and told him to use the information when applying for loans.For another $200, Mr. Bianchi says, Mr. Lawson promised totell any inquisitive lenders that he employed Mr. Bianchi at$48,000 a year. Mr. Bianchi was actually earning $27,000, asproduction manager for a maker of oil-field gear.   Mr. Bianchi says he had no idea at first that what he wasdoing was illegal, but later had misgivings and dropped theapplication. He wasn't charged with any crime. He says policelater told him his &quot;new&quot; Social Security number actuallybelonged to another Bianchi living in the Midwest.   In 1989, in another case, Mr. Lawson pleaded guilty instate district court here to a single count of theft -- hehad used doctored credit to buy a van from a local car dealer-- and was sentenced to five years in prison. Since released,he couldn't be reached for comment.   By the time Mr. Lawson was convicted, imitators alreadyhad sprung up around the city.   Forty-year-old George Gillum advertised his GCS CreditRepair Service on radio and in newspapers around the country.Police say that Mr. Gillum, among other things, bombardedcredit bureaus with letters contesting clients' records.Because federal law requires the bureaus to refrain fromdisclosing contested data while they investigate it, a&quot;window&quot; opened for clients to borrow freely. When Mr. Gillumwas arrested, his office contained more than 1,000 files ofclients, among them a Houston policeman who, police say,bought a new car while his credit record was being contested.   Contesting a credit record isn't illegal, and Mr. Gillumdenies he ever broke the law to fix anyone's credit. But hepleaded guilty in state court this year to six counts offorging Social Security cards and received a $60,000 fine anda three-year prison sentence. Mr. Gillum is appealing theconviction, arguing that police used a faulty search warrantto seize certain evidence.   Real estate broker Joszef S. Walker, police say, doctoredcredit histories to help clients obtain 13 houses from theVeterans Administration and the Department of Housing andUrban Development. He didn't have to hack into the creditbureau's files: His real estate company, headquartered in aweather-beaten yellow house, was a credit bureau member. Mr.Walker, whose state court trial on multiple counts of theftin connection with the house purchases is scheduled to starthere in October, has denied any wrongdoing.   Some of the doctors spent as much time curing their owncredit ills as that of others. Credit doctor Terry LynnJackson, who received two 10-year prison terms after pleadingguilty to theft in state court here, set up housekeeping in anewly renovated home in the middle of one of Houston'spoorest neighborhoods and bought 26 cars for himself,including a Mercedes-Benz. Police say he obtained all thecards on credit of other Terry Jacksons around the country.   Mr. Hilton, the pioneering doctor, had forgone thetrappings of wealth. For years, he served as associate pastorof the Fellowship Missionary Baptist Church, a tiny,weather-beaten church in Northwest Houston. The peeling signout front says: &quot;MOTTO: IF YOU WANT TO DO YOU CAN. IF YOUDONT WANT TO DO YOU WONT.&quot;   According to David Hefner, the Houston police detectivewho caught him, Mr. Hilton said he wanted to undermine thecredit-granting process, viewing it as a form of slaveryimposed on blacks by whites. &quot;I'm going to destroy the wholecredit system as we know it today,&quot; Mr. Hefner says Mr.Hilton said.   Mr. Hilton, interviewed at the door of his ramshackle homein South Houston, disputes that version of the conversationand denies being a credit doctor. Nonetheless, he pleadedguilty in federal court this year to charges of possessing 15or more unauthorized computer access codes with intent todefraud. Shortly after the interview he began serving aneight-month prison term.   Whether or not Mr. Hilton intended it, his doctoring didhit the credit system in these parts like an explosion. Everyclient became a walking time bomb, set to detonate as soon ashe or she stopped making payments. Banks, car dealerships andretailers suddenly began racking up huge fraud losses.Innocents whose histories were filched still live in terrorof the dunning notices that keep coming for things theydidn't buy.   &quot;When it first happened to me, I felt raped -- there's noother word for it,&quot; says Linda Brown Davis, a real estatebroker in Corpus Christi, Texas. Another woman had gottencredit cards in Mrs. Davis's name, bought a new Cadillac andwas about to get a $35,000 home-improvement loan when she wascaught. Mrs. Davis says her credit file now has a notice tolenders that she has been victimized by fraud. Still, twocredit-card companies recently rejected her applications.   Herman West, a 58-year-old school-bus driver, says he was&quot;ruined&quot; by somebody who used his name and credit record toget a piano, a bunch of credit cards and a Dodge pickup. &quot;I'mtelling you, man, I owed people I never heard of,&quot; he says.&quot;I'm scared to buy anything now.&quot;   Perhaps the biggest jolt hit Jean Wright, who, as acollege student living alone in a one-bedroom apartment in1987, received a past-due notice for a $500 electric bill. Alittle checking revealed that somebody hadn't only stiffedthe electric company in Ms. Wright's name; that person hadfiled a personal bankruptcy petition using Ms. Wright's nameand Social Security number. The petition, still on file inU.S. bankruptcy court here, lists nearly $100,000 in bills,including a $64,000 mortgage on a Humble, Texas, house.   Investigators for CSC traced the bankruptcy petition andother alleged frauds to Wilma Wright Sturges, a member of Mr.Hilton's Fellowship Missionary congregation. She has pleadedno-contest to a charge of theft of a house and been sentencedto 10 years' probation. She is expected to testify in thetrial of Mr. Walker, the real estate broker and allegedcredit doctor for whom she worked.   But, she says, &quot;I am not a criminal]&quot; And, pointing with adramatic sweep at the sky: &quot;My security is not down here. Mysecurity is up there]&quot;</TEXT></DOC>