<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911031-0075</DOCNO><DOCID>911031-0075.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>10/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   ISRAELIS AND ARABS CONVENED peace talks as Bush urgedcompromise.   The longtime adversaries came together in Madrid to launchthe first international conference on Middle East peace in 18years. The general mood of the conference was surprisinglycalm. Secretary of State Baker said Israel and the Arabnations still haven't agreed on where to begin one-on-onetalks that are slated to follow the largely ceremonialthree-day opening session. Bush warned the delegates they areembarking on a tedious process, and he declared that aMideast solution will require &quot;territorial compromise.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Egypt's foreign minister delivered a hard-line speech insupport of Arab rights and called for full Israeli withdrawalfrom the occupied territories.   ---   THE SENATE APPROVED a civil rights measure that Bush hasagreed to sign.   The legislation, passed on a vote of 93-5, reversesseveral 1989 Supreme Court decisions that made it moredifficult to win lawsuits alleging job bias. The vote cameafter three days of haggling over a series of amendments. Nowthe measure goes back to the House, where it is expected towin swift approval. The bill had been stalled until acompromise was reached last week between senators and Bush.   The bill will apply in part to employees of the Senate andto White House employees. They currently are exempt fromcivil rights laws.   ---   Russia's Yeltsin sought new powers to reshape the Sovietrepublic's government at will, to issue decrees withoutrestriction and to proclaim their supremacy over Sovietnational laws. The Russian leader asked lawmakers to granthim the power to enact economic reforms such as those heoutlined this week.   ---   A federal court in New York ruled that a computer-networkcompany isn't legally liable for the contents of electronicinformation it disseminates. The decision could set aprecedent in a murky legal area where the liability ofcomputer networks hasn't been clear with respect todefamatory or offensive public messages.   ---   China sold nuclear-weapons technology to Iran despiteassurances that Beijing wouldn't export its nuclear know-how,U.S. intelligence agencies determined. Assistant Secretary ofState Solomon told a Senate panel that the U.S. had expressedconcern to China about the sale. He said other nations alsomay be aiding Iran's program.   ---   Two research teams have found similar gene defectsassociated with a rare, inherited form of Alzheimer'sdisease. The latest gene findings-by British and U.S.teamsmay help in learning how the disease develops.   ---   France's Finance Ministry said it would compensate peopleinfected with the AIDS virus by blood transfusions between1980 and 1985, as evidence grew that health officialsknowingly used contaminated blood. The ex-director of theFrench blood transfusion agency was indicted last week oncriminal charges relating to the matter.   ---   Mass suicide was threatened by Vietnamese leaders at HongKong's largest camp for boat people, and they issued anappeal to Bush to stop forced repatriation. In Washington, aState Department aide reaffirmed U.S. opposition to therefugees' forced repatriation, agreed upon in a pact signedTuesday by Britain and Vietnam.   ---   The House overwhelmingly rejected a two-year, $25 billionforeign aid bill in a 262-159 vote that apparently united aidopponents and Republicans objecting to its easing of abortionrestrictions.   ---   A Senate committee approved legislation expanding federalfinancial assistance to more middle-class college students.The bill, which reauthorizes all federal spending on highereducation, isn't as generous as a version that cleared aHouse committee last week.   ---   Talks broke down between Zaire's President Mobutu and hisopponents. Shortly afterward, the nation's new primeminister, Mungul Diaka, named his cabinet. Belgian troops,meanwhile, evacuated more of their citizens from the country.   ---   Opposition leader Frederick Chiluba told thousands ofcheering supporters in Zambia he was confident of topplinglongtime President Kaunda in today's general elections.Chiluba and his Movement for Multi-Party Democracy arepredicted to win Zambia's first contested, multiparty vote in17 years.   ---   The death toll rose to about 1,600 from an Oct. 20earthquake in India's northern Uttar Pradesh state, afterdelayed reports of deaths reached the state capital, Lucknow,officials said. They said the temblor had destroyed about18,000 homes in the mountainous region. Relief efforts arestill hampered by poor access to remote villages.   ---   Died: Ben Hill Willingham, 77, retired head of GenescoInc. and Burlington International, Sunday, in Savannah, Ga.</TEXT></DOC>