<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901231-0021</DOCNO><DOCID>901231-0021.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   ROMing Your Corporate Library for Job Leads   ----   By Ronald F. Dow</HL><DATE>12/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 6</SO><IN>MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><LP>   Recent reports in this paper describe the &quot;flood&quot; ofmanagerial cutbacks sweeping through America's leadingcorporations. Executive and middle-management layoffs areaffecting thousands of people as companies across the countrydownsize and retrench in light of economic gloom.   Some of the soon-to-be unemployed are turning to corporatebusiness libraries for help. Over the years managers haveused corporate library resources for data collection andother sources of information that have fed their activitiesas analysts, planners, brokers and marketers. However, therecent development of electronic directories of U.S. andinternational businesses on CD-ROM (compact disk-read onlymemory) have added a new dimension for library users. CD-ROMis an optical disk technology that offers great informationstorage potential. A typical disk can hold the text of150,000 printed pages or the contents of 1,200 standard5.25-inch diskettes.</LP><TEXT>   CD-ROM readers, coupled with commercially available disksof corporate data purchased from business publishers, make animpressive tool for the job seeker. This technology, which isrelatively inexpensive, requires just a personal computer,CD-ROM drive, controller and printer. The data, coupled withthe technology, is now available in many corporate, publicand academic business libraries. Job seekers now are findingthat librarians can quickly and cheaply produce lists of jobleads, develop customer lists for new business opportunities,or supply enough company data to build a personalized jobbank.   For example, a manager in a company's corporate realestate department, suspecting it was only a matter of timebefore his termination, sought the librarian's assistance inlocating firms in other geographical regions with enoughcorporate property to need someone with his experience. UsingCD-ROM directories of both public and private companies, thelibrarian searched such criteria as number of employees,subsidiaries, and key balance-sheet items to identifyjob-search targets.   The search produced a select universe of potentialemployers. This list was then limited geographically tocities in Virginia and the Carolinas, using telephone areacodes, and given to the manager for review.   When the list was returned to the library by the manager,the address and chief administrative officer's name for eachselected firm was downloaded into a PC computer file. Thefile was then linked to a word processing program. A formletter was written and run against the data file, producingpersonalized letters to be sent to each firm on the editedlist. The entire operation took less than one hour of thelibrarian's time and produced more than 100 personalizedletters for the manager. Even more important, the managerreceived positive responses on many of his letters.   In another instance, a recently fired senior executive inthe investment banking department approached the corporatelibrary for assistance identifying prospective customers fora new business venture she was evaluating. She wasconsidering using severance pay as venture capital for herown enterprise.   Using CD-based library resources, the corporate librarianwas able to identify a range of potential customers bysegmenting publicly available corporate data by geographiclocation, line of business, sales and other criteria -- atvirtually no additional expense to the former employer. Inother words, as sort of a severance bonus the executive wasable to walk away with both capital to begin a new businessand a segmented list of potential customers' companies,executive names, addresses and phone numbers.   Students in the nation's business schools are also turningto the library to identify potential employers who don'tnormally recruit on campus. Often these students are lookingfor smaller firms or companies in specialized markets.   Utilizing such sources as Securities and ExchangeCommission filings, financial statements, brokerage housereports, market studies and other widely-held materialsavailable on CD, students are identifying companies asemployment prospects. Since all of these resources areavailable through commercially available CD-ROM services, theprocess of gathering data is significantly speeded up.   Some of the primary vendors of business information on CDare Disclosure Inc., Lotus Co., Dun andamp; Bradstreet, andStandard andamp; Poor's. For the past several years Disclosure hasmarketed its Compact Disclosure product. With updatesprovided on a monthly basis, this disk contains extensiveinformation on over 12,000 public companies. Lotus, Dandamp;B andSandamp;P have produced similar products that incorporate extensiveinformation on both public and private companies.   These CDs will often contain several years ofbalance-sheet information, the full text of the president'sletter from the annual report to shareholders, a list ofsenior officers and directors (including compensation), anextensive breakdown of lines of business by either SIC codeor description, and, of course, the company address and phonenumber. Many of the files also list subsidiaries and theirlocations.   Although each vendor's product is different, all do allowsearching on most of the data bases. That search capabilityis what gives these systems their strength. By followingsimple menus, users are able to search through data onliterally hundreds of thousands of companies to identifytargets for the job search.   For example, by searching on balance-sheet items, a jobseeker can limit activity to companies of specific sizes. Orby looking for words such as &quot;reorganization&quot; or &quot;turnaround&quot;in the president's letter, target companies that might tapthe past experience of unemployed executives can beidentified.   Some job seekers request that specific information, suchas the text of the president's letter, product descriptions,lists of subsidiaries, and financial data -- the same sourcesthat are useful when analyzing a competitor's or supplier'sfinancial condition -- be printed from the disk on everycompany targeted for the job search. As one productionmanager, who was in the process of relocating to the New Yorkarea noted, the printout results in a ready reference whenpreparing for an interview.   ---   Mr. Dow, former director of libraries at Shearson LehmanHutton Co., was assisted in the preparation of this articleby James R. Fries, business and engineering librarian,Dartmouth College.</TEXT></DOC>