<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910419-0124</DOCNO><DOCID>910419-0124.</DOCID><HL>   Saving the Banks:   Bank Reform? What Bank Reform?   ----   By Ron Chernow</HL><DATE>04/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS, TRENDS, INDEXES, PROJECTIONS, ANALYSES (ECO)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   The Bush administration's blueprint for bank reform has,unfortunately, emerged as the first domestic casualty of thePersian Gulf war. Unveiled by Treasury Secretary Brady inFebruary, the ambitious plan calls for interstate branching;expanded securities and insurance powers for banks; modestretrenchment of deposit insurance; a recapitalized insurancefund; and a simpler regulatory structure. If early reactionsare any guide, the plan may soon suffer the legislativeequivalent of crib-death. What has gone wrong?   Mr. Bush seems to be hoping that a quick economic upturnwill revive banks, sparing him the need for painful action.In consequence, the audacious Brady plan has been promotedwith a surprising lack of salesmanship. Meanwhile,congressional Democrats have eagerly joined the conspiracy ofinaction. Stymied by Mr. Bush's new popularity, they wouldlike to keep the spotlight on the Sandamp;L mess forever.</LP><TEXT>   Ordinarily, as front-line medics dealing with the carnage,bank regulators would vigorously advocate reform. But sincethe reform package contains a proposal to revamp theregulatory structure itself, shifting powers away from theFederal Deposit Insurance Corp. and Federal Reserve to theTreasury Department, the regulators have emerged assquabbling participants instead of united sponsors. At thesame time, regulators must calm a public jittery about thenation's banks and so refrain from expressing any urgencyabout the situation. Proponents of the Brady plan also fearthat to sketch too dire a picture of the commercial banks'plight would damage any chances for reform. So everyone inWashington -- the executive, Congress, the regulators -- isresiding in the Land of Wishful Thinking, the most exuberantreal estate market in America today.   No, the country is not repeating the Sandamp;L disaster. YetWashington's reflexive denial of any major problem has itselfbecome a startling parallel between the two episodes.Recently, the FDIC reported a sharp rise in delinquent realestate loans and repossessed property, with troubleincreasingly bottled up at big banks. Where the number ofproblem banks has steadied at a shade over a thousand, theirassets have soared from $235 billion in 1989 to $409 billionin one year. The $8.4 billion in the deposit insurance kittyseems a mighty weak reed to sustain such a potentially heavyload.   The Pollyanna position apparently held by theadministration holds that, buoyed by the Gulf victory,consumers will spend, the economy will cast off its torpor,and the banking crisis will fade. This magical scenarioignores one troublesome fact: Bank failures soared during the1980s boom, obviously responding to some set of dynamicsother than general economic health. Structural obstacles torecovery abound -- for instance, the current surplus ofoffice buildings and shopping malls and high levels ofconsumer debt presage continued banking problems. Thesanguine view also ignores the paradox that the banks'weakness will stall any recovery.   False analogies to the Sandamp;L deregulation of the early 1980shave deterred bank reform and the Treasury Department hasbeen spectacularly inept at showing that its plan flows fromdifferent premises. The Sandamp;L deregulation perpetuated theclassic American error of having many small, weakly managed,poorly capitalized banks, sink their money into local realestate. Charters were handed out freely, and regulatorscompeted in leniency. Sandamp;Ls didn't diversify -- they shiftedfrom narrowly safe to narrowly risky lending.   By contrast, the Bush proposal seeks to consolidate thebanking system, not to atomize it further. It foreshadows agradual evolution toward strong, well-capitalized nationalbanks, with diversified powers and unified regulation -- thesorts of banks that make failures great rarities in England,Canada and elsewhere. Yet the Bush administration has allowedreform opponents to portray the package as a bizarre,misguided, almost suicidal attempt to reenact the Sandamp;Ldisaster.   Despite the failure of more than 1,000 commercial banks ina decade -- with another 1,000 tottering -- congressmen stillexpress ritual fears about banks obtaining &quot;risky&quot; securitiesand insurance powers. Oddly, the universal banks of Europe --which have such powers -- are commonly faulted for being grayand stodgy, not for being high-flying swingers.   Another popular Washington refrain maintains that beforechanges can be contemplated, the depleted deposit insurancefund must be replenished and confidence restored in thesystem. Nobody quarrels with this priority, nor with the needfor early intervention for troubled banks. But a corollarycontends that the reform package would not correct thecurrent crisis and could even markedly worsen it.   To be sure, no congressional action will wipe away therubbishy loans to Latin debtors, commercial propertydevelopers and overly leveraged companies. Such damage cannever be undone. So then the central question becomes: Willwe restore the stability of banks by having them slash theirassets (i.e. loans) or by expanding capital? After cuttingcosts, there's no escape from this mathematical choice.   To date, the solution has disproportionately favoredshrinking banks, as they write off bad loans, pull lines ofcredit and set prohibitive lending terms -- the famous creditcrunch. Whether this situation should be blamed on zealousregulators or churlish bankers has spurred fruitless debate.The credit crunch won't be solved by editorial sermons orregulatory exhortation, but only by injecting new capitalinto the banking system. This is where the Bush reformsbecome relevant.   The best way to lure fresh capital into the banks is tosketch a future brighter than the dismal history of the past20 years, banishing the perpetual poison clouds that hangover the industry. The American banking system has become theChernobyl of international finance, a ghastly disaster areaboycotted by most investors. Ending an old taboo, the Bushpackage contains a proposal to allow industrial companies tobuy banks. Whatever its merits, no industrial company hasevinced the slightest desire to take advantage of thishistoric opportunity. Why buy a bank when many of the samefunctions can be performed without getting tied up inregulatory red tape?   Perhaps the most potent argument for considering bankingreform now is that a new banking system is already risingfrom the ashes of the old. The Bush plan attempts to ratifyand rationalize shifts already taking place in themarketplace. As large banks fail, for example, regulatorsallow rival banks to cross state lines to buy them. And theFed apparently looks on with tolerance as a Saudi prince buysa large stake in Citicorp and Banco Santander of Spain doesthe same with First Fidelity of New Jersey. So themarketplace is creating a global banking system, whileCongress cannot bring itself even to certify a national one.   Such changes, now reshaping the banking world, occurwithout any guiding vision. Far from being a remoteirrelevance, a consensus on a new banking system could alterspecific bailout decisions. Everything else being equal, forinstance, should regulators favor BankAmerica of Californiaor Fleet/Norstar of Rhode Island to buy Bank of New England?If one favored national banks, with diversified deposit basesand loan portfolios, it might tip the balance to BankAmericarather than to Fleet/Norstar, which operates in the sameregional economy as the Bank of New England.   Similarly, congressional refusal to repeal Glass-Steagallwon't bar banks from investment banking. It will simply cedeto Alan Greenspan and the Federal Reserve Board theopportunity to grant banks such powers on a preferentialbasis, as has been happening for years. Such selective repealby regulatory fiat is obviously the least equitable way tomake public policy.   President Bush can neglect the banking crisis only at hisperil. Pervasive financial weakness could transform a short,shallow recession into one of unusual length and severity.Unlike the Sandamp;L debacle, the commercial bank crisis is takingplace on President Bush's watch. Amid the worst bankingcrisis in 60 years, the president must take decisive action.At the same time, it will ill behoove congressional Democratsto cast stones later if they refuse to take constructiveaction to remedy commercial bank problems and seek refuge inendless replays of the Sandamp;L disaster. Without deregulation,the U.S. banking system generates from 150 to 200 bankfailures per year. Something is obviously terribly wrong.   Back in 1920, the U.S. possessed about 30,000 banks.Today, after massive failures in the 1920s, 1930s and 1980s,plus many mergers, the number has dwindled to 12,400.Eventually, the U.S. will have the sort of large,consolidated national banking systems enjoyed by our tradingpartners, who don't suffer chronic bank failures. Thehistoric trajectory is crystal-clear. The real choice iswhether we wish to move toward such a system via decades ofbloody bank collapses and community devastation, or whetherwe can spare ourselves this agony through wise, timelypolitical leadership.   ---   Mr. Chernow is the author of &quot;The House of Morgan&quot;(Atlantic Monthly Press, 1990).</TEXT></DOC>