<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900601-0173</DOCNO><DOCID>900601-0173.</DOCID><HL>   No Lion: California   Considers Preserving   A `Harvestable' Cat   ---   Will Voters Spend Millions   On a Thriving Species?   Point-Blank `Slaughter'   ----   By Ken Wells   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   SACRAMENTO, Calif. -- Dick Weaver can recall many a mad,sweat-drenched scramble through thicket and ravine hoping tocatch a mountain lion. More times than not, the lion --despite a pack of well-trained dogs on its tail -- gave Mr.Weaver the slip, sometimes by flight, sometimes by fang.&quot;Dogs have been killed by the lions they chase,&quot; he says.   &quot;People who think this isn't fair chase need to go alongonce and try it,&quot; agrees Terry Mansfield, a veteran of adozen mountain-lion chases. Mr. Weaver is a recently retired40-year veteran of California's Department of Fish and Game;Mr. Mansfield is the department's chief fish and wildlifemanager.</LP><TEXT>   Their weapons of choice on mountain lion hunts have beentranquilizer darts and radio collars as part of the state'sextended cat-counting effort. The official conclusion is thatthe California lion, its ranks once perilously thinned bydecades of bounty hunting, has rebounded spectacularly after18 years of scrupulous state protection.   The state says there now are perhaps 5,000 mountain lionsin California. In the vernacular of modern game management,those are &quot;harvestable&quot; numbers -- high enough that the statehas been proposing (unsuccessfully) since 1987 to allowhunters to kill up to 190 lions a year.   State Fish and Game officials, in pushing sport hunting oflions, find themselves with a political tiger by the tail.Contending that game managers have inflated lion numbers topromote a sport that borders on barbarism, lion lovers havebypassed the thickets of state bureaucracy and gone straightto the voters with a measure that would ban trophy hunting ofthe big cats, also known as cougars.   They have come armed with a powerful image that makes eventhe pro-hunting lobby squirm: Because the secretive,150-pound lions are too wily to be stalked, hunters usetenacious hounds to chase them up a tree. Once treed -- andoften exhausted -- the lions are shot point-blank withhigh-powered rifles.   &quot;This is not sport,&quot; says Sharon Negri, director of theMountain Lion Preservation Foundation, which helped collectsignatures to get the lion protection measure on the ballot.&quot;This is slaughter.&quot;   Indeed, if the initiative, to be decided by voters onTuesday, were merely a referendum on lion hunting, thelargely pro-hunting coalition that opposes it likely wouldhave conceded defeat. Polls by both sides show that up to 80%of voters, including many hunters, tend to agree with Ms.Negri, especially since lions are valued for neither food norfur and typically end up as trophies on a wall.   But the measure does much more than cast an anti-huntingnet over the lion: It will cost almost $1 billion over thenext 30 years, a price tag that has been seized by itsdetractors in attempting to untrack it. That money will go toacquire habitat, though not just for lions; two-thirds of itwill be earmarked for other rare and endangered Californiaspecies. Some of the land might be used for other purposes,such as parks, but the animals couldn't be disturbed.   Conservationists, viewing the annual influx of 600,000 newresidents into a state whose population has tripled since1945, say the mountain lion will inevitably be crowded out ofits native range unless lion habitat is put aside. The theoryis both ambitious and novel: an attempt to require governmentto protect a species, and safeguard its habitat, before itfalls into the threatened category.   &quot;It does little good to protect lions from hunters if theydon't have a place to roam,&quot; says Gerald Meral, director ofthe California Planning and Conservation League, among themany environmental groups campaigning for Proposition 117.The environmentalists point to Florida, where unbridleddevelopment has reduced the Florida panther, the mountainlion's once-common first cousin, to as few as 30 animals, onthe verge of extinction.   The struggle over the lion has been a cat fight for twodecades. Between 1916 and 1971, the lions, which range fromthe state's southern deserts to its northernmost coastal rainforests, were considered a nuisance and hunted for bounties;more than 12,000 were killed. With evidence that the numbersof lions were in steep decline, Gov. Ronald Reagan approved amoratorium on lion hunting in 1971.That moratorium stayed inplace until 1985, when Gov. George Deukmejian vetoed a billthat would have extended it while biologists measured thelion population.   But when Fish and Game attempted to open a lion huntingseason, Ms. Negri's group and others blocked the hunts incourt, convincing state judges that the department hadn'tadequately assessed the lion population before deciding therewere huntable numbers.   Finally, the cat's friends, sure that the state wouldpersist in its lion-hunting efforts, collected 700,000signatures last year to force Prop 117 onto the ballot. &quot;Intruth, many of us didn't want to do an initiative,&quot; says Ms.Negri. &quot;But the people want to see the mountain lionprotected. We believe you can't take a good-ole-boymanagement program and shove it down the people's throat.&quot;   Prop 117 proponents say $30 million a year is a smallprice to pay -- just 1/20th of 1% of California's annualbudget. But the price tag has provided an issue foropponents, including the National Rifle Association, toscratch away at support in a state where the mere whiff ofextravagant spending can doom a measure.   Mr. Weaver, the retired Fish and Game man, is heading anumbrella organization called Californians for Fair Spendingon Wildlife Protection. He says the cost is particularlyonerous considering the state's conclusion that the lion --far from threatened -- may be overabundant in some places.   Game officials cite statistics that the number of lionskilled after preying on livestock or other domestic animalsis up from about 10 a year in the 1970s to 72 last year. Theyalso note that while the lion is indeed rare or non-existentin most states east of the Mississippi River, mountain lionsthrive in 11 other Western states, all of which continue toallow annual hunts.   Mr. Weaver also argues that since only half of the $30million in annual habitat spending would come from newsources, the other half probably would come at the expense ofexisting habitat and species protection programs. This, hesays, &quot;is bad game management.&quot;   Mr. Weaver's coalition has also gotten support fromunlikely sources: a sprinkling of state health-careproviders. Last year, voters approved a new tobacco tax, withmost of the money going to health programs. But some of thattobacco-tax money would also be used in the land acquisitionprogram. The health workers worry about health programs goingbegging for the benefit of saving wildlife. The NRA and otherProp 117 opponents have picked up on that argument, tellingvoters that the initiative isn't bad because it bans hunting,but because it steals health care from widows, orphans andindigents.   Mr. Weaver's coalition also includes the CaliforniaCattlemen's Association and the state's Farm BureauFederation, whose members object to further public landacquisitions; half of California is in public ownershipalready. They also worry about increased lion attacks onlivestock, though the initiative continues to allow huntersto kill lions feeding on farm animals.   In any case, all this is much ado about nothing, arguesJim Gibbons, coordinator of California Houndsmen forConservation, a 5,000-member hunting group that opposes Prop117. Mr. Gibbons insists that his members mostly just want tochase the lions to take pictures of them, which has alwaysbeen allowed. &quot;The thrill of the sport is to run the thingsand catch them,&quot; he says. &quot;Most of our guys shoot withcameras.&quot;   If Proposition 117 passes, however, hunters can even leavetheir cameras at home: The measure appears to outlaw chase oflions by dogs for any reason.</TEXT></DOC>