<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910401-0137</DOCNO><DOCID>910401-0137.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Negotiations Between U.S. and Japan   Concerning Financial Services Bog Down   ----   By Clay Chandler and Marcus W. Brauchli   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7F</SO><CO>   JAPAN LABOR</CO><IN>DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)SECURITIES (SCR)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)INSURANCE (INS)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   TOKYO -- As new trade skirmishes loom between Japan andthe U.S., all is quiet on one battlefield where the economictitans often clash: financial services.   After seven years, the once-heated bilateral negotiationsknown as the Yen-Dollar Talks are bogged down. In part, thefaltering talks reflect Washington's successes in prying openTokyo's vast financial markets to foreign participants. Fewforeign banks or securities firms still harbor complaintsabout access in Japan.</LP><TEXT>   Yet the stand-off also reflects both sides' deep rootedintransigence on remaining issues -- many of them ideologicalgripes that promise small rewards for foreign companies yetappeal to the U.S. Treasury Department's free-marketinstincts. &quot;We have a strong sense of the marketplace,&quot; saysan American official. &quot;We'll push these issues regardless ofthe private sector.&quot;   Japan's negotiators feel they have made long strides inrecent years but aren't prepared to be rushed into what theyfear could be destabilizing changes just to appease the U.S.&quot;We shouldn't have to make changes that we're not ready for,&quot;says a Finance Ministry official.   That view has hardened as the effects of higher interestrates and a stock-market crash last year ripple throughJapan. Reforms already implemented, often at U.S.instigation, have slashed the once-sure struts supportingprofits -- such as fixed interest rates or a captive stockmarket. Corporate bankruptcies are soaring and banks havebeen forced to rescue smaller credit unions and cooperatives.   The tenor of the talks thus has shifted markedly fromtheir origins in the lead-up to the September 1985 PlazaAccord, which brought about a major depreciation of thedollar. The talks became a forum for all manner of financialdiscussion, from letting foreign securities companies intothe Tokyo Stock Exchange in 1986 to the handling ofgovernment bond auctions. Most issues revolved on changingJapan's rules to let foreigners in.   Today, by contrast, the very structure of the financialindustry in Japan is at issue. As in the U.S., the businessesthat banks, trust banks, securities companies and insurancecompanies can engage in is strictly defined. Further reformin Japan could entail lowering the barriers among industrysectors -- something the Finance Ministry is preparing to doanyway, but at its own pace. Changes will take time,officials say, because they affect so many of their giantdomestic constituents.   Besides, some officials point out, many foreignersoperating in Japan have won special permission to cross thosebarriers precisely because they aren't viewed as domesticcompanies. Thus, foreign banks such as Citicorp, Barclays PLCand Deutsche Bank AG own brokerage firms in Tokyo, whileforeign securities companies, such as Salomon Inc. and MorganStanley Group, now have banking licenses.   In a few cases, foreigners now wish they hadn't botheredbreaking into previously off-limit Japanese markets; ChaseManhattan Bank's trust banking business was a costly error,and some foreign members of the Tokyo Stock Exchangeprivately hint they wouldn't mind giving up their costlyseats if it wouldn't be too embarrassing.   That sense of disappointment has undermined the U.S.negotiating position in the Yen-Dollar Talks. The pragmaticJapanese negotiators want to know just who wants the changesWashington favors. Thus, as a show of support, the heads ofthe top U.S. securities firms recently sent letters toUndersecretary of the Treasury David Mulford endorsing thetalks.   U.S. officials say a number of crucial issues remain onthe table. Japan still doesn't have a free auction to sellgovernment bonds (though part of the bonds are sold that way,effectively setting the price for those that aren't), and itstill applies a withholding tax on short-term governmentbonds, even those delivered overseas.   The biggest leftover complaint, though, is interest-ratederegulation. Until a few years ago, deposit rates werefixed, as were lending rates, at a profitable spread. Theresult was that Japanese banks had cheap sources of fundingand sufficient profits pouring in at home, enabling them toundercut lending rates nearly any other bank in the worldcould offer. That helped Japanese banks to scoop up more thanan eighth of the U.S. lending business in half a decade. Tocombat that assault, some U.S. Congressmen proposedlegislation enabling retaliation against Japan if it didn'tloosen its restrictions.   Today, for all practical purposes, it has. More thantwo-thirds of commercial bank deposits offer free-floatinginterest rates. Japanese banks are retrenching overseas. Yetthe U.S. government still is complaining about interest-ratederegulation, in particular the fixed rates paid on non-timedeposits, or savings accounts. The Japanese say they have athree-year timetable for deregulating and won't be hurried.   At the moment, the liveliest dispute on the agendarevolves around a peculiarly Japanese informal barrier. LastApril, the Finance Ministry granted 39 foreigninvestment-advisory firms -- along with about 100 previouslynonaccredited Japanese firms -- permission to compete forcontracts to manage Japan's enormous pool of public andprivate pension money. It was a concession the U.S. long haddemanded. But there were strings: the newcomers still arebarred from managing pension funds that were establishedfewer than eight years ago and that have an annual net cashinflow of less than a billion yen.   Those rules whittled the number of eligible funds to fewerthan 100, analysts say. And foreigners can handle only thetiny fraction of money set aside since April 1990.   Even in that narrow corner of the market, prospects forforeigners are daunting. Japan's public pensions tend tochoose investment advisers according to precedent andpersonal relationships rather than performance, while privateconsortiums allocate fund money on the basis of commercialties.</TEXT></DOC>