<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910123-0009</DOCNO><DOCID>910123-0009.</DOCID><HL>   Hidden Strength:   After a Week of War,   Iraq's Military Still   Shows Plenty of Punch   ---   A New Scud Raid on Tel Aviv   Brings Israeli Casualties,   Raising Retaliation Issue   ---   Protecting Missiles and Planes   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and John J. Fialka   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA -- A week ago, Saddam Husseincommanded the world's fifth-largest army. Since then, his warmachine has endured the fiercest six days of conventionalbombing in history.   What does Iraq have left? Answer: The world'sfifth-largest army.</LP><TEXT>   Iraq has plenty of punch left. It apparently retains mostof its military arsenal, with plenty of planes, tanks,troops, artillery, minefields and even chemical weapons stillavailable. &quot;He still has a lot of firepower and a lot ofwillingness to use it,&quot; says Col. Ron Richard of the Marines'Second Division. &quot;This isn't an enemy that is going to goeasy.&quot;   The better he husbands his resources, the more likely itis that Saddam Hussein can turn the war into the &quot;mother ofbattles&quot; he repeatedly has promised. This could take the formof a debilitating and politically unacceptable ground war or,analysts fear, a terrifying shock attack on U.S. troops orenemy cities in which Iraq lashes out with everything it has,possibly including chemical weapons. Baghdad Radio saidyesterday that Iraq may launch &quot;suicide operations&quot; againstits enemies.   Saddam Hussein's Iraq has a record of fulfilling itsthreats, such as invading Kuwait and attacking Israel. In anattack last night, Iraq launched its most lethal missilestrike at Israel so far, firing at least one Scud at thecoastal city of Tel Aviv, Israeli defense officials said. Itslammed into a residential area, killing three and injuringmore than 70, Israeli sources say.   The deaths and the large number of injured -- shown invivid television broadcasts -- will probably make it moredifficult for the Israeli government to continue refrainingfrom retaliating against Iraq. Allied forces have asked thatIsrael stay out of the war for fear that its involvementcould shatter the anti-Iraq alliance.   In Kuwait, Iraq's forces yesterday set fire to two majoroil storage tanks and an oil field, fulfilling another Iraqithreat made before the war began. Allied forces are concernedthat the thick smoke from the fires could impede U.S. pilotsand reconnaissance satellite operations. U.S. Navy jets,meanwhile, attacked and disabled an Iraqi mine-laying vesselduring the day and fired on three other Iraqi boats, sinkingone.   In a separate round of Scud attacks, Iraq fired sixmissiles at Saudi Arabia, but did no damage. While the Scudattacks on Saudi Arabia have had little immediate militaryeffect, they have made the waiting tough for Allied soldiersat the front. Soldiers in the Army's elite Seventh Corps,which is likely to play a leading role in a ground offensive,have stayed up in recent nights, sitting in their hotchemical warfare suits in response to alerts. Some officersworry that the nightly alarms will hurt their troops fightingability. There were signs last night along the front thatU.S. troops could be gearing up for at least some groundaction soon.   Despite its failure to destroy some Scud sites, thePentagon is characterizing the Allied air campaign as beingon track. Based on the limited information the Pentagon hasreleased, specific U.S. high-tech weapons systems appear tobe reaching particular targets in impressive fashion. But theU.S. military is extremely vague about the overall success ofthose air strikes. Knocking out hundreds of radar systems,missile sites, aircraft and runways is one thing. Stopping amillion-man army is quite another.   Going into the war, Iraq had at least 600 combat planes.The Pentagon can confirm the destruction of only a fraction,and British military officials estimate that 70% of the Iraqiair force survives. Moreover, Iraq's command and controlsystem, through which Saddam Hussein guides his fieldcommanders, is still functioning to some extent despite greateffort to knock it out.   The key question right now is how well the B-52 bombingcampaign against the elite Republican Guards is proceeding.The Pentagon has virtually blacked out information about thebombardment. But the Guard, which would be the core of anyIraqi defense of Kuwait, appear to remain largely intact.   A blanket of clouds enshrouding southern Iraq and Kuwaitfor four days has complicated the B-52 campaign. &quot;We'reprobably three to four days behind where we expected to be,&quot;says Col. Ervin Sharpe, commander of a wing of A-10 Warthogtank-killing aircraft. Yesterday clouds over southern Iraqbegan to clear.   &quot;Saddam Hussein is not foolish,&quot; says military analystAnthony Cordesman. &quot;He has spent five months digging in,sheltering his forces against air strikes. His strategy hasalways been to absorb the air strikes and wait for the war ofattrition on the ground.&quot;   Defense experts say Saddam Hussein has pursued thatstrategy with a vengeance, saving his military strength byhiding it, dispersing it and refusing to engage Allied forceson their terms. He has used decoys to outwit Allied strikesagainst his Scud missile launchers and protected his aircraftwith multiple bunkers.   But several factors work against Saddam Hussein's strategyof hunkering down, if that indeed is what he is doing. Forone thing, Pentagon officials note that the air war may runfor weeks more, wreaking much more destruction. Moreover,notes retired Army Col. Harry Summers, hunkering down doesn'talways work. The military historian likens Saddam Hussein'sstrategy to that used by the German high command during theinvasion of Normandy during World War II. The Germans heldback elite Panzer divisions for a counterattack. But by thetime they wanted to move those divisions, the Allies hadseized control of the air, and it was too late to stop thelanding. &quot;It's going to be even tougher in this situation,&quot;predicts Col. Summers. &quot;These Iraqi troops will have no aircover at all.&quot;   Experts inside and outside the Pentagon caution thatIraq's remaining strength can't be gauged by simply toting upnumbers. For instance, even if there are hundreds of Iraqiplanes left, they may be unable to fly if their runways aregone, if they are too dispersed to be grouped properly forcombat, or if ground radar used to guide them has beendestroyed.   &quot;A lot of people say they are saving a knockout blow forus,&quot; says an F-14 pilot on the U.S.S. Kennedy. &quot;But if theytry to do that, they are going to get knocked out.&quot;   With the air war continuing, Iraq's largely futile effortto hit attacking planes is using up precious anti-aircraftmissiles. &quot;It's not like Vietnam, where the enemy had Russianships bringing in more and more,&quot; says retired Adm. ThomasMoorer, former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff. &quot;So theair war will get easier as the days go by.&quot;   But it is clear that it will take longer than it seemedearly on for the air armada to weaken the Iraqi military andinvite surrender or, more likely, clear the way for awinnable ground war. Moreover, even limited ground combatcould produce high casualties.   Allied actions in the coming week could determine the fateof the Republican Guards, and perhaps the course of the war.Military experts are divided on the ability of the Guards towithstand a fierce allied bombardment. Retired Marine Maj.Gen. Fred Haynes, who served in the Middle East, feelsconfident that &quot;the severe pounding&quot; the Guards take from theair will make it far easier for U.S. troops to defeat them.Because of the terrain, he adds, &quot;you can pinpoint thelocation of their major enemy troop locations.&quot;   Yet other military specialists doubt that the battleagainst the Guards can be won from the air. Richard Jupa, theco-author of an article about the Guards that will bepublished soon in Army magazine, says he would be &quot;immenselysurprised&quot; if the bombing has reduced the dug-in Guards'effectiveness by as much as 20%. &quot;They can take a lot ofpunishment,&quot; he says.   The seven regular Republican Guards divisions, comprisingabout 85,000 troops, along with 20,000 special-forces troopsdirectly controlled by the Guards, are widely dispersed fromKuwait City north to Kuwait's Bubiyan Island and in mobileready reserve units in northern Kuwait and southern Iraq.Another division is always kept in and around Baghdad torepel any attack on Saddam Hussein. The Guards are allvolunteers and were originally recruited entirely from SaddamHussein's home town of Takrit. Like him, but unlike themajority of Iraqis, they are all Sunni Muslim.   The Guards are equipped with Soviet T-72M tanks, whichhave been upgraded with night scopes, modern range-findersand smoke launchers. The force also fields lots of artillery,including self-propelled 155mm and 120mm mortars andlong-range 130mm guns. It also has Russian-made SA6 missilesto protect it against air attack.   Even more ominous is the specialty the Guards developedduring the bloody eight-year Iran-Iraq war: bombarding theenemy with nerve and cyanide gas. Each brigade has its ownchemical-weapons companies. Chemical weapons can be firedfrom mortars, guns and from aircraft.   &quot;Republican Guards and other Iraqi elite troops are nowthe world's most seasoned in carrying out assaults precededby chemical attack,&quot; Mr. Jupa observes in the Army magazinearticle. &quot;It is believed that all of the war-winning majorIraqi offensives of 1988 were preceded by nerve and cyanidegas.&quot; Mr. Jupa says he has no reason to believe thiscapability has been seriously affected by the allied airstrikes.   Experts fear that other Iraqi troops still possess similarcapabilities. The U.S. has said Iraq's chemical weaponscomplexes have been badly hurt, but thousands of chemicalweapons built before the war are believed to already be atthe front. &quot;They've just had too long to hide and dispersethem,&quot; says Mr. Cordesman, the military analyst.   The Allies are also increasingly worried about desperateacts of military terror by Iraqi forces. Experts worry that,at war's end, Iraq could use its few surviving aircraft toattack its neighbors with chemical weapons. There is evenconcern that Iraq might try to explode a crude nuclear device-- one that mainly just spews radioactivity -- over the skiesof Tel Aviv or Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.   As for Iraq's command-and-control system, in the war'sfirst few days, the Pentagon released dramatic photos showinglarge command centers in Baghdad under air attack and it wasreported that the Defense Ministry itself had been wrecked.But now analysts inside the military say some of those keybuildings weren't totally crushed. An entire wing of onebuilding, for example, was relatively undamaged, and ananti-aircraft gun continued to operate on the roof.   What's more, Saddam Hussein is thought to have redundantcommand-and-control centers, just as the U.S. does. &quot;If youtook out the Pentagon with an air strike, you'd burn up a lotof paper,&quot; says one top U.S. military man who works there.&quot;But you wouldn't stop us because we have parallel commandcenters running full-time elsewhere,&quot; a reference to buriedcommand posts in the mountains near Washington.   Nobody doubts that command-and-control has been damaged.Pentagon officials note that the few Iraqi pilots who havegone aloft have seemed confused about what to do.Anti-aircraft guns and missiles appear to be fired wildly,without guidance or coordination.   But there is also little doubt that Saddam Hussein'scommanders are still in touch with headquarters. &quot;He'sundoubtedly got buried land lines to supplement the radiolinks we took out,&quot; says retired Gen. Jerry Carey, who headedthe Air Force's tactical air war center.   There were new signs yesterday that the White House ishardening its view toward settling the conflict with SaddamHussein, and hints that President Bush's war aims haveexpanded to include elimination of the Iraqi leader himself.White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater asserted that the goalof the U.S. and its allies in the conflict hasn't broadenedbeyond United Nations resolutions calling for an Iraqiwithdrawal from Kuwait. But Mr. Fitzwater also wouldn't ruleout the possibility that U.S. forces might seek to capturethe Iraqi leader, possibly to try him for war crimes.   The presidential spokesman said the Bush administrationright now views peace initiatives with &quot;limited optimism.&quot;The administration is &quot;not looking for ways to initiatedialogue at this point,&quot; he said.   In addition, the administration disclosed that PresidentBush dispatched a personal emissary to Jordan, apparently inan effort to improve relations and keep that country out ofthe conflict. Jordan has been sympathetic to Iraq and openlycritical of President Bush's military actions in the Gulf,but just last Friday Mr. Bush said that he didn't want to&quot;write off&quot; relations with Jordan.   ---   James M. Perry in Washington contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>