<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910228-0064</DOCNO><DOCID>910228-0064.</DOCID><HL>   Power Vacuum:   Iraqi Leadership Ranks   Yield Few Alternatives   To Saddam Hussein   ---   The Toppling of the Dictator   Could Bring Instability   To a Fragmented Society   ---   A Dark Horse: King Hussein   ----   By Geraldine Brooks and Peter Waldman   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   AMMAN, Jordan -- In an attempt to force an end to SaddamHussein's leadership, the U.S. may find it has cured a cancerwithout saving the patient.   With no benign alternative waiting to replace a toppledIraqi leader, Saddam Hussein could easily become the ghost atthe postwar feast, his legacy of chaos and bloodsheddisrupting attempts to stabilize the Middle East.</LP><TEXT>   If a new leader were to come from within the president'sinner circle, the regime would remain dangerously committedto militarism and domestic repression. Otherwise, there mightwell be a bloody contest involving a dozen top militaryfigures, or a Lebanese-style fragmentation into armedfactions antagonistic to one another.   In the short term at least, it might be safer for Iraq andits neighbors for the coalition forces to leave a bruisedSaddam Hussein rotting on the tree. Disaffected Iraqis wouldbe likely to deliver the coup de grace themselves before toolong -- sparing the U.S. some of the bitterness many Arabsnow harbor.   Desperate to mollify his enraged population, a survivingSaddam Hussein would have to provide bread and olives,electric lights that work and toilets that flush. Restoringsuch basics of life would leave little time to make troubleabroad. Iraq's acute need for international assistance wouldact as a further curb.   Saddam Hussein's dozen years of iron-fisted rule have heldtogether Iraq's crazy quilt of religious sects and ethnicgroups. But when his grip slackens, it all could quicklyunravel. To walk through Baghdad's% &quot;souq&quot; is to seebandoleered Bedouins jostling baggy-trousered Kurds; women inskimpy skirts alongside black-veiled Shiites. A babel ofTurkish, Kurdish, even Persian, punctuate the Arabic.   &quot;When Saddam goes, the forces will be centrifugal; thetendency will be toward atomization,&quot; says a diplomat basedin Baghdad until the war began. Iraq's 16 million people are80% Arab. Most of the rest are Kurds resentful of thepost-World War I agreements that deprived them of a state anddivided among themselves on what to do about it. The majorityof Arabs are Shiite Muslims -- restive, brutally repressedand long denied proportionate wealth and power. A host ofminorities -- Armenians, Assyrians, Turkomans and Yazidis --complicate the patchwork.   The political picture is equally diverse. Saddam Hussein'sBaath Party has suppressed numerous ideological challengers.But remnants of opposition persist: communists, liberals withWestern leanings, Islamic fundamentalists.   Saddam Hussein's recent resort to Muslim rhetoric --calling his struggle a &quot;holy war&quot; -- belies the fact that afew years ago, Iraqi men were arrested just for wearingIslamic beards. Many disaffected young men have turned to themosques, and it is from there that unrest could spill.   Then, too, there is the legacy of grudges engendered by apolice state. In a society in which every neighbor is apotential informer, the urge to take revenge runs deep. Thenight of the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq in their longwar offered a foretaste. Iraqis poured into the streets,firing guns to celebrate. &quot;There were a lot of `accidental'shootings that night,&quot; recalls a Western ambassador thenbased in Baghdad. &quot;Mohammed would see Ahmed next door who hethought had betrayed his son; the next thing, Mohammed's hand`slipped' and Ahmed had had it.&quot;   Diplomats and others long acquainted with Iraq say it isimpossible to name one charismatic figure who could hold thebattered nation together. By design, says one envoy, SaddamHussein has peopled the top levels of the army and thegovernment with &quot;an enormous cast of incognitos.&quot;   Those few candidates for leadership who are known arefeared.   Taha Yassin Ramadan, Saddam Hussein's most prominentdeputy, exemplifies the style of the inner circle. He wears arevolver in his belt, its pearl handle facing forward tofacilitate a fast draw. Mr. Ramadan's power has declined overthe past two years while the president's cousin Hussein Kamelal-Majid has been in the ascendant. Mr. Kamel is married toSaddam's eldest daughter, Ghard. As the minister of industry,he oversaw the development of Iraq's chemical, nuclear andother weapons programs, and he replaced the recently toppledoil minister. &quot;People are afraid of him. He is just as muchof a tyrant as Saddam,&quot; says Amatzia Baram, an Iraq expert atHaifa University. &quot;He's very rough on people, perfectlysupercilious, a very unpleasant man. But he's not a butcherthat I know of.&quot;   Mr. Kamel's brother, Hussein Ali al-Majid, is a butcheraccording to many Kurds and Kuwaitis. As chief of one ofIraq's internal security branches, Mr. Ali ordered thegassing of the Kurds and suppressed resistance within Kuwait.In the month after he became governor of occupied Kuwait,thousands of Kuwaitis reportedly disappeared.   Barazan Ibrahim, Saddam Hussein's half brother, is anothercontender for power. A former chief of general security, Mr.Ibrahim attended the talks between James Baker and Tariq Azizand represents Iraq at the United Nations' human rights forumin Geneva. But his job might give one the wrong impression.Sami Farag Ali, an exiled Iraqi dissident, says he once got acall from Mr. Ibrahim, warning: &quot;`Don't think you're safe inLondon,'&quot; Mr. Ali recalls. &quot;`With one word, I can have yourhead brought to Baghdad.'&quot;   Current disarray in Iraq at least temporarily favorsmembers of the ruling group: With channels of communicationcut, it would be hard to organize a coup, or even to announceit.   Iraqis, made meek by years of repression, aren't likely torise up without an army spearhead. But if such a groundswellcomes, Saddam's circle would likely be swept away with him.That includes Mr. Aziz, the foreign minister, who as aChristian is an unlikely contender in any case. Even suchmild figures as Nizar Hamdoon, the deputy foreign ministerand former ambassador to Washington, whom the Iraq-baseddiplomat describes as &quot;brilliant and a friend of the West&quot;could be &quot;too connected with the regime&quot; to play much of aleadership role. Adds an Iraqi-born Israeli diplomat: &quot;TheIraqis are basically smart people. When they turn againstSaddam, they'll also turn against his inner circle.&quot;   For the U.S., the &quot;optimal&quot; solution is a transitionalmilitary regime, says Laurie Mylroie, co-author of &quot;SaddamHussein and the Crisis in the Gulf.&quot; The military, she says,is one of the few Iraqi power-centers that still commandrespect. But to avoid a return to the debilitating cycle ofcoups and counter-coups that marked the decades before SaddamHussein's ascent, such a government would have to movequickly to prepare the country for some kind of democraticprocess.   In justifying their support for Saddam Hussein, Iraq'sArab allies often argue that the country is chronicallyungovernable -- except by tyrants. Since civilization beganin Mesopotamia, this potentially rich land never hasexperienced anything resembling democracy. What happens nowcould well be a tragic replay of the half-century ofinstability touched off by the departure of British colonialgovernors when Iraq gained its independence in 1932. Thefirst year saw an army slaughter of the Assyrians and aseries of bloody Shiite uprisings. A quick succession ofcoups, assassinations and insurgencies continued until theBaath Party takeover in 1968. Interfactional executionsmarked the next decade, as Saddam Hussein consolidated power,becoming president in 1979.   Some Iraqi exiles, even fervent opponents of SaddamHussein, suspect that the U.S. isn't interested in fosteringdemocracy in their homeland. &quot;Americans don't have ademocratic agenda in the Middle East,&quot; says Sabah Jawad, anIraqi writer and human-rights activist based in London.&quot;Otherwise, why did they support Saddam Hussein for so long?Why the Shah? Why King Fahd? These are the people who haveensured that democracy doesn't exist in the Middle East.&quot;   While the Bush administration continues to state that itwouldn't shed any tears if Saddam Hussein were removed, itprivately expects him to remain in power for several moremonths. Meanwhile, a senior State Department official says,the administration hasn't yet spent much time focusing onwhat kind of government it would like to see emerge inBaghdad if Saddam falls.   Mr. Jawad is troubled by what he sees as American-backedattempts in Saudi Arabia to shape governments-in-exile.Riyadh has welcomed some 30 former generals and politiciansousted over the years by Saddam Hussein. Among them areIbrahim Daoud, a former defense minister, Taleb Shabib, aformer foreign minister, and Hassan Nakib, a former general.&quot;They aren't clean,&quot; Mr. Jawad says. &quot;All participated in thecrimes against the Iraqi people.&quot; Damascus, meanwhile, isplaying host to an uncomfortable collection of 17 Iraqipolitical groups ranging from Islamic fundamentalists andMarxist revolutionaries to proponents of democracy.   A third, longer-established group, based in Iran, isheaded by the Shiite cleric Ayatollah Bakr al-Hakim. Hisgroup seeks an Iran-style Islamic state in Iraq, but itsfollowing diminished during the Iran-Iraq war, when mostIraqi Shiites backed their own government.   It is dimly possible that Iraq's neighbor Jordan couldplay a role in a post-Saddam political restructuring. SomeIraqis are nostalgic for the Hashemite monarchy that came toa violent end in a 1958 coup. Faisal II, the murdered king,was the cousin of Jordan's King Hussein, and the two monarchshad united their kingdoms a few months before the coup.Saddam Hussein, then a young revolutionary, backed theregicide. But since becoming friends with King Hussein, hehas restored the monarchy to an honored place in Iraqihistory, rebuilding monuments, tombs and buildings associatedwith the family.   Many Iraqis feel warm toward King Hussein, grateful forhis pleas to avert the war and envious of the democratizationunder way in Jordan. A unification of the two countries wouldundo some of the divide-and-conquer colonial statecraft somany Arabs bitterly resent, giving Jordan a viable economyand Iraq a decent seaport.   Although out of favor now with both the U.S. and its Gulfallies, King Hussein is a pro-Western leader who has managedfor 38 years to run a stable, nonrepressive state and who hascontinually sought a peaceful accommodation with Israel. Theking has correct, if cool, relations with Syria and is in theprocess of restoring ties with Iran. His installation asconstitutional monarch of a unified Iraqi-Jordanian statewould offer the Arabs the prospect of a strong, stable nationinstead of a broken, turbulent one. It would offer the West afriendly regime in place of a bitter, anti-Western enemy,although Israel wouldn't like having such a powerful Arabneighbor along its longest border.   Meanwhile, for most Iraqis, democracy and stability remaina distant dream. &quot;The people are fed up with war anddictatorship,&quot; says Sahib al-Hakim, director of theLondon-based Iraqi Association for Human Rights. But afterseeing 23 of his relatives executed, he says he won't hurryback from exile, even if Saddam Hussein is overthrown. &quot;I'llstay here and watch to see if the next group respects humanrights,&quot; he says. &quot;If they don't, I'll start all over againto campaign against them.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>