<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910314-0024</DOCNO><DOCID>910314-0024.</DOCID><HL>   Hot Lists:   Data Mills Delve Deep   To Find Information   About U.S. Consumers   ---   Folks Inadvertently Supply It   By Buying Cars, Mailing   Coupons, Moving, Dying   ---   Treasure for Direct Marketers   ----   By Michael W. Miller   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   DNY TRW EFX</CO><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)INDUSTRIAL andamp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)DIVERSIFIED TECHNOLOGY (DTC)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   NEW YORK -- Nicholas Iannelli, two days old, whines softlyas a nurse's aide takes him from his hospital bassinet andpositions him beneath a big metal camera. &quot;Come on,sweetheart,&quot; she whispers, then clicks the shutter.   In a flash, Nicholas is back in the nursery, and his vitalstatistics embark on a lifelong journey into a vast networkof direct-marketing computers.</LP><TEXT>   St. Vincent's Medical Center on Staten Island sends anorder-card filled out by Nicholas's parents to the offices ofFirst Foto in Red Bank, N.J. The Iannellis get snapshots.Their names, address and phone number go into the files ofFirst Foto's owner, Hasco International Inc., whose hospitalcameras shoot about 1.6 million newborns each year. Thecompany passes along the data it collects to a Massachusettsoutfit that does a brisk business sharing its lists withcompanies such as Kimberly-Clark Corp. and Sears, Roebuck andamp;Co. They will fill the Iannellis' mailbox with ads fordiapers and toys.   Scavenging for the personal details of people's lives istoday a high-tech, billion-dollar industry. It is theinvisible engine of junk mail and junk phone calls. And ithas been instrumental in the erosion of personal privacy.   The industry has its tentacles in a thousand corners wherepersonal information resides, from car registrations tomortgage records to birth announcements. It buys data fromall manner of companies. Bookstores sell lists of theircustomers. Magazines and newspapers (including The WallStreet Journal) sell or rent their subscription lists. Theindustry also plucks data directly from consumers who don'talways realize that they are feeding computers just byfilling out questionnaires, entering contests, redeemingcoupons or making a simple phone call.   &quot;You go through life dropping little bits of data aboutyourself everywhere,&quot; says Evan Hendricks, editor of PrivacyTimes, a Washington, D.C., monthly. &quot;Most people don't knowthat there are big vacuum cleaners sucking it up.&quot;   Some people are upset by what they do know of all this.Last year, the software company Lotus Development Corp.attracted national attention to the personal-data business byannouncing plans to sell &quot;Marketplace,&quot; a set ofpersonal-computer disks containing data on about 120 millionU.S. households. That news brought Lotus lots of cards,letters and phone calls it didn't want -- 30,000 protests inall. In January, Lotus decided the product was more troublethan it was worth and killed it.   Three committees of Congress plan hearings on the boom inpersonal data-gathering. A 1990 survey by one bigdata-gatherer, Equifax Inc., concluded that nearly 80% ofAmericans are distressed about threats to their privacy.   Nevertheless, fund-raisers and marketers have never beenhungrier for tidbits of personal information. It is essentialraw material for businesses shifting from mass-mediaadvertising to direct-marketing via mail and phone. Thestrategy, which costs much more per targeted consumer, makeseconomic sense only when they know enough about a householdto consider a personal pitch worthwhile.   And companies know a staggering amount.   Even if a baby happens to make it home from the hospitalwithout landing in First Foto's database, the infant willstill probably crawl into the files of Metromail Corp. ofLombard, Ill., one of the biggest of the informationgatherers. The company promotes its &quot;Young Family IndexPlus,&quot; which lists 67,000 new births each week, about 85% ofthe 4.1 million babies born in the U.S. each year. Metromailbabyfinders clip birth announcements, call Lamaze coaches andget names from companies that deal in baby supplies.   The quest continues as children get older. A kid whoreaches the 10th grade in school will almost certainly windup in a computer in Great Neck, N.Y., where American ListCorp. stores yearbook listings and other data about virtuallyevery high-school class. Marketers also can get lists of100,000 buyers of novelty items advertised on Dubble Bubblegum wrappers, and 73,467 members of the Dairy Queen BirthdayClub. Another ice-cream club (Farrell's) in 1983 sold a listof 18-year-olds to the Selective Service System.   Buy a house in any of 575 U.S. counties, and a Metromailagent will come into possession of public records on the saleand the mortgage. (&quot;Be the first to know the `second' theyclose,&quot; is a Metromail slogan.) Buy a car in most states andthe registration information (name, address, make), finds itsway to R.L. Polk andamp; Co. of Detroit. (Among its many customers:The Wall Street Journal, which buys lists of new BMW andMercedes-Benz owners from Polk.)   Consumers Marketing Research Inc. of South Hackensack,N.J., sells lists sorted by any of 78 ethnic and religiousgroups. It produced a list of Italian voters for Mario Cuomowhen he ran for governor of New York, black households forthe United Negro College Fund, and Japanese men for a BrooksBrothers promotion of suits in smaller sizes. For a maker oflederhosen, CMR prepared a list of German names with thosethought to be Jewish deleted.   If anyone succumbs to too many of these pitches and filesfor personal bankruptcy protection, a scout for JeffersonMailing Lists may well spot the court record. &quot;It has turnedout to be a tremendous list,&quot; says Jeff Figler, who runs thesmall Poway, Calif., firm and says it adds 35,000 names amonth to its list. &quot;They want to re-establish their credit,so when they buy something, they're going to beconscientious.&quot;   Compiling and selling lists now profitably occupiesthousands of little-known, mostly private companies. Sincethey usually sell lists for one use only, they can sell themagain and again. (The buyer usually gets a roll of printedmailing labels to use once and is obliged not to duplicate orreuse the list without paying for it again.) With overheadlow, they commonly enjoy 25% pretax profit margins. TinyAmerican List, which collects all the yearbooks, isspectacularly profitable, earning $4 million on $7.1 millionin sales in fiscal 1990.   But three companies dominate the industry, and they comefrom a long tradition of minding other people's business.Young Ralph L. Polk began knocking on doors in Ohio in the1860s, for the publisher of a city directory. Twenty yearslater in Chicago, Reuben H. Donnelley started taking namesand addresses for one of America's first phone books.   Today R.L. Polk, still family-run, and DonnelleyMarketing, owned by private investors, have built those earlydirectories into electronic data bases that include nearlyevery household in America, with address, phone number,estimated income and information on purchasing habits, amongother things. The third such nationwide file belongs toMetromail, owned by printing giant R.R. Donnelley andamp; Sons Co.(founded by Reuben's father but unrelated to DonnelleyMarketing). Each of the three has estimated annual sales ofbetween $150 million and $250 million.   Government agencies do plenty to help the data-diggers,and sometimes share in the proceeds. New York state, whichsells its car-registration data to the highest bidder, gets$1 million from Polk for two years' records.   The data industry is a legal business. Privacy advocateshave sought laws that would require companies to get asubject's permission before collecting or selling personalinformation. But the industry has successfully fought suchmoves, letting companies write their own loose rules. Theindustry trade group, the Direct Marketing Association,suggests that companies &quot;periodically inform&quot; people thattheir names are being sold, but the suggestion is easily andwidely ignored.   The federal Office of Thrift Supervision recently tried tocurb the savings and loan industry's widespread practice ofselling lists of depositors. But the regulators held offafter the industry said cutting off list revenues could driveadditional thrift institutions out of business.   Movements are afoot in other nations to inform the publicexactly how personal data bases work, and to give citizensthe right to stay out of them. The European Communitycountries, for example, are preparing rules that would keepdata subjects informed about how their names are used.Britain, Germany and several other countries have nationalagencies overseeing the uses of personal information.   U.S. industry is largely unfettered by regulation andfreewheeling in its practices. R.L. Polk searches itsnationwide electronic file for listings in which the onlyname is a woman's, thus producing the &quot;Polk's Female Head ofHousehold List.&quot; Database America Cos. of Englewood, N.J.,hunts for rich people by pinpointing neighbors of corporationdirectors.   When dieters get coupons in the mail for Crystal Lightdrink mix and cash them in, few know that numbers on thecoupons are matched to their own names in a computer at KraftGeneral Foods.   Whatever effort is made to explain practices to consumerstends to appear in small print. On the baby-photograph orderform that little Nicholas Iannelli's mother filled out, aline of type at the bottom declares: &quot;If you prefer not toreceive information on baby related items, check.&quot;   Eleanor Iannelli didn't see that. &quot;After you have a baby,you're in a daze -- some things you don't take notice of,&quot;she says. But soon after she brought Nicholas home, she got aflood of mail trying to sell her baby products. Mrs. Iannelliisn't sure where all these people got her name. She wouldhave checked the First Foto box if she had seen it, she says.   Not every consumer is singled out so precisely, and therehave been embarrassing gaffes. Heart Thoughts Inc., whichproduces birth-announcement cards in Wichita, Kan., bought alist of pregnant women from a source it won't disclose. Thenames apparently came from a list of women who had said on aquestionnaire that they intended to have a baby.   &quot;We got calls and letters from quite a number of peoplewho wanted to get pregnant but could not,&quot; recalls Woodrow W.Goodvin Jr., director of marketing. &quot;In some cases they hadbeen trying for years. We felt horrible about that,&quot; he says.   The data-gathering business has attracted threesophisticated new entrants, who already know most Americansintimately. They produce credit reports.   TRW Inc., Equifax, and Trans Union Corp. all have accessto sensitive financial information about virtually everyAmerican. Banks, credit cards, stores and others send themregular updates about their customers. The three companiesreport on consumers' finances when they apply for a loan, amortgage, a credit card or sometimes even a job.   With the advent of the direct-marketing boom, the threecompanies realized they were sitting on a gold mine: acomputerized directory containing not just the names andaddresses of most people in America but also constantlyupdated, detailed information about what they have, what theybuy and what they can afford. All three have aggressivedivisions selling their data to marketers. So the next timeyou apply for a loan or a credit card, Equifax will probablyinclude your name on its &quot;Credit Seekers Hotline,&quot; (&quot;a strongindicator that these prospects want to make new purchases&quot;).   If you do start buying with that new Visa or MasterCard,you will probably show up on Trans Union's &quot;BankcardHotline,&quot; which lists people who have used such a cardrecently. TRW sells a &quot;Highly Affluent Consumer Database&quot; ofpeople with &quot;proven individual and household income levels&quot;over $100,000.   Their new sideline puts the credit bureaus in the grayarea of the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act, whichgenerally forbids them to disclose data except for a&quot;legitimate business need.&quot; The bureaus say they stay legalby not divulging specific data that would expose a consumer'sfinancial condition to marketers. But they do use data togroup consumers into broad categories such as high, averageor low &quot;spending power.&quot;   Telephone companies are also getting into the businesswith the new technology they sell companies to trace phonecalls, thus identifying callers by phone number.   This can be a powerful data-mining tool. TV commercialsrecently promoted an 800 number one could call to learn thelatest pollen count in any zip code. People by the thousanddialed the number. What they didn't know was that phonecomputers kept a record of every number that called. Thesewere easily matched to names and addresses, all of which wentto Warner-Lambert Co., which sent all these unsuspectingcallers coupons for Benadryl antihistamine.   Data vendors often play down the threat to privacy byarguing that their computers are used to generate mailinglabels, not to look up facts about any one person. But thatisn't always the case.   The 775,000 PC hobbyists who subscribe to the CompuServenetwork can use a Metromail service called MetroNet. Theytype in your phone number and up comes your name, address,spouse, and more. Metromail's own customers can use personalcomputers to dial into MetroNet and find out the names andages of all members of a household and the names, addressesand phone numbers of up to 10 neighbors.   A Metromail phone-agent cheerfully demonstrated theservice to this reporter, taking his phone number and,seconds later, reading off his address, wife's name, and theaccurate information that he has lived in an apartmentbuilding of 20 to 49 units for three years. The agent alsocame up with a New York address for the rock star Madonna (inan 8-unit building), and she doesn't even have a listedtelephone.   Metromail promotes the service to bill-collectors, andsays it also is &quot;ideal&quot; for &quot;targeting customers' neighborsas new prospects for products/services.&quot;   A company that wants to go after old people can dobusiness with Senior Citizens Unlimited of White Plains, N.Y.It combs through driver's licenses and voter registrations toproduce a data base of 40 million Americans over 50. Buyersget computer diskettes with 5,000 names, sorted by age, zipcode, estimated income, and home ownership. The company callssenior citizens &quot;ideal for telemarketing.&quot;   James McQuaid, president of Metromail, says the company is&quot;very cautious&quot; about the data it includes in MetroNet.&quot;What's in there is information that could be gatheredpublicly, though maybe not as easily,&quot; he says. Reversedirectories sorted by phone number, for instance, haveexisted for decades.   Like the credit-reporters and other data sellers,Metromail also says the industry is simply responding toconsumers' growing demand for service and convenience. TheEquifax survey found that many Americans say they oppose thesale of personal data, but change their minds once it isexplained how the data can help people shop at home.   Finally, the industry says it always deletes the recordsof anyone who asks out. Consumers who want their names purgedfrom lists can contact the Direct Marketing Association inNew York, which keeps a &quot;delete me&quot; list that most big datacompanies use. A million people have signed up for the list.   But data firms say they sometimes simply ignore the list.One leading data executive says he actually helped a companysend a special mailing to everyone on the &quot;delete me&quot; list,reasoning that their mailboxes would be wonderfullyuncluttered.   Lawmakers are trying to write rules for this industry.Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) contends that sellingcredit-data to direct marketers is illegal, and he hasintroduced a bill that would make that ban more explicit.Another bill would establish a federal data protection boardsimilar to agencies that exist in Europe.   Meanwhile, the industry keeps thinking of new twists. Itis even taking an interest in consumers who pass on from thismarketplace. Lifestyle Change Communications Inc. of Atlanta,which prepares consumer questionnaires for marketers, oftenasks whether there has been a recent death in the family.   Robert Perlstein, the company's president, says thatquestion interests fund-raisers, credit-card companies, andlandlords. &quot;Death has always been a negative life stylechange nobody thought could be sold, but I differ,&quot; he says.&quot;I think it's a very good market.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>