<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910130-0053</DOCNO><DOCID>910130-0053.</DOCID><HL>   Ray of Hope:   Investors Begin to Bet   On Firms They Believe   Will Lead a Recovery   ---   Citing Oil and Interest Rates,   They Look for a `Bottom';   Others Call It Foolhardy   ---   The State of Key Industries   ----   By Bernard Wysocki Jr.   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FORECASTS AND ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)BANKS (BNK)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)HOME CONSTRUCTION (HOM)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><GV>FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><LP>   Housing starts are abysmally low. Auto and appliance salesare weak. Retailers suffered through the Christmas season.Airlines are reeling from high fuel costs and a decline intravel stemming from fear of Iraqi terrorism.   Hardly auspicious for the U.S. economy, one might argue.These industries are some of those that typically lead it outof recession. If they aren't snapping back, any rebound mightseem far in the future.</LP><TEXT>   Yet some professional investors are betting that theseindustries will begin to revive fairly soon. Auto sales maybe in the tank, but Peter Canelo, a Bear, Stearns andamp; Co.strategist, is recommending stock in General Motors andChrysler. Retailers had a bad Christmas, but LexingtonManagement's William Stack is optimistic about Dayton Hudsonand May Department Stores, among others.   Do they know what they're doing? Maybe they do.   Many economists and investors think that the recession isnear a bottom and that a recovery could begin this spring.They base their optimism on hopes of further declines ininterest rates and oil prices.   And some government policy makers are encouraging optimismdespite last week's report that gross national product fell2.1% in the fourth quarter. &quot;The worst of the decline mayvery well be behind us,&quot; says W. Lee Hoskins, president ofthe Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.   That's a buy signal for some Wall Streeters. &quot;If you waituntil the earnings are up, you'll be too late,&quot; Mr. Canelosays. &quot;The stocks turn long before the fundamentals.&quot;   Underlying this optimism is a conviction that the currenteconomic downturn is a fairly traditional one. That suggests,for example, that the Fed-orchestrated easing of interestrates will significantly stimulate the economy. Enoughinvestors apparently hold this view that many cyclical stocks-- those strongly affected by fluctuations in economicactivity -- have begun to outperform the market averages inthe past few weeks. Among them are shares of some homebuilders, retailers, airlines, auto makers and paperproducers.   Not everyone agrees, of course. In this environment, saythe gloomiest forecasters, a cyclical uptick or downtick inautos or retailing is of little moment. &quot;It's like going tothe stadium to watch the halftime show and only laterrealizing there's a football game going on,&quot; says MichaelAronstein, of Comstock Partners Inc.   Many people doubt that lower interest rates will do theeconomy much good because, they say, it is still weighed downby heavy debt. Even lower rates can't help if consumers don'twant to spend, or can't. Yesterday, in fact, the ConferenceBoard, a business-research organization, said consumerconfidence tumbled in January to a 10-year low. And althoughthe recent plunge in oil prices promises to put more money inconsumers' hands, any further declines depend on a hugeuncertainty, a successful resolution of the Persian Gulf warduring the next few months.   It's also doubtful that lower interest rates couldalleviate the vast oversupply of commercial real estate inmany U.S. markets. And the Federal Reserve itself isconcerned that, despite lower interest rates, banks may beunwilling to lend to some business customers, even those withgood track records.   &quot;We're still wrestling with the economywide creditexcesses of the past,&quot; says Robert Marks, of Siff, Oakley andamp;Marks, a New York investment advisory firm. &quot;Look at whathappened in the first 2 1/2 years of the Depression. Interestrates came down like a stone, but we had a spontaneouscontraction of money and credit.&quot; In other words, even withlower rates, people borrowed less and less. However, Mr.Marks says that today credit is still expanding at about a 7%annual rate.   Faced with this blizzard of contradictions, some analystsare concluding that the U.S. economy is on a knife-edge.Either a modest recovery will begin soon or there will beanother sharp downward move as businesses find that they canwait no longer to cut costs -- and employment -- further.   To take just one example, some believe that the Northeasthousing market has reached a critical juncture and couldquickly go either way.&quot;In New York and Boston, a whole lot ofhome-buying is on hold,&quot; says Douglas Poutasse, chief ofstatistics and forecasting at the F.W. Dodge division ofMcGraw-Hill. There are some signs that prices have begun tofirm and that buyers are beginning to perceive bargains.&quot;But,&quot; Mr. Poutasse says, &quot;We can't stay in this situationvery long. Either this is the trough and it comes back up, orwe'll have a major downtrend.&quot;   Typical of those who see a mild, shallow upturn possiblyin the making is James M. Griffin Jr., corporate economist atAetna Life andamp; Casualty and chief portfolio strategist for $3billion of Aetna-managed funds; he told Aetna directors lastFriday that he expects a shallow recession and a sluggishrecovery. In an interview, he says, &quot;This isn't the end ofthe world.&quot;   Mr. Griffin has put some of his money where his mouth is.His portfolio recently turned from somewhat negative on thestock market to &quot;neutral.&quot; He says the prospect of lowerinterest rates could be bullish for stocks. When the Fedeases, he says, &quot;Don't fight the Fed.&quot;   Will the decline in interest rates, along with lowerenergy prices, really bolster important downtrodden sectorsof the economy? Nobody knows, but a closer look at a few ofthese sectors may help explain the optimism of some analysts-- and others' pessimism.   In past recessions, housing has usually turned down earlyand recovered early. In the past six economic downturns,housing starts touched bottom anywhere from two months to 12months before the recession ended, notes Lacy Hunt ofCarroll, McEntee andamp; McGinley in New York.   Lately, housing starts have hit their lowest level sincethe 1982 recession. Consumers remain heavily in debt, theinventory of unsold homes is huge, and housing may befighting demographic trends, namely, a slowdown in householdformation. Moreover, the housing slump may inhibit otherspending, as consumers fear that the value of their mainasset, their home, is declining.   But there's at least a shred of good news: Many expertsbelieve that, nationwide, the home-building decline ishitting bottom right now. That was the consensus of 24economists recently surveyed by the Federal Reserve Bank ofCleveland. They predicted, on the average, that housingstarts would hit a trough of 1.03 million on an annual basisin the first quarter and then rise fairly sharply to a 1.18million rate by the third quarter. That's a far cry from themid-1980s boom but, if it occurs, a fairly good snapback -- a15% increase in six months -- from a very depressed level.   Declines in interest rates and in home prices are helpingmake housing more affordable, and the Decemberconsumer-confidence survey by the University of Michiganshowed a slight increase in interest in buying a house. &quot;Youcould extrapolate from this survey that more consumers thinkit's a good time to buy,&quot; says David Hale, chief economist atKemper Financial Services in Chicago.   The housing picture varies widely from region to region,however. In much of the Midwest, house prices and demand fornew homes are stable, even rising a bit. But a rebound, inhome sales or construction, is far from certain in theNortheast. Layoffs in banking, computers and defensecontracting are raising unemployment there, and New Englandis experiencing a population outflow.   In the Northeast, perhaps more than anywhere else, theripple effects of the heavy debt incurred during the 1980sare appearing. The building boom created 50,000 constructionjobs in eastern Massachusetts between 1984 and 1987, and nowthey have been wiped out, says Karl E. Case, an economist atWellesley College. Home prices, which had soared, later fell30% or more. Home-buying traffic dried up. The low volume hasreduced real-estate commissions and squeezed out brokers. Inaddition, many restaurants and stores have closed. Thus,relatively few people in the Northeast have been buyinghouses, refrigerators or cars this year.   The weakness in the Northeast and in some other regions aswell makes it likely that nationwide sales figures forbig-ticket items probably will be weak. In 1990, for example,the sales volume of major kitchen and laundry appliances fell5% from 1989. For this year, General Electric is predictinganother 5% decline, plus perhaps a 7% drop in what it calls&quot;non-core&quot; appliances, such as air-conditioning units andmicrowave ovens.   Auto sales are also expected to post the fifth weak yearin a row. W. Van Bussmann, associate economist at Chrysler,regards the high-debt boom of the mid-1980s as a time whenconsumers &quot;borrowed&quot; from future demand. They bought morecars than demographics and income numbers would havepredicted. Now come the lean years of &quot;giveback&quot; to themarket, of fewer purchases by consumers and fewer sales byauto makers.   So what is the optimism all about?   Mr. Bussmann thinks that the giveback period may be almostover. Others agree. Prof. Case of Wellesley believes thateven in New England, much of the excess in the economy hasbeen wrung out. And as other regions make a comeback, theNortheast's computers and high-tech wares will begin to sellagain, they believe. So, the rest of the U.S. could help bailout the Northeast.   In contrast to the Northeast and parts of California, theindustrial heartland and the farm belt are holding up fairlywell. The triangle formed roughly by Pittsburgh, Milwaukeeand Denver slogged through hard times in the early and middle1980s. Today, this area, thanks partly to exports, is evenshowing some gains.   &quot;Our orders have definitely picked up from December,&quot; saysJoseph H. Stegmayer, chief financial officer of WorthingtonIndustries, a Columbus, Ohio, steel processor anddistributor. &quot;In fact, January isn't going too badly.&quot; Alsoin Ohio, Huffy Corp. records strong sales of bicycle andbasketball goal sets. After a nervous fall, retailers areordering more consistently again. Wendy's International, theColumbus-based fast-food chain, is moving ahead with anambitious expansion plan and this year will open 150 newhamburger outlets, up 50% from its 1990 pace.   Even some hard-hit sectors of the economy show surprisingresilience. Although commercial real estate is a disasterzone, with too much office space and too many hotels andconstruction dormant in most cities, a leading U.S. elevatormaker, Schindler Elevator Corp., is doing well.   &quot;Profits are squeezed,&quot; says David Bauhs, president of theSchindler Elevator unit of Switzerland-based Schindler Group,which acquired Westinghouse's elevator business in 1989. Butvolume is steady at about $750 million a year. Replacementwork in existing buildings is strong. Escalators and movingsidewalks in airports are still holding up. And thehigh-profit service business is booming. What's more, a newescalator factory in North Carolina produces to metricmeasurements, largely for export to Europe. Demand there isstrong, Mr. Bauhs says.   In fact, exports may greatly help any U.S. rebound, someeconomists say. Last week's report of a decline infourth-quarter gross national product also showed exports 7%ahead of a year earlier. In turn, exports, which have beenbolstered by the weak U.S. dollar, could help fuel demand forhousing, autos and other durable goods and set off a cyclicalrecovery.   But the wild card, many economists also believe, remainsthe Mideast. A drop in oil prices could significantly liftconsumer purchasing power, which has been weak recently,especially since the runup in oil prices right after Iraq'sAug. 2 invasion of Kuwait. Oil prices in the$15-to-$20-a-barrel range would increase inflation-adjustedpurchasing power between 1% and 3%, says Mr. Marks of SiffOakley.   And an end to the war would raise consumer confidence. AsMr. Canelo of Bear Stearns puts it, &quot;We'll see people turningoff CNN and going out and purchasing goods and services.&quot;   ---   Ralph E. Winter contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>