<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911003-0063</DOCNO><DOCID>911003-0063.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Secret Oral Pacts Don't Pre-Empt   Labor Accords, Appeals Court Says   ----   By Arthur S. Hayes and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   ASC DAL LABOR</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>AIRLINES (AIR)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)FOOD RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS, CONVENIENCE STORES (FDR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)JOINT VENTURES (JVN)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EGYPT (EG)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GEORGIA (GA)ILLINOIS (IL)MARYLAND (MD)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PAKISTAN (PK)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)UTAH (UT)</RE><LP>   A federal appeals court in Chicago has ruled that secretlynegotiated oral agreements between a company and a union donot pre-empt ratified collective bargaining contracts.   In a 2-1 decision, the U.S. Court of Appeals for theSeventh Circuit ruled that federal labor laws regulatingcollective bargaining would have &quot;little substance if thecentral provisions of the collective compact could benullified by&quot; unwritten secret agreements not ratified by theunion rank and file.</LP><TEXT>   The ruling, which sets a precedent in the Seventh Circuit,is important nationally because the Chicago appeals court isconsidered influential. So far, the validity of often-usedsecret oral contracts has been addressed by only a handful offederal trial courts and two federal appeals courts.   The ruling last week means that more than 15,000 formeremployees of Jewel Food Stores, a Chicago-based unit ofAmerican Stores Co. in Salt Lake City, may receive more that$3 million in back wages and benefits. The employees filedthe breach of contract suit in 1984, which was certified as aclass action.   The secret agreement, which was not disclosed to themembership of Local 881 of the United Food and CommercialWorkers Union, was forged by union negotiators and Jewel FoodStores executives during a discussion in a hallway, after thecollective bargaining agreement was struck. The partiessecretly agreed that the company could reopen talks on wagesand benefits if another chain of supermarkets entered theChicago-area market. When a competitor later entered themarket, talks resumed and Jewel eventually slashed wages.   A federal jury returned a verdict in favor of Jewel FoodStores. On appeal, the former employees contended that theoral agreement should not have been enforced because itviolated national labor policy and federal labor law, as wellas the union's constitution requiring ratification ofsignificant terms of a labor contract.   In the opinion, appeals court Judge Richard D. Cudahyagreed with the plaintiffs, reasoning that to &quot;avertindustrial strife, collective bargaining agreements must bemore secure than the garden variety contracts.&quot;   But in a strongly worded dissent, Judge Frank H.Easterbrook, a leading proponent of the Chicago Law School'sfree-market economy philosophy, accused the majority ofplacing &quot;a thumb on the scales of justice&quot; to help employees.Judge Easterbrook's ideological kinsman, appeals court JudgeRichard A. Posner, served as the trial court judge.   Max Brittain, attorney for Jewel Food Stores, said he hasadvised his client to request that the full Seventh Circuitappeals court rehear the panel. Mr. Brittain said he believesthat Judge Posner would probably not be allowed to review thecase.   Francis A. Spina, an attorney for the plaintiffs, hailedthe ruling as &quot;a strong decision in favor of honesty andopenness in collective bargaining matters.&quot;   ---   FOREIGN CRIMES' EFFECT on sentencing is limited by appealscourt.   The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled thatalleged crimes abroad shouldn't be considered in calculatingthe range of prison terms that a defendant faces underfederal sentencing guidelines. However, the court said thealleged foreign crimes can be considered in determining asentence within the range set by the guidelines.   The appeals court, in Manhattan, sent the case of MohammadAzeem, convicted of conspiracy to import heroin to the U.S.,back to the trial judge for resentencing.   The decision could have implications in other drug casesor in fraud cases, where the total amount of alleged lossesto victims determines the range of sentences for defendants.The sentencing guidelines, which apply to wrongdoing thatoccurred after Nov. 1 1987, set a range of sentences thatjudges are required to use.   Benson Weintraub, a criminal defense attorney in Miami,said the decision appears to be &quot;a significant retreat fromthe expansive view of relative conduct that courts have takenin the past&quot; in considering foreign crimes in sentencing.   Mr. Azeem was convicted of being part of a conspiracy thatimported a kilogram, or 2.2 pounds, of heroin into New Yorkfrom Pakistan. Prosecutors also alleged that he and hisco-conspirators shipped three kilograms to Cairo, Egypt, fromPakistan. Under the sentencing guidelines, Mr. Azeem faced asentence of 15 1/2 to 19 1/2 years if the Cairo shipment wasincluded -- compared with a sentence of 12 1/2 to 15 1/2years based solely on the New York delivery. The larger theamount of drugs involved, the higher the sentence range underthe guidelines.   &quot;The guidelines section on base offense levels is broadlyworded . . . but doesn't explicitly address the issue offoreign crimes and activities,&quot; the appeals-court panel said.The court said that including foreign crimes would requiresentencing judges to consider whether the conduct would be acrime in the U.S. and whether arrests abroad wereconstitutional.   &quot;We decline to create the complexities that the inclusionof foreign crimes in the base offense level calculation wouldgenerate. These issues are best considered and resolved byCongress,&quot; the appellate judges said.   ---   LAW FIRM SUES former partners over fees in Lockerbie crashcase.   The suit filed by the Baltimore law firm Whiteford, Taylorandamp; Preston claims that three former partners persuaded clientswith suits against Pan Am Corp. -- stemming from the December1988 plane crash in Lockerbie, Scotland -- to follow them toa new firm.   Read McCaffrey, James Lekin and James Deveney all defectedto the Baltimore office of Patton, Boggs andamp; Blow, based inWashington, D.C., last February. The suit was unsealed inBaltimore County Circuit Court earlier this week.   The three partners represent families of six crew membersand 396 residents of Lockerbie. The plane was blown up by aterrorist bomb, and Pan Am has been accused in the suits ofbeing lax about security.   The suit, which centers on how much in legal fees each lawfirm is entitled to, highlights the conflicts that developwhen partners at a law firm defect to another and take theirclients with them.   Ty Cobb, a lawyer for the three lawyers, agreed thatWhiteford Taylor is entitled to some &quot;reasonable value&quot; forthe work handled while the lawyers were still at the lawfirm. But the two law firms haven't yet agreed, despitenegotiations, how the fees should be split, said Mr. Cobb, apartner in the Baltimore office of Hogan andamp; Hartson, aWashington law firm.   Messrs. McCaffrey, Lekin and Deveney left their former lawfirm after representing the families of the six crew membersfor about a year and settling that workers' compensationclaim in the case for $2,950,000. Fees in that settlementalone came to $983,300.   The Lockerbie residents weren't signed up as clients untilSeptember 1990. The combined value of the Lockerbieresidents' suits and those still pending by the crew's familymembers has been estimated between $20 million to $30million, including fees of more than $4 million.   Whiteford Taylor's attorney George Nilson, at theBaltimore law firm Piper andamp; Marbury, declined to comment. Inthe suit, however, Whiteford Taylor contends that its formerpartners stole the law firm's clients.   Mr. Cobb said that Scottish lawyers representing thevictims' families have signed sworn statements refuting anyallegations that the three attorneys solicited any clients.   ---   JUSTICE SCALIA CRITICIZES judges' reliance oncongressional intent.   One of the pet peeves of U.S. Supreme Court JusticeAntonin Scalia is judges' tendency to rely on legislators'motives to buttress their court decisions. Yesterday, in aspeech to faculty and students at Hofstra University LawSchool in Hempstead, N. Y., Judge Scalia advocated thatjudges abandon such reasoning in their legal interpretations.   It's common practice for federal and state appellatejudges to probe legislative committee records and lawmakers'speeches to determine the meaning behind a law. JusticeScalia related the history of a few recent federal laws toshow that legislative documents are contradictory and vague,allowing a judge to &quot;pick out the portions you like and plugthem into your opinion.&quot;   Judge Scalia said he is not an advocate of originalintent, that is the interpretation of the motives of theConstitution's framers and ratifiers. However, he said hebelieves in interpreting what the Founding Fathers wroteabout the Constitution's meaning.   ---   WASHINGTON LAW FIRM LAUNCHES venture with St. Petersburgbar group.   Dickstein, Shapiro andamp; Morin, a 187-lawyer Washington, D.C.,law firm, will set up an office in St. Petersburg, U.S.S.R.,in conjunction with the bar association. The independentjoint venture will advise the city and regional councils ofSt. Petersburg, formerly known as Leningrad.   The Russia-American Law Firm, as the new office will becalled, will try to help attract U.S. investment and jointventures to the area. Priorities, according to DicksteinShapiro partners, are investment plans involving meat andmilk production, pharmaceuticals, energy and hotels.   Partner David I. Shapiro said that some of DicksteinShapiro's clients have already expressed interest inestablishing joint ventures in St. Petersburg. He said thatto avoid conflicts of interest, St. Petersburg would use itsin-house counsel in deals involving those clients.   The St. Petersburg operation will be staffed by sevenlawyers from the bar association and three Dickstein Shapiropartners who will rotate duty in the office. They are Mr.Shapiro, Samuel A. Stern and Frederick M. Lowther. Theventure also plans to hire a Russian-speaking lawyer to workfull-time in St. Petersburg.</TEXT></DOC>