<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900530-0064</DOCNO><DOCID>900530-0064.</DOCID><HL>   Asian Upheaval:   Japanese Banks Face   Sharper Competition,   Industry Consolidation   ---   Deregulation of Deposit Rates   As Proposed by the U.S.   Endangers Farm Co-ops   ---   Global Role May Be Eroded   ----   By Marcus W. Brauchli and Masayoshi Kanabayashi   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/30/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   JAPAN CCI</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   NAGOYA, Japan -- Banking is a dying trade at Higashi ChitaAgricultural Cooperative Bank. Big-city interlopers aretrying to woo away the cooperative's newly affluent customerswith splashy services. But it has found a niche: funerals.   The co-op helps customers and their families arrangecremations and family altars, get floral wreaths anddistribute inheritances. Its slick banking rivals may beatthe co-op on lending and deposit rates, its officials reason,but not on neighborly compassion. &quot;If we can handle thiswell,&quot; says Hisaki Matsuura, a planning manager, &quot;we will beable to establish eternal relationships&quot; with the bereaved.Last year, the co-op handled 234 funerals in the suburbs ofthis smokestack city.</LP><TEXT>   In the land of financial giants, where the 10 biggestdomestic banks are also the world's 10 biggest, Higashi Chitais a Lilliputian. But its offbeat moves to survive in a newlyhostile environment illustrate the turmoil in Japan'sonce-coddled financial industry.   Goaded by rapid liberalization of financial regulations,Japan's banks are having to change the way they do business.Big-city institutions are focusing increasingly on thedomestic market and seeking to set themselves apart from thepack. Medium-size and regional banks are talking aboutmergers. And small banks and specialized institutions arefighting for their lives. Government officials even speculateopenly about the possibility of the first bank collapsessince World War II.   In Hiroshima, locals joke that the battle among the banksresembles gang warfare. Nearly every major commercial bank inJapan is represented in the western coastal city, and sofierce is the competition for customers that interest ratespaid on deposits are, surprisingly, higher than in Tokyo.Hiroshima Bank, a big regional bank, recently escalated thewar by deciding to open on Sundays. Hiroshima CityAgricultural Cooperative tries a soft sell: Its telephoneoperators answer calls in English with a cheerful &quot;Howdy]&quot;   The sweeping change in Japanese banks has implications forthe way they do business overseas, too. Bankers andgovernment officials say the overhaul of Japan's domesticbanking industry in coming years will reduce theinternational competitive power of its financial giants.   With nearly $7 trillion in assets, Japanese deposit-takinginstitutions already face some constraints on lending becauseof tougher international rules requiring them to back up newloans with fresh capital and because of the difficulty ofraising capital as the Japanese stock market plummeted in thefirst quarter. And with the prospect of a huge restructuringin domestic banking, Japanese banks will be less able to pushtheir foreign businesses.   &quot;The big banks will have to become more cautious aboutinternational expansion,&quot; says Junichi Ishikawa, executivemanaging director of Kyowa Bank Ltd.   He should know: Starting in 1985, Kyowa trimmed itsforeign role and revamped its domestic operations to focusexclusively on small and medium-sized borrowers in Japan.Today, its staff has shrunk by one-quarter to 7,200 full-timeemployees and its corporate-loan portfolio by $2 billion. Sofar, its profits haven't soared far above those of otherbanks, but credit analysts routinely cite Kyowa as thesmartest of Japan's big banks.   The prospect of such important changes has attractedadvocates of even-faster reform. Worried by the relative easewith which Japan's well-protected banks had been displacingtheir U.S. and European rivals over the past decade,Washington has been demanding with increasing force thatJapan accelerate its financial liberalization. Last week inTokyo, U.S. Treasury Undersecretary David C. Mulford warnedMinistry of Finance officials that unless Japan acts soon toderegulate deposit rates further, the U.S. Congress is likelyto pass a proposal authorizing retaliation against Japanesebanks operating in the U.S.   The repercussions could be serious. The biggest bloc offoreign banks in the U.S. is Japanese; they own four of thetop 10 banks in California. Sensing the heat, Japan's majorbusiness newspaper, Nihon Keizai Shimbun, editorializedrecently that &quot;Japan's attitude . . . not only lacks inconsideration towards the international situation but lacksfrom the domestic depositors' viewpoint as well.&quot;   The U.S. pressure didn't sway the Japanese officials,though. They say their government will complete the processof deregulation as quickly as it can, and no sooner. Aftersix years of U.S. prodding, they note, Japan already has madesubstantial strides toward complete deregulation. But anyinterest-rate regulations are unfair, U.S. officials argue,because the very low levels of interest that Japanese bankspay depositors give the institutions a vast source of cheapfunding and enable them to lend that money at interest rateswell below those that U.S. and other international banks canafford.   The Japanese don't agree. &quot;The reality is that theweakness of U.S. banks is a problem made by their bigmistakes, not regulation here,&quot; a Finance Ministry officialsays. &quot;We are deregulating as a matter of fairness to smalldepositors who deserve better rates, not for U.S. banks.&quot;   Though officials in Washington may not have felt thebreeze of change, a financial tornado is already blastingthrough Japan. Most significant is the effect ofinterest-rate deregulation. The once-guaranteed profitmargins from government-set interest-rate spreads -- mostbanks make money by lending at higher interest rates thanthey pay depositors -- have given way to market-set, floatingrates and razor-thin rate spreads. Unregulated accounts nowconstitute nearly 70% of the $1.2 trillion on deposit atJapan's 12 big commercial banks. Even at agricultural co-ops,the share of unregulated deposits has soared to nearly 30%from none a year ago.   So, profit margins are narrowing, and Japanese banks willhave to find ways to compete harder against one another. Someof them are casting about for marriage partners. Recently,two giants, Mitsui Bank Ltd. and Taiyo Kobe Bank Ltd., fusedtogether to form Mitsui Taiyo Kobe Bank Ltd., the world'ssecond-largest bank with more than $400 billion in assets.   Medium-sized Tokai Bank often hints that it would be amerger candidate for a strong domestic bank, and even mightyMitsubishi Bank acknowledges that it would consider the rightsuitor. Still others -- notably Bank of Tokyo, which has asmall domestic branch network and an expensive string ofinternational offices -- routinely have to deny speculationthat they might be takeover or merger candidates.   While the winds of deregulation are rattling some Japanesebanks, at least one foreign bank, Citicorp, is lurking like avulture hoping to feast on the carnage. After long tryingunsuccessfully to buy its way into Japan's retail market, itsCitibank unit recently won Finance Ministry clearance to openvirtually as many branches as it wants. Masamoto Yashiro, whowas hired from Exxon Corp.'s Japanese subsidiary to headCitibank's retail efforts, thinks that within a decade thebank may have 50 to 70 retail branches, mostly in Tokyo, upfrom eight now.   &quot;Deregulation will provide us with opportunities to growfaster,&quot; Mr. Yashiro predicts. Citibank hopes to exploit itscachet as the only foreign bank in Tokyo's retail market andwin business from Japanese with experience or businessinterests overseas. &quot;We want to be selective,&quot; Mr. Yashirosays, aiming for only relatively well-off Japanese. &quot;We wantto segment the population, we want to segment products, wewant to segment services.&quot;   That sort of specialization is one tactic that other banksinevitably will follow as the government eliminates currentlegal distinctions among them. Japanese banks have long beenprotected not only from market interest rates but from banksin other business areas: Commercial banks handled corporateand retail loans; regional banks handled smaller companies;trust banks were independent, and long-term credit banksdoled out term loans. Until the early 1980s, Bank of Tokyoeven had a near-monopoly on foreign-exchange and overseastransactions.   However, the barriers between different types of banks arecrashing down, and many smaller financial institutions, suchas Higashi Chita Agricultural Cooperative Bank, are facingdirect competition from bigger, broader rivals. The resultwill be a painful consolidation. In April alone, there werenine mergers of banks and credit cooperatives, affecting bothbig and small institutions. In one Tokyo neighborhood, a pairof tiny, one-branch credit unions recently merged to becomethe 175th-largest credit union -- the first marriage ofcredit unions in 15 years.   &quot;We anticipate a complete reorganization of the industry,&quot;one government official says. Mindful of the problems afterthe U.S. unfettered savings and loan associations a decadeand perhaps $500 billion ago, Japan seeks to deregulateslowly and do it right. &quot;We don't want to see an Sandamp;L crisis,&quot;a Finance Ministry official says. He adds that Japan'sdeposit-insurance program has only a few billion dollars inassets -- not enough to bail out even one of the 100 biggestbanks in Japan.   To avoid bank failures, the government is expected to takean active role in the industry's consolidation, steeringtroubled institutions into one another's arms. But thegravest problem area lies outside the Finance Ministry'susual realm, in the agricultural cooperatives. The parallelsbetween the cooperatives and America's Sandamp;Ls worry manyanalysts.   Japan now has 3,700 co-ops, many of them small, one-branchoperations originally set up by American occupation forces tocollect deposits from farmers. The money then is either lentto other farmers or channeled upstream to prefecturalcooperatives, which, in turn, lend it or pass it on toNorinchukin, Japan's giant agricultural bank. Norinchukininvests most of its money -- its assets totaled $235.7billion as of March 31 -- in U.S. and Japanese governmentbonds.   As deregulation sets in, though, the financialinstitutions in the agricultural sector will want the rightto invest elsewhere, much like what happened when U.S. Sandamp;Lswere unregulated. The agricultural sector was perfectly happywith its earlier role, when it made money, largely throughits bond investments and the fixed spreads between depositand lending rates, and was in no hurry to change. Indeed,agriculture's political clout is one reason some analyststhink that the Finance Ministry hasn't already acceded toU.S. requests for complete interest-rate deregulation.   &quot;Financial reform will have an unfathomable impact on thesystem of agricultural cooperatives, shaking it from the verybottom,&quot; warns Yoshiyuki Onodera, a senior researcher at theNational Institute of Agricultural Economics. Comparing theimportance to the agricultural sector of importing foreignrice -- long a contentious issue -- and the importance offinancial deregulation, Mr. Onodera says, &quot;The difference inimpact is as great as that between TNT and the atomic bomb.&quot;   When deposit rates are deregulated at all lendinginstitutions, the farm lobby contends, loan rates will rise,and food prices may rise as well. Even worse, critics say,farmers soon will expect higher returns on their co-opdeposits -- now, deposits of less than 10 million yen,including the majority of accounts at agriculturalcooperatives, are regulated -- and when they do, the coopswill be in trouble. Either farmers will remove their moneyfrom them and put it in commercial banks, or the co-ops willhave to find ways to earn more so they can afford to paymore.   To avert some problems, the Agriculture, Forestry andFisheries Ministry hopes to close or merge two-thirds of theco-ops by the year 2000. But even that is risky. Their loanswould have to be sold, and many of the loans are low-quality,made by small-town co-ops to friendly businessmen or farmers.One solution, an official suggests, would be to package theloans and sell them as interest-bearing securities, perhapsto Norinchukin.   Doing that, however, would open another regulatory issue,the separation of Japan's banking and securities industries.Legislation patterned after the U.S. Glass-Steagall Actprohibits the two industries from invading each other's turf.Allowing banks to buy or sell securitized assets might broachthat line and bring securities firms into the fray.   &quot;Deregulation is happening faster than the banksthemselves can adjust,&quot; says James Russell, a Merrill Lynch andamp;Co. analyst here. &quot;And there already is a lot more risk inthe system as a result.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>