<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900622-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>900622-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Internal Threat:   Soviets Begin Moving   Nuclear Warheads Out   Of Volatile Republics   ---   Fear of Theft or Civil War   Prompts Military Action   On Short-Range Arsenal   ---   Strategic Arms Still in Place   ----   By John J. Fialka   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The Soviet Union is quietly moving nuclearwarheads out of the Baltics and its volatile southernrepublics and into parts of the Russian republic consideredpolitically stable, strategic experts and Sovietologists hereand abroad say.   The unobtrusive shift of weapons is taking place not outof fear of foreign attack but because of worries that anuclear warhead could fall into the wrong hands internally.That is exactly the scenario that U.S. Defense Departmentofficials and leaders of the military committees on CapitolHill have been worrying about lately.</LP><TEXT>   But no one is more concerned than the Soviets themselves,who have been telling U.S. officials and experts that theU.S.S.R. has moved to consolidate its control over itsestimated 33,000 nuclear warheads.   Rising levels of crime, thefts of conventional weaponsfrom military bases, attacks on military units, accidents andpersonnel problems within the military have accelerated theeffort. It appears to focus, at least in part, on bringingtactical nuclear weapons such as short-range missiles,nuclear artillery and bombs into the Russian republic.   &quot;The irony is that here we are in a day and age when thethreat of nuclear war has gone down, but the risk of aninadvertent release or an accidental war increases,&quot; saysSen. Timothy Wirth, a member of the Senate Armed ServicesCommittee and one of a number of U.S. officials who have beentold about the consolidation and the fears driving it.   The move isn't thought to include strategic nuclearweapons, and so doesn't constitute a major change in thebalance of superpower nuclear weaponry. But it doesunderscore the Soviet government's concerns about its owninternal situation.   The Soviet Embassy in Washington didn't have any commentyesterday. Several Bush administration officials alsodeclined to comment, citing the extreme sensitivity of thesituation. However, one senior U.S. official, confirming themovement, said: &quot;I don't regard it as an act of desperation,I regard it as an act of extraordinary caution.&quot;   There appear to be two basic Soviet concerns about theirnuclear warheads.   The first involves the potential for a breakdown ofcentral authority in the Soviet Union and the specter ofcivil war that could follow. History is punctuated with civilwars, but none has yet occurred in a nation with a vast andmost potent nuclear arsenal sprawled in hundreds of sitesacross its vast landscape.   Until now the Soviet Union has been regarded by many U.S.experts as having more-thorough safeguards protecting itsnuclear weapons than does the U.S., partly because theSoviets have a secret police force and a strong tradition ofcentral command and control.   But what happens if the central control breaks down? Thatis a worry that Sen. Wirth says he first began hearing a yearago during a meeting with Soviet scientists in Boston,several of whom have worked in the Soviet nuclear weaponsprogram. &quot;Who controls nuclear weapons? That was theirconcern. The command structure is controlled by a handful ofpeople in a committee. What happens if that committee isfighting each other?&quot;   The second concern involves the theft of one or morenuclear weapons that could occur if an isolated Sovietstorage site were overrun by rebel forces. This became morethan a speculative possibility in late January, when theKremlin suddenly dispatched elite Russian airborne units tostop fighting between armed Azerbaijani and Armenian groupsaround the Caspian Sea city of Baku.   &quot;I was meeting with Marshal {Sergei} Akhromeyev {theformer Soviet military chief of staff} in the Kremlin inJanuary and I was aware they had some very important nuclearstorage sites outside of Baku,&quot; recalls William J. Perry, aformer U.S. undersecretary of defense. &quot;I asked him whetherthey were putting extra troops around there. He said theywere.&quot; Mr. Perry is now co-director of Stanford University'sCenter for International Studies on Arms Control.   Marshal Akhromeyev, according to Mr. Perry, furtherexplained that Soviet nuclear weapons are protected withspecial locks, believed to be similar to the &quot;permissiveaction links&quot; on U.S. weapons. The locks must be opened withan electronic code before the weapons can be armed and fired.Mr. Perry says he's not sure how much protection the Sovietlocks would provide in the case of a nuclear theft. &quot;The onlyconsolation I have is that I know they're worried,&quot; he says.   Since last winter's Baku incident, according to Stephen M.Meyer, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology, Soviet officials have said they are movingnuclear weapons from sites south of the Caucasus, from theBaltic republics and from more isolated bases to consolidatethem in larger, more protected sites in the Russian republic.   &quot;What you are seeing is prudence,&quot; says Mr. Meyer, anexpert on the Soviet military who recently returned frominterviews with government officials in Moscow. &quot;You wouldn'twant the Azerbaijanis taking one of these {nuclear weapons}and turning it over to the Iranians. That's what they worryabout.&quot;   Soviet worries about control over nuclear weapons begininside the military, where the custody of nuclear weapons hashistorically been given to elite forces that once consistedalmost entirely of ethnic Russians. The largest is the298,000-man Strategic Rocket Force, a separate service, whichcommands intercontinental ballistic missiles and otherlonger-range nuclear weapons with some 9,300 warheads in all.   In a recent interview with Moscow News, Col. Gen. IgorSergeyev, deputy commander of the Rocket Force, unburdenedhimself, indicating that the elite image of his units hasbegun to fade. &quot;On the one hand, in our rocket forces thereare regiments which have not seen a single injury in the past15 years, not a single scandal with equipment or any breachesof the regulations. On the other hand,&quot; he added, &quot;the numberof recruits with previous convictions doubles in everycall-up.&quot;   Largely because college-bound students are now exempt fromthe draft, he said, more accidents are happening. &quot;We havemore than 2,000 specialties,&quot; he added; &quot;try and master themwhen some soldiers do not even understand Russian.&quot;   Crime within the military, according to Gen. AleksandrKatusev, the chief military prosecutor, has risen by 14.5%over the last year. One of the major problems is the theft ofsmall weapons, which are later sold in a burgeoning blackmarket.   This leads to more ambitious schemes. The Internal AffairsMinistry of the Armenian republic announced last month thattwo groups of armed men had stolen 21 tanks, surrenderingthem to pursuing army units only after a firefight followedby &quot;negotiations.&quot; In a separate incident, according to anaccount in the Soviet military newspaper Red Star, 40 armedmen attacked an Air Force base near the Armenian capital ofYerevan and tried to break into a barracks before beingdriven off.   Later reports from Armenia talk about ambushes on militaryunits and, in one case, a night attack on a military baseinvolving as many as 300 armed &quot;terrorists.&quot; All of this,according to Prof. Meyer of MIT, has changed the securitythreat that Soviet nuclear forces must plan for. &quot;Thepolitical landscape has changed so dramatically that now theyhave to think about what a mob of 5,000 to 10,000 peoplecould do,&quot; he says.   What could such a mob do with a stolen nuclear weapon?According to Fred C. Ikle, under secretary of defense duringthe Reagan administration, it would have great difficultytrying to launch or explode the device.   He and other U.S. experts assume that the locks on mostSoviet nuclear weapons are much like U.S. technology. Withoutthe proper code, a weapon cannot be armed. If somehow it wasarmed, electronic sensors inside the weapon would destroy it,harmlessly, if it was not launched exactly the way it isdesigned to be launched in wartime.   What is more likely, Mr. Ikle believes, is that the weaponcould be used as a powerful negotiating tool in a hostagesituation or sold to a nearby foreign power, such as Iran orIraq. &quot;The Iranians would put it in a laboratory and foolaround with it until they figured out how to use it or blowthemselves up, whichever comes first. It's not something thatanybody in Moscow would ever want to happen,&quot; says Mr. Ikle.   The last line of defense for Soviet nuclear weapons in acivil-war setting would be the KGB, according to Bruce G.Blair, a Brookings Institution researcher who has studiedSoviet nuclear weapons since the early 1970s, when he headeda U.S. Minuteman missile launch crew as an Air Force officerin Montana.   During the 1960s and early 1970s, KGB officers assuredsecurity by maintaining separate physical custody of nuclearwarheads, which they mated to Soviet missiles only duringnuclear alerts. More recently, he says, the KGB has begun torely more on automation, maintaining a separatecommunications network that would electronically controllaunching and arming once the codes were released fromMoscow.   On the eve of a civil war, he points out, the codesthemselves might be in danger. &quot;The questions,&quot; he says, &quot;arewhose fingers are on the button? Will those lines ofauthority remain clear? Will they be exercised rationally?&quot;   There are some strange scenarios here. For example, if theSoviet Union were to break up into independent republics,Kazakhstan, with its large Moslem population, couldconceivably become one of the world's most potent nuclearpowers. It is the site of two bases for SS-18s, the heaviestICBMs -- some of which are believed to be aimed at the U.S.-- and a major long-range Bear bomber base.   Thus far the Soviet central Asian republics have seen farless turmoil than either the Baltic republics, such asLithuania, or the southwestern republics of Georgia, Armeniaand Azerbaijan. But that could change. Earlier this week, forexample, the parliament of Uzbekistan, while not calling forindependence, proclaimed control over the republic's domesticand foreign policy.   Leon Goure, a veteran Soviet analyst at ScienceApplications International Corp., a California-based researchfirm, believes that the predominantly Russian missile andbomber crews would be unlikely to use nuclear weapons in aninternal struggle for control. &quot;All these forces arepeculiarly dependent, particularly in a state of collapse, onlocal authorities for food supplies,&quot; he notes. Also, Sovietcommanders would be unlikely to use nuclear weapons againstopposing units that possessed nuclear weapons of their own.   The U.S., with its long experience in safeguarding nuclearweapons, may be able to provide some help to the Sovietmilitary in the scary period that lies ahead. Meanwhile,congressional leaders are pushing for a re-evaluation of U.S.nuclear controls, particularly in the Navy, which isn'tbelieved to have the lock mechanisms used by other serviceson their nuclear weapons.   Rep. Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed ServicesCommittee, is exploring an offer by Yevgeny Velikhov, amember of the counterpart committee in the Supreme Soviet, tohold joint hearings next year to explore more effective waysto control nuclear weapons.   Sen. Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed ServicesCommittee, is pushing a plan to have both the U.S. and theSoviet Union agree to hold internal reviews of theirnuclear-weapons safeguards procedures. In fact, he says, hewill try to force the issue here if the Pentagon doesn'tagree to such a review on its own.   The U.S., he believes, must do whatever it can to helpassure that &quot;the evolution in the Soviet Union takes placepeacefully. I'm not one who subscribes to the theory thatcivil war in the Soviet Union is in our interest. I think itwould be a very dangerous time for our world.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>