<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910219-0101</DOCNO><DOCID>910219-0101.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>02/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE SOVIET UNION OFFERED the Iraqis a plan to end thePersian Gulf war.   The proposal, presented by Gorbachev to Baghdad's foreignminister, appeared to demand an unconditional Iraqiwithdrawal from Kuwait but offered some assurances that theanti-Iraq coalition won't seek to change Iraq's government.Moscow's plan reportedly included at least a vague Sovietpledge to seek action on other Mideast disputes, includingthe Israeli-Palestinian conflict. While the White Houseneither accepted nor rejected the Soviet plan, someadministration aides voiced skepticism. On Friday, Bush hadrejected a Baghdad peace bid and urged the Iraqi people tooverthrow Saddam Hussein.</LP><TEXT>   Iraqi mine blasts damaged two U.S. Navy ships, a missilecruiser and a helicopter assault carrier, as dozens ofwarships converged in preparation for a possible Marineamphibious landing.   ---   Bombs rocked two of London's main train stations, killingone man and injuring dozens of people in a rush-hour attackbelieved to be the second major assault by the IrishRepublican Army this month. Nearly half a million commuterswere delayed when the blasts forced British Rail to close 14stations to search for bombs.   ---   Maryland's Gov. Schaefer signed into law a bill that wouldprotect a woman's right to abortion in the event the SupremeCourt's Roe vs. Wade decision is overturned. Earlier in theday, the Maryland House sent the bill to the governor on avote of 84-52, ending a yearlong fight over the measure.   ---   The Soviet Parliament debated declaring a state ofemergency in South Ossetia, a region of Soviet Georgia besetby separatist conflict. Earlier, violence flared in anotherpart of Georgia as an unidentified armed unit in the republicreportedly staged a predawn attack against a paramilitarygroup, injuring at least two people.   ---   The Bush administration is expected to announce exportregulations designed to stem the spread of chemical,biological and nuclear weapons. Under the new rules, theCommerce Department would control exports of manufacturingfacilities, plant designs and processing equipment associatedwith such weapons.   ---   The Japanese government gave nuclear power plants newrules for shutting down reactors quickly in response toradioactivity surges like the one that caused an automaticshutdown Feb. 9 at Mihama. The rules require a shutdown whenthere is a radioactivity increase of 20% or more. Plantspreviously had no percentage guidelines.   ---   The Nicaraguan government pledged to investigate theslaying of a former leader of the Contra rebels and someconservatives blamed the killing on the leftist Sandinistas,who governed for a decade. The Sandinistas, however,condemned Saturday's shooting of Enrique Bermudez in Managuaand rejected accusations they were responsible.   ---   Medical teams in Philadelphia visited members of twofundamentalist churches that shun medical care in an effortto fight a measles outbreak that has killed at least fourchildren. A court order Sunday forced one family tohospitalize a youngster with measles, after another familyvoluntarily took their child to a hospital.   ---   A total of 171 people were killed in southern Thailand onFriday when an overturned truck exploded and flames engulfeda crowd that had gathered to look at the damaged vehicle,police said. The truck, laden with electric detonators, blewup about an hour after the crash. Witnesses said theonlookers had ignored police requests to disperse.   ---   Peru's health minister predicted it would take about twomonths of intense work to bring the nation's cholera epidemicunder control. He said that about 1,000 Peruvians are beingstricken each day, and that at least 100 people have died sofar.   ---   Albanian troops surrounded a campus in the nation'scapital, Tirana, as students began a hunger strike to demandthe removal of the name of the late Stalinist leader Hoxhafrom the university's official title. Most of Albania's10,000 students have boycotted classes for the past two weeksto demand political and economic changes.   ---   North Korea canceled high-level meetings with South Korea,saying Seoul was undermining dialogue by conducting jointmilitary exercises with the U.S. The nations' prime ministershad been scheduled to hold discussions next week inPyongyang.   ---   Died: John A. McCone, 89, who headed the CIA during theCuban missile crisis and before that chaired the nation'sAtomic Energy Commission, Thursday, in Pebble Beach, Calif.,of cardiac arrest.</TEXT></DOC>