<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901221-0175</DOCNO><DOCID>901221-0175.</DOCID><HL>   Pertamina, Under Revised Plan, to Own   Petrochemical Plant Slated in Indonesia   ----   By Richard Borsuk   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION</SO><CO>   FREST G.THY BP RD SC MITSY</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><LP>   JAKARTA, Indonesia -- Plans for another in a series of bigIndonesian petrochemical projects should fall in place by theend of the year. But the ownership of this one has turned outfar different than originally planned: Private investors,including a son of President Suharto, won't have a role.   Initially, the project was structured as a $916 millioninvestment that would have included an equity interest heldby Humpuss Group, controlled by Hutomo Mandala Putra, theyoungest of Mr. Suharto's three sons. However, Humpussdropped plans to invest with a unit of Thyssen AG of Germanyand M.W. Kellogg Co. of the U.S. in the large upstreamaromatics plant in Sumatra. Instead, Pertamina, the state oilcompany, will be sole owner of a scaled-down version of theplant, on which construction is likely to begin in early1991.</LP><TEXT>   Humpuss and the other private investors gave up on theirproject when they couldn't secure sufficient support fromPertamina. Earlier this year, the oil company told theprivate investors it could guarantee only about half thevolume of feedstock they were seeking, making their aromaticsplan financially unfeasible. Aromatics are chemicals derivedfrom oil and gas and processed to make fibers, detergents andother end-products.   Humpuss distributes one petrochemical for Pertamina, buthas been looking to invest in production. It will do so soon,though not in nearly as big a fashion as it had hoped: Underan agreement announced in late October, it will be a partnerin a $200 million venture to use paraxylene supplied by thearomatics plant to produce purified terepththalic acid, orPTA, which is used to make synthetic fiber for the textileindustry.   If current plans proceed, all three of Mr. Suharto's sonswill have a role in Indonesia's petrochemical industry. SigitHarjojudanto, the eldest, has a personal stake with a unit ofBritish Petroleum Co. in a $400 million plant being built tomake polyethylene. Bambang Trihatmodjo, the second son,expects his Bimantara Citra Group to sign a joint-venturewith foreign concerns led by Royal/Dutch Shell Group for a$1.7 billion olefins center.   The inability of the private aromatics venture to proceedsurprised many Jakarta businessmen, who had assumed that withpolitically well-connected Humpuss as a partner, theconsortium could get any government assistance it needed.Some business analysts speculate that Pertamina withheld thevolume of feedstock requested because it didn't want privateinvestors to control an upstream project.   Kartiyoso, Pertamina's deputy director for processing,disagrees. The state oil company was unable to meet theprivate investors' request because of changing projections oftotal demand for Pertamina's feedstock supply and itslong-term availability, he says. &quot;They started with a verybig project,&quot; he says of the private investors. &quot;It's notviable from our point of view.&quot;   Had it gone ahead, the Humpuss consortium's project wouldhave become the world's second-largest benzene producer.&quot;This would have projected Humpuss on the aromatics map,&quot;says Hasan Soedjono, assistant to the chairman, Mr. Hutomo.   On the decision to drop the venture, Mr. Hasan says,&quot;Initially, we thought we had the feedstock. We were wrong.&quot;He describes the change away from a private venture as &quot;`NewOrder' pragmatism at work.&quot; The New Order is the nameIndonesians give to the government established by Mr. Suhartoin 1966.   Pertamina already has delivered a letter of intent to aconsortium of Mitsui andamp; Co. and Chiyoda Corp. of Japan and theThyssen unit that was to have a stake in the private projectto build the plant, for $700 million, in Sumatra. Aconstruction contract is expected to be signed before the endof the year.   For bankers, the switch to state control of the aromaticsproject is also a pragmatic one. A Jakarta-based Japanesebanker says there were &quot;too many problems&quot; in arrangingfinancing for a private aromatics venture, but with theproposed plant now belonging to Pertamina, &quot;there's noproblem.&quot;   Pertamina plans to obtain financing for the project on anon-recourse basis, meaning the state oil company won't bethe borrower and the lenders won't have the right to seizeassets if loans aren't repaid. The borrower likely will be anew offshore company that services project debt from cashflow it receives through guaranteed long-term supplies of theplant's output.   Even though Pertamina won't be directly liable for loansrelated to the project, its ownership of the plant willcomfort bankers. Non-recourse financing will allow Pertaminato build the plant without adding to the Indonesiangovernment's large foreign debt -- now more than $35 billion-- while lenders will regard financing for the project asbeing nearly as safe as a sovereign loan.   Hirotoshi Yokote, Mitsui's manager for development inJakarta, says the mechanism of the non-recourse financing forthe aromatics plant will be &quot;quite complicated,&quot; but still&quot;workable.&quot;   In the early 1980s, Pertamina planned to build its ownaromatics plant. But in 1983, the project was shelved alongwith other state projects because of financial difficulties.Lacking funding, Pertamina later indicated that privateinvestors could undertake the investment.   In March 1988, Humpuss and Thyssen Rheinstahl TechnikG.m.b.H. won approval from Indonesia's investment board toinvest $916 million in an aromatics venture and Pertaminaagreed to supply the needed condensate.   Condensate is a byproduct of the natural gas exported fromSumatra in liquefied form.   Under tentative plans, Humpuss was to hold 30%, and theThyssen unit was to hold 35%. They brought in Kellogg, withanother 35%, and there were plans for giving Pertamina anominal share. However, negotiations on the venture boggeddown earlier this year when Pertamina said it could guaranteefeedstock supplies of only about 40,000 barrels of condensatea day, compared with the 90,000 barrels a day that Humpussand its partners were seeking.   The reduced supply meant the size of the project wouldhave to be scaled down drastically, making it difficult towin financial support.   Thyssen Rheinstahl, the proposed main contractor, beganrepackaging the plant to be owned by Pertamina and financedthrough non-recourse loans. Japanese banks and tradingcompanies appeared hopeful of playing a role in exporting theplant's output.   Plans to recast the project on a smaller scale eventuallyjelled. The plant will use about 45,000 barrels a day ofcondensate. Benzene production will be only 150,000 metrictons a year, compared with plans by the private investors foroutput of more than 300,000 tons. But production ofparaxylene, used to make synthetic fiber, will be 335,000tons, compared with the previous plan of 197,000 tons.   If Pertamina runs short of condensate, which it exports,it can use naphtha, a crude-oil derivative, as feedstock.Pertamina controls naphtha supplies. &quot;They assume that ifpush comes to shove, Pertamina will make feedstock availablefor its own project,&quot; says Mr. Hasan.   Claudio Clagluena, Thyssen's representative in Jakarta,says the change to ownership by Pertamina &quot;makes a lot ofsense.&quot; Some Jakarta oil industry executives are concernedthat the switch indicates that Pertamina opposes a privaterole in upstream petrochemical production, but Mr. Clagluenasays he feels Pertamina is right to hold on to theseactivities.   While it won't enter upstream production as hoped, Humpussstill comes away with an expanded role in petrochemicals.Four days after saying its consortium had receivedPertamina's order for construction of the aromatics plant,Mitsui also announced Indonesian government approval of a$200 million PTA venture near the site of the plannedaromatics plant at Arun. Humpuss will hold a 10% stake, andPertamina will hold 20%. Mitsui Petrochemical Industries Ltd.will hold 50%, and Mitsui andamp; Co. 20%.   Competition to sell PTA, unlike that for aromatics, couldbe intense. At least four private joint ventures ofIndonesian and foreign concerns are considering PTAproduction to provide fiber for the country's booming textileand garment exports.   With domestic demand for petrochemical end-products risingrapidly, several Indonesian groups, including those headed byMr. Suharto's sons, have formulated ambitious plans forinvolvement in the industry. The two elder sons previouslybenefited from a now-abolished monopoly that importedpetrochemical products for making plastics. After themonopoly was ended in late 1988, industry analysts expectedthe sons to move to establish a strong position in domesticpetrochemical production.   Despite world economic uncertainty caused by the PersianGulf crisis, the Indonesian petrochemical industry appearspoised for rapid expansion. Robert Kennedy, chairman of UnionCarbide Corp., told a Jakarta audience earlier this monththat Indonesia should be in the &quot;logical forefront&quot; of worldpetrochemical industries for the next 50 years. He noted thatIndonesia has the advantage of oil and coal supplies to makefeedstock and a growing domestic market, and said the countrycould become the hub of a regional petrochemicals market.</TEXT></DOC>