<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900509-0161</DOCNO><DOCID>900509-0161.</DOCID><HL>   Loose Cannons:   Arms Dealers in Israel   Operate Quite Openly   On the Fringe of Law   ---   Yair Klein Is Unprosecuted   In Colombia Drug Case   Despite Latest Evidence   ---   A History of Latin Intrigue   ----   By Geraldine Brooks   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST AFRIC LATAM FREST</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   TEL AVIV -- At 5 Luntz St., it's business as usual forYair Klein, wanted in Colombia on charges of running atraining school for cocaine-cartel hitmen and facingprosecution at home for breaking Israeli law on exportingdefense know-how.   In the nine months since this situation surfaced, Mr.Klein has continued to run what he brags is &quot;the best team inIsrael for small wars, anti-terror units and commandooperations.&quot; An official inquiry in Israel hasn't led to aprosecution, and now new evidence implicates him in the saleof weapons discovered at the ranch of one of Colombia's mostinfamous drug barons.</LP><TEXT>   How does Mr. Klein, a swashbuckling lieutenant-colonel inthe Israeli army reserves, manage to keep operating? Mr.Klein is part of a world-wide trade in military arms andexpertise that brings Israel big money, along withinnumerable scandals. The nation needs international sales toprop up its arms industry, and prosecuting him could open awindow that Israel prefers to keep shut. Israel has shownwillingness to do business with just about any government,and tolerance of shadowy dealers such as Mr. Klein.   A powerfully built veteran of the Lebanon war, the46-year-old Mr. Klein says the Colombians he trained wereranchers rather than drug lords, and he denies selling anyarms to cocaine dealers.   Arms are big business in Israel. At least one out of every10 workers is involved in the arms trade, fromcottage-industry consultancies such as Mr. Klein's, operatedout of a seedy Tel Aviv apartment, to industrial giants suchas Israel Aircraft Industries Ltd., the state's largestexporter, whose foreign military sales last year exceeded$800 million.   According to official figures, military sales to more than60 countries brought Israel $1.4 billion last year, puttingthe tiny nation of 4.4 million people among the world'slargest arms exporters. And those figures don't include rogueoperations such as Mr. Klein's training school, which wasn'tapproved by the Ministry of Defense. Some 40% of Israel'ssales go to the U.S. and Europe. But even a partial list ofother past and current clients reveals the bizarre nature andthe global reach of Israel's arms trade.   Murky dealings in Latin America long predate Mr. Klein'sadventures. Israel has supplied arms and training to themilitary juntas of Chile, Guatemala and Argentina. It aidedNicaragua's Anastasio Somoza until his fall, then aided theContra rebels. A top adviser to Panama's Manuel Noriega,Michael Harari, was former head of clandestine operations forMossad, Israel's intelligence service.   In Africa, Israel recently re-established military linkswith Ethiopia's Marxist president, Mengistu Haile Miriam.Israeli military advisers helped Idi Amin to power in Ugandain 1971. Zaire's dictator, Mobuto Sese Seko, trained as aparatrooper in Israel, had an ex-Mossad agent as a topadviser, and currently is host to eight Israeli officers astrainers for his army. Despite international sanctions,Israel has conducted many joint military programs with SouthAfrica, perhaps even collaborating on nuclear arms.   The late Ayatollah Khomeini got Israeli arms at leastuntil 1985. And a 1988 prosecution of an Israeli middle manin Hong Kong finally exposed the details of a long-deniedarms-supply relationship with China.   A few Israelis deplore their state's links with suchregimes. &quot;What enemy is Israel fighting through these sales?&quot;asks Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, a professor of psychology and aspecialist in the arms trade at Haifa University. In mostcases, he says, &quot;it is the population of the Third World,which can't be allowed to win its revolution.&quot; Israelis, heargues, tend to identify leftist guerrilla movements with thestruggle of the Palestinians. &quot;The confrontation doesn'tstart in Zaire, it starts right here. When Israelis look atthe people of the Third World, they see the Arabs of Gaza.&quot;   But few Israelis share Mr. Beit-Hallahmi's views. Hardeconomics drives the arms business, says David Ivry,director-general of the Israeli Defense Ministry. &quot;Foreignpolicy is one reason to approve a contract, but no one iseven asking permission if it isn't economically wise.&quot; Thereis, however, a strong correlation between arms clients andregimes that have large or vulnerable Jewish communities,such as Ethiopia, Chile, Argentina, Morocco and South Africa.   Surrounded by enemies, Israel has always needed arms. Anearly embargo by Britain, France and the U.S. forced the tinystate to produce its own. For it to make the industryeconomically viable, exports became essential. And as theIsraeli forces attained remarkable victories, the demand fortheir battle-tested equipment soared.   Now, with the easing of tensions everywhere from NATO toSoweto, the industry is threatened with the loss of itsbiggest clients and competition from a flood of low-pricedsurplus.   Yet with enemies such as Iraq continuing to expand theirarsenals, Israel can't afford to significantly reduce its ownproduction, and must somehow find new markets.   Israel isn't alone in supplying arms to unsavory regimes.Just last month, France delivered Mirage jets to Libya's Col.Moammar Gadhafi in return for hostages. The Swiss soldmilitary planes to Idi Amin in 1977, and the Iran-Contrascandal showed that the U.S. wasn't above dealing even withits arch-foe for a perceived political gain.   Israeli weapons sales occasionally have been undertaken asU.S. dirty work, to funnel military aid to domesticallyunpalatable regimes, but others fly in the face of U.S.foreign policy. As a result, the Israelis &quot;tend to beclose-handed about their deals,&quot; says a U.S. DefenseDepartment official who works closely with the Israelis.Because the U.S. is the source of much of Israel's mostsophisticated weapons technology, it theoretically controlsits re-export. &quot;We can put a lot of pressure on them,&quot; saysthe official, &quot;but Israel isn't a parrot.&quot;   In Ethiopia, Mr. Mengistu's brutal regime is tottering,with insurrections by its starving people flaring in severalregions. Signs are that the Soviets, long the main armssupplier, are withdrawing support, but Israel is steppinginto the breach. In December, aid workers say, teams ofIsraelis were flying daily from Addis Ababa to the airport inAsmara, an Ethiopian base of operations against Eritreanguerrillas.   The Israeli government denies sending any militaryinstructors. &quot;We are sending almost nothing to Ethiopia -- avery low amount of assistance,&quot; says a senior Israeligovernment official.   Israel wants freedom of emigration for the estimated17,000 Jews in Ethiopia, and several hundred have arrived inIsrael since diplomatic ties resumed last year after a16-year break. As well, Ethiopia has pardoned Jews sentencedto prison for trying to emigrate illegally.   &quot;Whatever we did with Ethiopia lately was to get out thoseJews,&quot; says Benjamin Peled, former head of the Israeli airforce. Even if Mr. Mengistu falls, Israel still can benefit,Mr. Peled argues, because relationships formed among themilitary endure from regime to regime. &quot;Down at workinglevels in those countries there probably is sympathy, becausethe people we sent are good people,&quot; he says.   Like many retired Israeli officers, Mr. Peled, amajor-general in the reserves, last year founded his owncompany, Crossbow Ltd., to develop and market arms. Aconfidential private-placement memorandum details thecompany's aim to produce products &quot;for use by military andparamilitary combat units at the low tactical echelons,&quot; or,as Mr. Peled puts it, to get some of the &quot;glitter&quot; ofhigh-tech weaponry into the hands of ordinary fighters.   Mr. Peled's decision to turn his distinguished militarycareer to use in business isn't unusual in Israel, where armyservice is universal. &quot;You take a guy who grows up on a farmand goes into the army,&quot; says Aharon Klieman, a professor ofpolitics at Tel Aviv University. &quot;When he comes out, he knowstwo things, how to grow tomatoes and how to make war. Andthere's a lot more money in war.&quot;   Israel has an estimated 100,000 reserve officers and some800 licensed military consultancies. Many of them advertisetheir skills in a weighty tome titled &quot;Israel Defense SalesDirectory,&quot; issued annually by the Defense Ministry'sarms-sales office. Some of the hardware advertised in itsglossy, full-color pages: a &quot;low-cost terminal guidance kitfor general-purpose bombs&quot;; &quot;an ear in the right place&quot; bugsfor telephone, telex and computer monitoring; and &quot;the uniqueHigh-tech riot control vehicles&quot; with &quot;colored tear gas jet.&quot;   There also are ads for consultancies such as Iscal Group,which features a photograph of eight unnamed men with acaption bragging that &quot;each of these executives has animpressive personal CV in certain military fields ofactivity,&quot; and offering their services to help develop groundand air forces.   Yair Klein's firm, Hod Hahanit, or Spearhead, advertisedin the Spanish-language edition of the directory in 1988, ayear before Mr. Klein was accused of training Colombian drugwarriors.   Hod Hahanit was established in 1983. Mr. Klein had served12 years in the army and, as a reservist, fought as a deputybrigade commander in the Lebanon war. His company's firstclient was a contact from that conflict, the PhalangeChristian militia, the group responsible for the massacre ofPalestinians in the Sabra and Shatilla refugee camps. ThePhalange wanted &quot;belts, helmets, personal gear,&quot; Mr. Kleinsays, and he arranged for their supply.   Between that contract and the Colombia training job, Mr.Klein says he worked for about 100 international clients. Mr.Klein, with a deep tan and a dazzling smile, says much of thework was driven by his own personal crusade against thespread of communism in the Third World. &quot;Today's left isn'tthe same left,&quot; he says, &quot;but two or three years ago, leftistguerrillas were a source of evil in the world.&quot;   Mr. Klein said in an April interview that he initiallyapplied to the Israel Ministry of Defense for a permit totrain members of a Colombian government security agency. Thatpermit was denied. He says that when ranchers approached himsoon after, worried about guerrilla attacks and seekinganti-insurgent training, he didn't ask the Defense Ministry'spermission. Technically, Israel requires consultants toobtain a permit even to begin negotiations on a militarydeal. But &quot;in practice,&quot; Mr. Klein said, such rules weren'tobserved. &quot;Many people were working with private bodies&quot;without official sanction, he says.   The first scandal broke last August, when NBC aired a filmof Mr. Klein conducting one of his classes. Mr. Kleinacknowledges that some of the ranchers he trained may havebeen involved in the drug trade, but he says he didn't haveany knowledge of it. &quot;Anyone who deals with drugs should beexecuted,&quot; he says.   Last December, however, Colombian police ambushed andkilled Jose Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, a major drug trafficker.A search of his ranch found a cache of arms which was tracedto an Israeli shipment that supposedly had been destined forAntigua. Baruch Binah, a spokesman for the Israeli ForeignMinistry, says Israel approved a shipment of Uzis and otherlight arms to the small security force of the easternCarribbean island with the stipulation that it wouldn't bepassed on to any other nation. Antiguan officials have toldthe Israelis they didn't order the arms and have launched aninquiry into how the shipment ordered in their name passed toColombia.   Mr. Klein, named by Antiguans as an intermediary in thenewly disclosed deal, has denied he sold anything to Mr.Gacha. A report in the Jerusalem Post quotes Mr. Klein assaying he arranged the arms for Panamanian insurgents whowanted to topple Gen. Noriega. Mr. Klein couldn't becontacted for comment on that report, and his lawyer, YigalShapira, wouldn't elaborate, saying that &quot;it isn't the timeto tell the full story.&quot;   The Israeli government says it still is investigating Mr.Klein's Colombian activities. But that hasn't stopped himfrom getting lucrative contracts to provide anti-terroristtraining to bus drivers of &quot;the Egged,&quot; a cooperativesubsidized and regulated by the government, and to railwayworkers. Mr. Klein says he also was employed to trainsecurity officers of the Interior Ministry, although aspokeswoman for the ministry couldn't immediately confirmthis.   Mr. Klein says he prefers to work abroad &quot;because themoney is better, and clients are willing to listen.&quot; He adds,&quot;In Israel everybody thinks they know better than you.&quot; Butnow, he says, &quot;because of all the noise&quot; over Colombia, he isworking only in Israel. He even has diversified from thesecurity field into a new business -- supplying Jordan Riverwater in crucifix-shaped bottles to Christian tourists. Hisbusiness card for that enterprise bears the name Yair Gal.   Why his case remains unresolved was hinted at by RafaelEitan, a member of the Israeli parliament and a former armychief of staff.   &quot;Someday, perhaps, if it's decided that the stories can betold, you'll see that the state has been involved in actswhich are a thousand times more dirty than anything going onin Colombia,&quot; he told the Jerusalem Post last September.&quot;These things were decided by the government, in cabinetmeetings. As long as the government decides to do something,something that the national interest demanded, then it islegitimate.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>