<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910624-0097</DOCNO><DOCID>910624-0097.</DOCID><HL>   The Quest:   After Father Is Accused   Of Nazi Crimes, a Son   Searches for the Truth   ---   In Long and Painful Odyssey,   Radoslav Artukovic Finds   New Evidence, Ugly Facts   ---   A Climactic Confrontation   ----   By Judith Valente   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)GERMANY (GE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   LOS ANGELES -- While driving to his father's home on themorning of Nov. 14, 1984, Radoslav Artukovic spotted a policeconvoy coming from the opposite direction. At the sight ofthe flashing lights, he panicked: Had something happened tohis 84-year-old dad?   It had. With guns drawn, federal marshals had burst intoAndrija Artukovic's Seal Beach, Calif., home and arrested himas a nurse spoon-fed him cereal. They took the elderly man, aformer interior minister of the Yugoslav republic of Croatia,into custody and charged him as a Nazi war criminal. TheJustice Department later called the prosecution of Mr.Artukovic its most significant war-crimes case ever.</LP><TEXT>   The son, a successful stockbroker and a governor of thePacific Stock Exchange, was stunned. &quot;There was a drivingneed in me to know what the truth was,&quot; he says. So RadoslavArtukovic began a personal journey to find out.   He traveled 200,000 miles to 35 cities around the world insearch of war survivors. He examined mounds of governmentrecords and questioned more than 1,000 people in Europe,Australia and the U.S. He was tailed by Yugoslav police andonce smuggled witness statements by hiding them between dirtyundershirts. In the process, he discovered surprising, andsometimes unpleasant, things about his father.   Mr. Artukovic's is a story that's likely to be repeated.As more old records become available from Eastern Europe,more U.S. residents could be charged as war criminals, andmore sons and daughters may come face-to-face with the U.S.Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations -- andwith history. Proving guilt in these murky decades-old casesis very difficult. So is proving innocence.   Radoslav Artukovic, now 43, had confronted his father'spast before. He says his earliest memory is as a boy ofthree, playing with a toy fire truck in a federal courtroomhere. The year was 1951 and at the time U.S. officials weretrying to deport his father to Yugoslavia to stand trial onwar-crimes charges. The case dragged on for years. When afederal magistrate finally dismissed the case in 1959, hewrote: &quot;I hope I never live to see the day when a person willbe held to answer for a crime upon such evidence as waspresented in this case.&quot;   The son went on to live a quiet life in Orange County. Asa youth, he studied to be a priest. Eventually, he marriedand had two children. He coached his son's soccer team. Hesays he was never especially close to his father, who waspreoccupied for many years with his legal troubles, then busytrying to make a living as bookkeeper at his brother'sconstruction firm.   But the son's life was thrown into chaos the morning thatfederal marshals arrested his father on charges of orderingthe horrible deaths of thousands of people. The full impacthit him a few days later. &quot;I sat up the whole night andcried,&quot; he says. &quot;I wondered if I was saying goodbye to mydad.&quot;   He decided he had to take an active role, a decision thatdid not surprise his family. &quot;Rad is the kind of person whofeels responsible for everyone,&quot; says his wife, Donna,president of the Los Alamitos, Calif., school board. As anonly son, she says, he felt driven to pursue the truth forhis mother and four sisters.   Two weeks after the arrest, he examined the JusticeDepartment's evidence. He wondered: Did prosecutors havesomething new that wasn't presented in the 1950s trial? Tohis surprise, the new case mostly rehashed the charges thecourt had rejected previously. There was one new major pieceof evidence: an affidavit from a man named Bajro Avdic, whosaid he had been a motorcycle escort for Mr. Artukovic'sfather. Mr. Avdic, who had served time for war crimes inYugoslavia, alleged that Mr. Artukovic's father had orderedthe deaths of as many as 5,500 civilians. (Efforts by thisnewspaper to locate Mr. Avdic were unsuccessful.)   One small thing immediately struck Mr. Artukovic: He sayshe knew from the first case that his father had bodyguards,but no motorcycle escort. That was reserved for the head ofthe Croatian state. And something else about the affidavitpuzzled him: Why hadn't the Yugoslavs presented Mr. Avdic'stestimony during the 1950s case?   Trying to find holes in Mr. Avdic's testimony, Mr.Artukovic sent 100 copies of it to Croatian groups around theworld and called World War II experts at universities aroundthe U.S. &quot;It was plain old Gumshoe 101,&quot; says Mr. Artukovic,who once served in U.S. Army intelligence. His initialefforts produced few results. &quot;People were afraid to comeforward because they thought they'd be accused of being Nazisympathizers.&quot; And, he adds, &quot;there were some people whosehelp I just didn't want because they were, quite simply,anti-Semites.&quot;   The quest began taking up more and more of his time. Beinga partner in a brokerage firm gave him some flexibility.Because he started work at 6:30 a.m., he could knock offabout 1:30 p.m. Pacific time, after the close of the New YorkStock Exchange. That gave him the rest of the day to work onhis father's case.   In his search for witnesses, he visited Croatiancommunities all over the U.S. and as far away as Australia.&quot;Everywhere I went, I took notes on what people couldremember about my father or the war,&quot; he says. He heardstories his father had never told him, about small acts ofkindness during the war, about trying to find people who haddisappeared after arrest. &quot;I heard great stories about him,&quot;he says.   And finally, he got his first break. On a trip toCleveland, he found a man who said he had been his father'sbodyguard. The man said Mr. Artukovic's father, as interiorminister, never visited the towns where the massacresallegedly took place. In fact, he could recall only two timesthat Mr. Artukovic's father left the Croatian capital ofZagreb. Mr. Artukovic was elated. &quot;I felt maybe I could stillsave my father's life.&quot;   The trips helped him raise $300,000 for his father'sdefense, mostly from Croatian groups. But his absencesstrained his home life. He missed his daughter's 11thbirthday and several of his son's soccer games. Time awayfrom the office cut into his income. He often took red-eyeflights to get back to work in time. &quot;When I'd come back, I'dwork twice as hard to make good trades to make up for theincome I lost,&quot; he says.   His wife worried about the family. &quot;There were times Ifelt we needed to do things as a family,&quot; she says. &quot;I wouldhave to drag him kicking and screaming on vacations. He wouldsay, `How can I enjoy myself?'&quot; But, she adds, &quot;I respectwhat he is trying to do. I think it's incredibly ethical.&quot;   Andrija Artukovic remained in custody. But by the time theextradition hearing began in January 1985, Radoslav Artukovicfelt he had enough evidence to challenge the allegations. Forinstance, Mr. Avdic alleged that Mr. Artukovic's fatherordered tanks with mounted cannons to level houses inDecember 1941, killing hundreds of people. But a World War IIexpert from the University of San Francisco was prepared totestify that Croatia had no such tanks at the time.   Mr. Artukovic discovered ugly facts as well. His fatherhad signed anti-Semitic decrees that authorized thenationalization of Jewish property and prohibited Jews fromworking in the homes of non-Jews. &quot;If there is anything I'mashamed of, it's that,&quot; says Mr. Artukovic, who says he hassince donated money to the International Conference onHolocaust Law.   Mr. Artukovic's father had always told him that he wasinnocent of the murder charges, and that the allegations wereCommunist lies. But he admitted signing the decrees and toldhis son he regretted them, though he was critical of someJews he claimed supported Yugoslav Communists during the war.&quot;The whole thing was incomprehensible to me,&quot; says the son.&quot;But he used to say it would be hard for us to understand howit was back then.&quot;   From these decrees, Mr. Artukovic says, U.S. prosecutors&quot;drew the extension that my dad killed people. . . . It mademe want to double my efforts to get at the bottom of this.&quot;   In many war-crimes cases, the U.S. seeks deportation;prosecutors don't necessarily have to prove war crimes, butdo have to prove those accused falsified their applicationsto enter the U.S. In an extradition hearing, prosecutors needshow only that there is enough reason to believe a crime tookplace to send someone to another country for trial. The ideais that the accused can fully challenge the charges later atthe trial in the other country. Under the rules of suchhearings, the Artukovic attorneys were allowed to presentonly a bit of what the son had discovered.   Mark Richard, deputy assistant U.S. attorney general, saysthe case was handled well and fairly. &quot;Mr. Artukovic receivedthe highest amount of due process our system affords,&quot; hesays. &quot;The system worked.&quot; He calls Radoslav Artukovic &quot;a manof sincerity,&quot; but dismisses his claims as &quot;totally withoutmerit.&quot;   In March 1985, a U.S. magistrate ruled that there was&quot;ample probable cause&quot; to believe Andrija Artukovicparticipated in murder.   &quot;Of course, I was disappointed,&quot; Mr. Artukovic recalls,but he felt it was a victory in a sense. The magistrate threwout the bulk of the allegations. The case now hinged on thestatements of just two witnesses: Mr. Avdic, the motorcycleescort, and Franjo Truhar, whose allegations were part of the1950s case.   While appeals continued, so did the son's search. He heardabout Henry L. de Zeng, a World War II buff who owned anextensive file of microfilmed war documents. Mr. Artukovicpaid Mr. de Zeng $20,000 to search thousands of pages ofrecords. The result was a 34-page report that claimed seriousflaws in what Mr. Avdic alleged. For instance, Mr. Avdic saidthat &quot;at the end of 1941&quot; Mr. Artukovic's father orderedCroatian troops to gun down truckloads of Jews and partisanswho were being taken to the Kerestinec prison camp southwestof Zagreb. But war records showed the camp had closed in July1941.   Mr. de Zeng could find no references to the massacres thatMr. Artukovic's father allegedly oversaw, including one inwhich several hundred people were shot and crushed undermoving tanks in the town of Samobor in early 1943.   Mr. Artukovic tried personally pleading his case toJustice officials. &quot;I went door to door at the JusticeDepartment. No one would see me. One kind lady did show methe Citizen's Complaint Box,&quot; he recalls.   Mr. Richard says the Justice Department didn't considerMr. de Zeng's report on a par with the work of &quot;noteworthyhistorians.&quot; And he says the absence of documentation on thealleged massacres didn't surprise Justice officials. &quot;Theactual written documentation on the Holocaust is verylimited,&quot; he says.   After exhausting all appeals, Mr. Artukovic's father wasreturned to Yugoslavia on Feb. 12, 1986. The JusticeDepartment had snared its highest-ranking target. InWashington, Neal Sher, who headed the Artukovic prosecution,called it &quot;our most significant victory, a historic event,the most gratifying achievement we have had.&quot;   Radoslav Artukovic faced the press in Los Angeles, thenwent into seclusion for a day. He took his wife to see themovie &quot;Down and Out in Beverly Hills.&quot; But visions of hisfather being carried off an airplane in Yugoslavia keptflashing before his eyes. The thought of giving up, he says,&quot;never entered my mind.&quot;   The next morning, he combed through Croatian newspapers tofind names of lawyers who had represented dissidents. Heultimately found three Yugoslav attorneys willing to take hisfather's case.   In April 1986, he flew to Zagreb for the trial. Policewere waiting for him at the airport. They questioned him fortwo hours and confiscated papers he had brought for defenseattorneys. Police monitored him for the rest of his stay.   Watching the trial was &quot;like being in a dream,&quot; herecalls. His father -- then 86 years old, blind and sufferingfrom Parkinson's disease -- was incoherent most of the time.At one point, he says, the chief judge boomed into amicrophone, &quot;Accused, are you asleep?&quot;   Mr. Truhar, one of his father's main accusers, seemedhardly more coherent, according to U.S. press reports of thetrial. Two nurses had to support him as he entered thecourtroom. The chief judge prompted his answers. Mr. Avdicrepeated the allegations he had made previously and addedsome. Another prosecution witness testified that he knew Mr.Artukovic's father was guilty of war crimes because he had&quot;read it in the newspaper,&quot; according to the press reports.   Soon Mr. Artukovic's worst fears were confirmed. TheYugoslav government barred his father's attorneys frompresenting any witnesses. With the verdict a foregoneconclusion, he decided to go home early. Fighting back tears,he said goodbye to his father from behind a glass partitionat the prison. &quot;Dad didn't even know where he was. He thoughthe was in the States,&quot; Mr. Artukovic recalls. The two mensaid the Lord's Prayer. &quot;I'm proud of you,&quot; Mr. Artukovictold his father.   Before he left, defense attorneys had slipped him copiesof previous statements one of the key witnesses had given inthe 1950s, showing he'd changed his story three times. Mr.Artukovic hoped to use the documents in the U.S. to helpprove his father's innocence, even though it was largelyacademic by now. He feared Yugoslav police would confiscatethe papers, so he made two sets. He put one in his attachecase, which police did uncover. The other they missed --hidden between his dirty undershirts.   In Los Angeles, Mr. Artukovic saw a chance to directlyconfront Mr. Sher, head of the Justice Department'sNazi-hunting unit, the Office of Special Investigations. Mr.Sher was coming to town for a talk. During a question andanswer period, Mr. Artukovic asked to what extent the JusticeDepartment verified the allegations made against his father.&quot;It is the U.S. position that your father was a massmurderer,&quot; Mr. Sher responded. Then he added: &quot;It's not easyfor me to say that to you.&quot;   Still, Mr. Artukovic refused to give up. He traveled toMunich, Germany, to search for Mr. Avdic's ex-wife. He wentto five buildings before he found the right apartment. But noone was home each time. &quot;There were lots of frustrations likethat. I spent a lot of time spinning my wheels,&quot; he says.   On that trip, he noticed he was being videotaped when heleft his hotel. He suspected his watchers were Yugoslavgovernment agents. One night, they followed him to a coffeehouse, then on to a train station. &quot;It was the one time Ithought maybe I could get shot,&quot; he says.   Despite his fears, he returned to Yugoslavia in May 1987.This time, he searched through thousands of names of soldierswho had served in motorcycle escort units. He could find nomention of Mr. Avdic.   On Jan. 18, 1988, Mr. Artukovic's father died in prison ofnatural causes. He was 88. His body has never been returned.   Friends urged Mr. Artukovic to move on. &quot;They said, `Rad,you've fought the good fight,'&quot; he recalls. Instead, hecompiled his findings into a 135-page report, bound it inpale blue covers and called it &quot;Anatomy of a Fraud.&quot; He sentit to the Justice Department and congressmen.   The years of fighting had taken their toll. Doctorsdiagnosed his frequent chest pains and shortness of breath as&quot;an accumulation of stress.&quot; He had spent nearly $200,000,deferring home repairs and savings for his children'seducation.   A sensational development followed. In Yugoslavia, MilanBulajic, a former top justice official, alleged publicly thatMr. Avdic, the prosecution's chief witness, had fabricatedthe charges. Mr. Bulajic, who has since written a book on theArtukovic case, said Yugoslav officials had interviewed Mr.Avdic in the 1950s, but rejected his allegations as false.&quot;It was the kind of break I had been looking for,&quot; Mr.Artukovic says. He redoubled his letter-writing campaign toJustice officials, asking them to re-examine the case.   Finally, in August 1989, the Justice Department's Officeof Professional Responsibility agreed to investigate whetherthe prosecutors mishandled the case. Justice officialsdecline to comment on the status of the investigation and saythe department routinely investigates &quot;any assertion ofunethical conduct.&quot; Says Mr. Richard, the deputy assistantattorney general: &quot;This is a highly emotional area of thelaw&quot; in which cases &quot;cause a lot of pain.&quot; But, he adds: &quot;Theprocedures we've established are designed to insure there isno overreaching.&quot;   Mr. Artukovic says the probe itself is an importantvictory because it took him three years to get the departmentto agree to it. And he has won some support from a fewmembers of Congress. Rep. James A. Traficant Jr., an OhioDemocrat, says the Justice Department's war crimes unitshould adopt stricter standards for evidence. He says theagency is pressing some cases despite a &quot;lack of evidence.&quot;   Mr. Artukovic still hopes to persuade the courts somedayto remove the extradition order against his father as asymbolic gesture. But whatever happens, Mr. Artukovic says,his search has made him feel &quot;more comfortable with myself.&quot;He believes that he found the truth, and that the truth ishis father was innocent.</TEXT></DOC>