<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900828-0019</DOCNO><DOCID>900828-0019.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>08/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE U.S. EXPELLED Iraqi envoys as Bush voiced pessimism on&quot;fruitful&quot; talks.   In response to Iraq's attempt to close the U.S. Embassy inKuwait, the White House ordered Baghdad to slash itsdiplomatic contingent in Washington by two-thirds. While Bushexpressed doubts, he endorsed plans by the U.N.'s chief tomeet Iraq's foreign minister, but the president indicated theU.S. wants the talks limited to an unconditional Iraqipullout from Kuwait. Baghdad, meanwhile, reportedly orderedat least one captain of an oil tanker not to defy theinternational naval blockade of trade with Iraq.</LP><TEXT>   The food situation in Iraq doesn't appear nearly asdesperate as first thought, U.S. officials said, but theIraqis are running into severe problems feeding theirsoldiers in Kuwait.   ---   THE U.N. REPORTEDLY AGREED on a plan to end Cambodia'sconflict.   The permanent members of the Security Council -- the U.S.,the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China -- formulated aplan calling for the U.N. to administer key Cambodianministries in a transition leading to free elections,diplomats said. The plan also is said to call for the U.N. toverify a ceasefire in the decade-old civil war and to verifythat Vietnamese forces have withdrawn.   The proposals, which one official described as &quot;Cambodia'slast hope,&quot; will be submitted to Cambodia's warring factionsfor their approval.   ---   Tens of thousands of blacks held a one-day strike in SouthAfrica to bury their dead and to demand an end to factionalfighting that has killed more than 500 people. AnglicanArchbishop Tutu blamed police officials and pro-apartheidwhites for the recent violence, and called for the creationof a new police force acceptable to blacks.   ---   Quebec's premier broke off talks with Indians involved ina seven-week armed standoff with authorities and ordered theCanadian army to tear down Mohawk barricades in twocommunities. Bourassa, who charged that the Mohawks hadn'tbeen negotiating in good faith on their demands, didn't sayhow or when the army would act.   ---   Eugene Hasenfus lost his bid to be compensated for hisrole in the White House-sanctioned Contra supply mission.Jurors in federal court in Miami rejected the claims of thecrew member of a plane shot down over Nicaragua in 1986. Mostof his claims had been dismissed earlier, reducing his pleato $500.   ---   A Utah brush fire raged out of control, killing twofirefighters, destroying at least 18 homes and scorching2,500 acres, officials said. About 300 homes were evacuatedin the path of the wind-driven blaze, which broke out Sundayin mountains 30 miles east of Salt Lake City. The fire, ofunknown origin, had simmered since late last week.   ---   About 20,000 Bulgarians rallied in Sofia to show supportfor the governing Socialist Party, the former CommunistParty, near the party's headquarters, which was attacked andburned Sunday by anti-Communist protesters. Police wereinstructed to use clubs and tear gas if necessary to preventfurther violence in the capital.   ---   A Michigan appeals court ruled that news organizationsmust turn over unpublished photographs and notes to peopleinvolved in civil lawsuits. It was the first time that aMichigan court has considered whether the First Amendmentprotects reporters from having to disclose nonconfidentialinformation.   ---   Scholastic Aptitude Test scores fell for the thirdstraight year because of students' weakening verbal skills.Students headed for college this fall achieved an averagecombined mathematics and verbal score of 900, down from 903last year. All of the decline was in the verbal score, whichfell to 424.   ---   Nigerian ships captured a boat carrying weapons for aLiberian rebel leader, according to a spokesman for theAfrican forces trying to impose a cease-fire in Liberia'scivil war. An official with the multinational force said theguns seized were destined for insurgent Charles Taylor, whoheads one of two groups fighting to oust President Doe.   ---   Ousted Pakistani leader Bhutto said charges of illegalweapons possession brought against her husband werepolitically motivated and designed to influence electionsscheduled for Oct. 24. Police officials filed the chargesSunday night against the ex-prime minister's husband butdidn't arrest the 37-year-old businessman.   ---   Rival Christian forces battled in East Beirut, killing twosoldiers and violating a three-month truce, securityofficials said. Troops of rebellious Gen. Aoun reportedlyfought for two hours with militiamen of the Lebanese Forces.Aoun has rejected an Arab-sponsored peace pact to end 15years of civil war in Lebanon.   ---   Angola's leftist government opened direct peace talks withU.S.-backed Unita rebels. The long-delayed meeting, held inPortugal, was the third in five months aimed at ending the15-year Angolan civil war. Officials close to the discussionssaid they were doubtful that much progress would be madetoward a firm cease-fire accord.</TEXT></DOC>