<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910828-0031</DOCNO><DOCID>910828-0031.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Insurers' Pollution-Liability Limit   Reinforced by Top Michigan Court   ----   By Jonathan M. Moses and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   S UPJ WNEWS</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LIFE INSURANCE (INL)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)IRELAND (EI)EUROPE (EU)FLORIDA (FL)ILLINOIS (IL)MARYLAND (MD)MICHIGAN (MI)NORTH AMERICA (NME)OHIO (OH)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PUERTO RICO (PR)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)WEST INDIES (WIS)</RE><LP>   Michigan's highest court limited insurers' liability forpollution caused by policyholders, adding its voice to thoseof a growing number of courts that have favored insurers onthe issue.   The three Michigan decisions are considered particularlyinfluential because of their wide scope and because they comein a major industrial state. In the largest of the threecases, Allstate Insurance Co., Northbrook, Ill., was relievedfrom having to cover pollution caused by Upjohn Co. ofKalamazoo, Mich. Allstate is a unit of Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co.</LP><TEXT>   At issue is a pollution-exclusion clause standard in mostgeneral-liability policies from 1973 to 1986. The clauseexcludes coverage of pollution damage except in &quot;sudden andaccidental&quot; cases, leaving wide room for disagreement as tohow sudden and how accidental the pollution must be. Inreversing lower court decisions, the Michigan Supreme Courtruled that insurance companies don't have to pay when thepollution occurs as a result of standard company practices orover an extended period of time that can cover as little astwo weeks.   Interpretations of the pollution-exclusion clause arewatched particularly by insurers and manufacturers because ofthe high cost of defending and cleaning up spills and othertypes of pollution. Since the mid-1980s, most liabilitypolicies have excluded all pollution coverage, requiringcompanies to purchase much more expensive environmentalimpairment liability insurance.   Cases concerning the pollution-exclusion clause have beenheard or are pending in several states, but insurance lawyerssaid the latest decisions are especially significant.   &quot;It's the most important ruling to date because it's inMichigan,&quot; said Thomas W. Brunner of the Washington, D.C.,law firm Wiley, Rein andamp; Fielding. Mr. Brunner, who filed afriend-of-the-court brief on behalf of the InsuranceEnvironmental Litigation Association, said the decision couldinfluence cases in the industrial states of Ohio, Illinoisand Florida.   He added that the stakes are high for insurance companies.&quot;There's a potential to impose liability of $100 billion forinsurers by large industry,&quot; Mr. Brunner said.   Industry lawyers said the latest decision represented agrowing trend away from pollution coverage under liabilitypolicies that include the pollution-exclusion clause. &quot;Thisdecision puts coverage in trouble,&quot; said Philip A GrashoffJr., a partner in the environmental law department of theDetroit law firm of Honigman, Miller, Schwartz andamp; Cohn.&quot;Insurance companies have taken on a very aggressive posture.There's very little ability to settle with them in light ofthe enormous damages,&quot; said Mr. Grashoff, who filed afriend-of-the-court brief on behalf of a group ofmanufacturers.   But another lawyer had a more upbeat view of the impact onindustry. &quot;The decisions are more fact-driven than anyonethought. The courts are looking more closely at the factsrather than handing down a sweeping decision either way,&quot;said Stanley M. Spracker, a partner in the Washington officeof Weil, Gotshal andamp; Manges, which represents a manufacturer ina California insurance case.   According to an Upjohn spokesman, the suit in which it wasinvolved resulted from an incident in 1982 at an Upjohn plantin Arecibo, Puerto Rico. Thousands of gallons of carbontetrachloride leaked over a period of about two weeks from astorage tank. The chemical is a waste solvent resulting froman antibiotic-manufacturing process.   Allstate, which as one of Upjohn's insurers facedliability of as much as $5 million, argued that because thespill occurred over a period of two weeks, the &quot;sudden andaccidental clause&quot; barred coverage, said Thomas Emery, anattorney with Garan, Lucow, Miller, Seward, Cooper andamp; Becker,a Detroit law firm specializing in insurance litigation. Thefirm was Allstate's outside counsel.   Four of the seven Michigan justices agreed, deciding thatthe &quot;sudden and accidental&quot; clause is unambiguous and thatpollution would have to occur immediately, unexpectedly andunintentionally for the coverage to apply.   &quot;I draw an analogy to someone driving a car away from agas station with the pump still in the car. That's anaccident. But a leaky underground storage tank is not,&quot; saidMr. Emery.   In the two other cases, one involving an oil distributorand the other involving the city of Woodhaven, Mich., thestate's top court extended its interpretation of the clauseto rule that insurance companies also do not have to defendpolicyholders in litigation when it's clear that thepollution did not occur immediately, unexpectedly andunintentionally.   Lawyers said these decisions are significant because ofthe high cost of defense in liability lawsuits.   ---   MARYLAND CASUALTY CO. hit with $7.9 million damagesjudgment. The award came in a case in which the Baltimoreinsurer was accused of bad faith in refusing to defend apolicyholder sued for negligence over an accident that left ayoung boy paralyzed.   In the ruling last week, San Diego Superior Court JudgeDonald Meloche said the facts surrounding Maryland Casualty'sconduct were &quot;some of the most egregious ones that I haveever seen.&quot; At the request of San Diego plaintiff lawyerBruce E. Sulzner, the judge more than tripled an earlier $2.4million damage award he handed down against the company inJune. Most of the $7.9 million is punitive damages, designedto punish the defendant and deter others from similar acts.   The case is unusual because such high damage awards areusually arrived at by juries. Many large damage awardsreturned by juries are later reduced by trial judges orthrough appeals.   Judge Meloche said the damages were warranted by the factsand criticized Maryland Casualty for arguing that it hadacted innocently on the advice of its lawyers.   &quot;I am concerned about the fact of attempting to hidebehind the defense of advice of counsel. . .,&quot; said JudgeMeloche, according to a court transcript. &quot;This is a clearcase which will show you the ills of anybody claiming thatall you have to do is claim advice of counsel.&quot;   In a statement, Maryland Casualty said Judge Meloche made&quot;significant errors of law and fact,&quot; by determining that thecompany was obligated to provide coverage and in assessingdamages. Both decisions are being appealed, the company said.   The case involved a small trucking company in San Diegothat was sued in December 1986, with half a dozen otherdefendants, after a five-year-old boy was crushed by aconcrete slab in a dump where the defendants had been haulingdirt and debris.   Through a series of legal maneuverings over a period offour years, according to the opinion, Maryland Casualtyrefused to provide coverage, negotiate a settlement, paycompany owner James E. Ethridge's lawyer or even communicatewith him.   The six other defendants in the case ultimately settledout of court for a total of $2.2 million, leaving Mr.Ethridge exposed to more than $4 million in damages withoutinsurance.   ---   FORMER IRA SOLDIER'S eight-year detention in U.S. is ruledlawful.   A federal appeals court rejected 36-year-old JosephDoherty's claim that the government has violated hisconstitutional rights by imprisoning him and denying him bailsince 1983. Mr. Doherty, a former member of the IrishRepublican Army and widely supported in the Irish-Americancommunity, hasn't been charged with a crime in the U.S. andwants to be released on bail while he seeks political asylum.   Ever since Mr. Doherty's arrest, the U.S. has been seekingto return him to Britain, where he would serve a lifesentence for the murder of a British Army captain in NorthernIreland. Mr. Doherty escaped from a prison in NorthernIreland shortly before he was convicted and fled to the U.S.,where he lived and worked under an alias for more than ayear.   Court proceedings related to the deportation effort havebeen plagued by delays. But the Second U.S. Circuit Court ofAppeals said that Mr. Doherty's &quot;inordinately longpre-deportation detention&quot; was allowed under immigration law.&quot;Governmental conduct that may be considered 'shocking' whenit serves to deprive the life, liberty or property of acitizen may not be unconstitutional when directed at analien,&quot; the appellate panel said in a 2-1 decision.   In a strongly worded dissent, however, Judge Frank X.Altimari said Mr. Doherty's indefinite detention isunacceptable even for a noncitizen. &quot;It is a bitter ironythat in this era in which totalitarian regimes are adoptingthe language of freedom and looking to the U.S. as a model ofliberty and justice, we today find it acceptable that a manwho hasn't been charged with a crime in this country mayremain incarcerated here indefinitely,&quot; Judge Altimari said.Mr. Doherty currently is being held in a high-securityfederal prison in Lewisburg, Pa.   The U.S. Justice Department also maintains that Mr.Doherty doesn't qualify for political asylum, an issue thatthe U.S. Supreme Court will hear in October. Stephen A.Somerstein, an attorney for Mr. Doherty, said he isconsidering whether to ask the Supreme Court also to reviewyesterday's decision.   ---   STATE BAR OF CALIFORNIA defeats program to licensenon-lawyers.   The program would have allowed people who aren't lawyersto provide limited legal services in California. Under thebar's proposed system, a state agency would have set rulesfor paralegals and other practitioners, authorizing them tooffer legal advice in landlord-tenant disputes.   California, like virtually all states, flatly prohibitsthe practice of law by non-lawyers. A growing number ofconsumers' advocates contend that allowing non-lawyers toadvise on simple matters would make counsel more accessibleto people who couldn't otherwise afford it. But barassociations tend to resist such changes, contending thatmembers of the public can be harmed by improperly trainedpractitioners.   In California, a committee of the bar proposed the limitedprogram after a series of studies in the past few years. Butthe plan was voted down by the bar's board of governors by&quot;extremists&quot; on both sides of the issue, according to RichardAnnotico, a board member. He said the disagreement turned inpart on whether the proposed plan should have extended tofamily law and other areas.   In some states, paralegals and other consultants have beenprosecuted criminally for violation of statutes barring theunauthorized practice of law. Last June, a paralegal in GreenBay, Wis., was sentenced to nine months in jail for helpingpeople file petitions in federal bankruptcy court in Madison,Wis. (He served 30 days and was released on probation.)   Several years earlier, a woman in Jacksonville, Fla., wasprosecuted for helping people fill out divorce and adoptionforms. Her case created a national stir and prompted theFlorida Supreme Court in 1987 to create a narrow exception tothe state's rules by allowing non-lawyers to assist people infiling routine forms.   ---   NOTED: James J. Dragna, 38 years old, has joined the292-lawyer San Francisco-based firm of McCutchen, Doyle,Brown andamp; Enersen, as a partner in its Los Angeles office. Mr.Dragna, an environmental attorney, previously worked at theLos Angeles office of the 340-lawyer Philadelphia-based firmof Pepper, Hamilton andamp; Scheetz.</TEXT></DOC>