<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920218-0153</DOCNO><DOCID>920218-0153.</DOCID><HL>   Blurred Borders:   Industries Find Growth   Of Digital Electronics   Brings In Competitors   ---   As Computers, Phones, Video   Blend or Overlap, Winners   And Losers Will Emerge   ---   Consumers Likely to Benefit   ----   By G. Pascal Zachary   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/18/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AAPL DJ EK HWP J.NTD NWS SNE</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)BROADCASTING (BRD)COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)SOFTWARE (SOF)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)</IN><NS>CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)NEW PRODUCTS andamp; SERVICES (PDT)</NS><RE>AUSTRALIA (ASA)CALIFORNIA (CA)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The Digital Revolution has reached Glasgow, Ky.   In this small town 100 miles south of Louisville, thelocal electric utility has installed a two-way monitoringsystem that can conserve electricity by automaticallyshutting off water heaters and taking other load-reducingsteps. The same network can deliver video images, news andinformation. So, in 1990, the Glasgow Electric Board becamethe town's second cable-TV provider, feeding broadcasts toabout 1,800 residents for a fee. In response, the originalcable company slashed rates and unsuccessfully asked a courtto evict the utility from its turf.</LP><TEXT>   And with the aid of digital electronics, the utility beganoffering telephone service to some of its employees last yearand plans to expand the service to the city's schooldistrict. &quot;It's technically feasible and legally doable,&quot;says William Ray, the utility's chief.   All this illustrates how the lines are blurring among fourhuge industries: computers, consumer electronics,communications and entertainment. The relentless spread ofdigital electronics -- converting information, sound, video,text and images into a single stream of ones and zeros thatcan be decoded by similar electronic hardware -- is steppingup competition, forcing strange alliances and underminingonce-lucrative businesses. Consumers seem sure to get newservices and lower prices.   Operators of telephone, television, cellular and satellitesystems like digital because it vastly increases clarity andcapacity and can improve security. Creators of music, movies,books and pictures benefit because digital allows theirproduct to be transferred readily to a variety of packagesand reproduced more cheaply. Makers of consumer-electronicequipment find digital saves money by providing a commonunderlying technology.   Which industries or companies will benefit most from theinvasions of each other's turf isn't clear, however. &quot;You cansit inside one of these industries and think you're immune,but these other industries are coming at you,&quot; says RobertLucky, executive director of research at American Telephone andamp;Telegraph Co.'s Bell Labs.   It sure looks that way. Cable-TV carriers andconsumer-electronics makers are buying movie and musicproducers. Satellite TV and data networks are being launchedby a defense contractor, a computer maker and a mediacompany. U.S. telephone companies own cable systems abroadand are itching to buy them at home. Software companies areacquiring images and data for use in their products, andpublishers are packaging books in electronic form.   &quot;Everybody is in everybody's business today,&quot; says CraigMcCaw, chairman of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., thenation's largest cellular carrier. The free-for-all couldredraw the corporate landscape -- if government regulations,industry divisions and technical problems don't bar the way.   Government, which has long tried to separate the fields ofbroadcasting, telecommunications and information, is relaxingits grip. Last October, a federal court approved plans byregional telephone companies to offer electronic data andshopping services over their lines. The FederalCommunications Commission is encouraging phone companies toenter the broadcasting business and cable providers to offerwireless telephony.   However, regulators, concerned about rising prices forcable and the effect of changes on newspapers and othermedia, still might hit the brakes; already the Senate haspassed a bill permitting municipalities to regulate rates forbasic cable services. But in the end, &quot;technology is going toobliterate the current regulatory structure,&quot; asserts StagNewman, a strategist with Pacific Telesis.   Industry's failure to get its act together also isdelaying the Digital Age. Self-interest has spawned aproliferation of electronic standards, making integration ofdigital media cumbersome or impossible and penalizingconsumers for buying one hardware system instead of another.Already there are competing formats for compact-disk players;disks made for one system can't play on another. And anelectronic game designed for Nintendo can't play on a Sega orAtari.   Technical hurdles also are worrisome, though notinsurmountable. The most vexing are to find ways to compressdata, especially motion pictures and medical images, so thatless expensive processing and communications hardware isrequired. Another tricky problem: what to do with predigitaldata, mainly text, photographs, film and music. Today, mostinformation products, such as music and newspapers, aretranslated into computer-readable form during theirproduction. But older material must be converted intoelectronic form, a process that currently is expensive,time-consuming and not always accurate.   Despite these obstacles, the convergence of digitalindustries brings unusual opportunities. U.S. companies, forinstance, may get a fresh shot at consumer electronics, asprawling industry that until recently was widely consideredirretrievably lost to the Japanese. &quot;Here is our opportunityto get it back,&quot; says James Clark, chairman of SiliconGraphics Inc., of Mountain View, Calif. The reason foroptimism: The U.S. is strong in computers. Since music, videoand text are going digital, the devices that will store,record and play this material will essentially be computersin handy packages.   So, the spread of digital electronics could reversedecades of decline in U.S. competitiveness. Just a few yearsago, the U.S. seemed doomed to trail Japan in advanceddigital TV but now appears to have leapfrogged into the lead.In electronic-game hardware, where Nintendo is king, aproduct being planned by Apple Computer Inc. is raising hopesof an American resurgence. And while Sony Corp. is stillleading the way in electronic books and camcorders,Hewlett-Packard Co. has beaten the Japanese to the punch witha palm-sized electronic spreadsheet.   In communications, digital electronics is fosteringcreation of new networks that can serve as highways for bitsof information. Three types of networks are emerging. One isbased on satellites, a second on the fiber and coaxial cablesbelonging to telephone and cable-TV companies, and a third oncellular and other radio technologies. Alfred Sikes, the FCCchairman, expects all three to flourish. That's because ofthe extensive equipment and networks already in place; thedesire of some companies to run networks; and the benefit tothe public from expanded competition.   &quot;I like the idea of competing networks,&quot; says RichardSnelling, executive vice president, network, of SouthernBell, a unit of BellSouth Corp. &quot;Even though it squandersresources to an extent, it promotes innovation.&quot; He adds,however, that the convergence of once-distinct industries is&quot;going to create a lot of chaos.&quot;   It also will hurt some industries. The losers may include:   -- Network television. &quot;Over the air&quot; broadcasters will besqueezed by vast video libraries stored electronically andobtained by satellite or on disks. Cable-TV will become morethreatening as providers expand channel capacity and qualitythrough digital circuitry. Just as pre-recorded music reducedthe audience for radio, new ways of obtaining videoentertainment may change the economics of TV by squeezing outcommercials. However, the networks also expect to go digital.They &quot;are a long way from dead,&quot; says John Malone, chiefexecutive of Tele-Communications Inc.   -- Service companies. Digital electronics will usher in afresh round of automation, wiping out entire classes ofservice workers much as computers wiped out many factory andclerical jobs. As the quality of documents sent by faxmachines and electronic mail improves, express-mail concernswill lose customers. In addition, suppliers of all kinds willget by with fewer workers as ubiquitous sensors, sendingwireless messages to central computers, streamline theprocess of restocking store shelves or reading utilitymeters.   -- Video-rental stores. Digital electronics will makerenting a movie as simple as changing a TV channel or dialingthe telephone. No more late-night trips to a video store,says Nolan Bushnell, a pioneer in electronic entertainment.Already trying to stave off obsolescence, BlockbusterEntertainment Corp. has started promoting for-purchase moviesand recently decided to sell titles stored on compact disks.   -- Personal-computer makers. General-purpose PCs arelikely to be supplanted by &quot;information appliances&quot; requiringlittle training. &quot;Even the exceptional users still spend moretime on their tools than solving problems they're meant tosolve,&quot; says John Young, chief executive of Hewlett-Packard.&quot;That isn't right.&quot;   -- Newspaper publishers. Weakened by a slump inadvertising, newspapers now face competition from telephonecompanies. One big fear: Phone companies could skimclassified advertising, the most profitable section of mostmetropolitan papers. Dow Jones andamp; Co., publisher of The WallStreet Journal, already runs electronic-data services.MediaNews Group Inc., which publishes 72 newspapers, istalking with phone companies about supplying editorialmaterial and selling audio ads.   The looming digital transformation has many companiesstruggling for ways to best defend their turf -- and frettingmore about cannibals from other industries than abouttraditional rivals. &quot;I'm more afraid of the data providers --Dow Jones, Reuters, McGraw-Hill -- than I am of my databasesoftware rivals,&quot; says Lawrence Ellison, chief executiveofficer of Oracle Corp., a supplier of database software.   Eastman Kodak Co. illustrates how companies try to avoidbeing blindsided by rivals. In June, Kodak plans to sell adigital system that takes film negatives and converts theminto images stored on compact disks. The disks will beprepared by photo developers and playable on home computers.Kodak hopes to lessen its dependence on film, but &quot;it is alsoa defensive program,&quot; says Scott Brownstein, manager ofdigital-imaging development.   Kodak's &quot;Photo CD&quot; plan is in a race against all-digitalcameras, which capture images on semiconductor chips. Thesecameras, made by Sony, Canon and others since the mid-1980s,are gradually improving in quality, though digital picturesstill pale in comparison to those from film cameras. Inaddition, the digital cameras are costly right now. But theyproduce pictures instantly, and the images can be sliced anddiced electronically. So, the long-term threat to film isserious, and Kodak really has to respond, says Eugene Glazer,an analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds.   But protecting the film business is expensive -- andrisky. Mr. Glazer estimates that Kodak will spend hundreds ofmillions of dollars to launch Photo CD; the company declinesto estimate the cost. And consumers may not bite because theywould need a special CD player and perhaps a computer, plus acamera.   Mr. Brownstein says Photo CD, to be successful, has tograb only a tiny percentage of the 60 billion photos takeneach year. But even then, Kodak may only delay the inevitabletriumph of digital electronics, where advances are beingfueled by billions of dollars invested annually by dozens ofmajor concerns.   Kodak's plight shows the dangers of going it alone.Alliances are one way to hold off the cannibals. Examplesabound. BellSouth is working with consumer-electronics kingSony on a new type of wireless phone system. Oracle and McCawCellular are testing a broadcast service that aims to stripdata traffic from traditional telephone carriers.   Probably the best-known alliance brings together Sony,Apple and Motorola Inc. Though rivals in some areas, thethree are joining forces to go after the nascent market forpocket-sized cellular phones that double as electronicnotepads. Each company is contributing different pieces ofthe technology -- Apple, software; Sony, manufacturing anddesign; and Motorola, chips and communications know-how.   These alliances are just the beginning. &quot;You're going tosee a whole different world of relationships betweenindustries and companies that you never thought would dothings together,&quot; says John Sculley, Apple's chief executiveofficer.   Some companies, however, are trying on their own to spanthe expanse of digital software and hardware, networks andcontent. &quot;There's nobody in News Corp. who would callthemselves a digital manager, but that's our approach,&quot; saysJohn B. Evans, executive vice president of News Corp. NewsCorp. owns TV Guide, publisher HarperCollins, Fox TV, acomputerized map company, a European satellite broadcastnetwork, and many newspapers and magazines.   A few years ago, it was inconceivable that a singlecorporation could pursue all or even most of the digitalpermutations. But that was before a slew of acquisitions byNews Corp.; the merger of Time Inc. and WarnerCommunications, Sony's acquisition of the enormous music andmovie holdings of Columbia Pictures, and Matsushita ElectricWorks Ltd.'s purchase of MCA and its similar operations.   So far, these deals have produced only modest results.News Corp. and Time-Warner Inc. are constrained by debt, andthe two Japanese giants have yet to reap the benefits ofmarrying hardware with &quot;soft&quot; entertainment content. But&quot;rightly or wrongly,&quot; ATandamp;T's Mr. Lucky says, these deals &quot;mayhave set the trend.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>