<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910211-0023</DOCNO><DOCID>910211-0023.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Airports Are Not Public Forums,   Appeals Court Says in Rights Case   ----   By Wade Lambert and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   PN JNJ SBE</CO><IN>AIRLINES (AIR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal appeals court ruled that solicitations can bebanned at airport terminals, in a decision that for the firsttime holds that airports aren't public forums wherefree-speech rights must be allowed.   The decision by the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appealsin Manhattan puts the court at odds with five other federalappeals courts that have ruled on the issue in recent years.The appeals-court panel in the New York case said that alittle-noticed Supreme Court decision last year changed thedefinition of a public forum.</LP><TEXT>   The appeals court ruled that while the airports can'tprohibit people from passing out leaflets, they can ban thesoliciting of donations by groups such as the InternationalSociety for Krishna Consciousness, which brought the suit.The lawsuit was filed against the Port Authority of New Yorkand New Jersey, which operates the airports.   Previously, courts have treated airport terminals aspublic forums, where soliciting donations can't be bannedalthough reasonable restrictions can be placed on where andwhen free speech is allowed.   In the 1990 decision cited by the appellate judges, U.S.vs. Kokinda, the Supreme Court ruled that because a postoffice served a specific purpose, it wasn't a public forum.Therefore soliciting could be banned on the post office'ssidewalk.   &quot;Like the sidewalk in Kokinda, the Port Authority'sterminals are remote from pedestrian thoroughfares and areintended solely to facilitate a particular type oftransaction -- air travel -- unrelated to protectedexpression,&quot; the appeals court ruled.   The court's interpretation of the Kokinda case prompted astrong dissent from one of the appellate panel's members.Chief Judge James Oakes said that under the majority'sreasoning, virtually any public property could be deemed anonpublic forum as long as it had some purpose other thanprotecting free speech.   &quot;Generally, traditional public {forums} include locationssuch as streets and public parks,&quot; Judge Oakes said. &quot;Airportterminals and streets or sidewalks alike are designed andused for the efficient movement of travelers . . . I don'tsee how we can attach any constitutional significance to thefact that one involves travel by airplane and the other byautomobile.&quot;   Professor A.E. Dick Howard of the University of Virginialaw school said &quot;very little was made of&quot; the Kokinda caselast year because of its narrow circumstances. &quot;A post officeis truly a single purpose property,&quot; he said.   Prof. Howard said the Kokinda decision is likely to becited in other cases involving free-speech rights. He saidthe airport case, if appealed, could open the way for theSupreme Court to further restrict the definition of a publicforum.   Jeremiah Gutman, an attorney in New York for the Krishnagroup, said he is considering whether to appeal the case.   A Port Authority spokesman said the agency is pleased thatthe ban on soliciting was upheld, but that it is reviewingthe decision on the handing out of leaflets. The PortAuthority's rules apply to public areas that aren't leased toairlines.   ---   FEDERAL JUDGE INDICTED on corruption charges.   U.S. District Judge Robert F. Collins of New Orleans wascharged Friday with bribery, obstruction of justice, andconspiracy.   A Justice Department news release said that the FederalBureau of Investigation recovered more than $16,500 of bribemoney from Judge Collins's private chambers.   New Orleans Levee Board member John H. Ross, who allegedlypassed the money to Judge Collins, was also charged withbribery, conspiracy and obstruction of justice.   The Justice Department said he and Judge Collins intendedto share $100,000 in bribe money from Gary Young, a defendantwho earlier had pleaded guilty to drug trafficking chargesbefore Judge Collins. In return for the money, the judgeallegedly promised to give Mr. Young &quot;favorableconsideration&quot; at his sentencing hearing.   Judge Collins, 60 years old, was appointed to the federalbench in 1978 by President Jimmy Carter. He is one of thefirst black federal judges in the south since Reconstruction.If convicted, Judge Collins and Mr. Ross face up to 25 yearsimprisonment and a $750,000 fine.   S.C. Garcia III, a New Orleans lawyer for Mr. Ross, said,&quot;The government has again gone beyond the boundaries of fairplay in an effort to target two local, respected, blackpublic officials. The government's attempt will backfire.&quot;   In a statement, Kern A. Reese, a New Orleans lawyer forJudge Collins, said that the judge is not guilty of any ofthe charges.   &quot;Would the government have spent the time, effort, andmassive public resources to set up a white federal judge byemploying a black twice-convicted dope pusher?&quot; Mr. Reeseasked.   ---   PAN AM bankruptcy judge allows suits over Lockerbieexplosion to proceed.   In federal bankruptcy court in Manhattan, Judge CorneliusBlackshear approved an agreement worked out by Pan Am Corp.,its creditors' committee and plaintiffs in the suits. Pan Amis being sued in two class actions filed by families ofpassengers and crew members who died when the airline'sFlight 103 exploded over Scotland in 1988.   Under the agreement, work on the Lockerbie cases can goforward, but no trial will begin without the bankruptcycourt's clearance. The suits accuse Pan Am of misconductbecause it didn't warn passengers or adequately increasesecurity after being warned that a bomb might be on theflight.   Pan Am filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S.Bankruptcy Code on Jan. 8. Under bankruptcy law, litigationagainst a company is automatically halted once it files forbankruptcy-court protection.   An agreement hasn't been reached on other litigationagainst the airline, including a class action stemming fromthe 1986 hijacking of a Pan Am plane in Karachi, Pakistan.   ---   ADVOCACY GROUP was improperly barred from state capital,judge rules.   A federal judge in Harrisburg ruled that Pennsylvaniastate officials violated the free speech rights of ACT UP,the vocal AIDS activist group, by barring its members fromthe public gallery of the state capitol last month.   Members of the Philadelphia branch of ACT UP, the AIDSCoalition to Unleash Power, had tried to enter the galleryJan. 28 to conduct a silent protest against Gov. Robert Caseyduring his state of the state address. Capitol police barredaccess out of fear that ACT UP would try to break up thegovernor's speech.   American Civil Liberties Union staff attorney Scott Burrisargued that each of ACT UP's branches is independent and thatmembers of the Philadelphia branch rarely engage in unrulycivil disobedience. The New York branch of ACT UP has triedto shut down sessions of the New York Legislature.   In a harshly worded opinion, U.S. District Judge SylviaRambo denounced the closing of the visitors gallery as &quot;thespitting image of prior restraint.&quot; She refused, however, toissue an injunction because the suit improperly named stateand capitol police officials as defendants. Only StateSpeaker of the House Robert W. O'Donnell, through thesergeant at arms, has the power to close the gallery, thejudge said.   Mr. Burris said he plans to pursue the case for punitivedamages and a permanent injunction prohibiting state policeaction against lawful protests by ACT UP.   Mr. O'Donnell said that in the future, when weighingsecurity and access issues, he will be inclined &quot;to err onthe side of access&quot; after examining the allegations.   ---   EX-FEDERAL JUDGE is named examiner to investigate Myersonandamp; Kuhn bankruptcy.   Abraham Sofaer, currently a partner at the firm HughesHubbard andamp; Reed and previously an adviser to the StateDepartment, has been appointed to investigate whether aconsentual reorganization plan can be reached in the case, orwhether the firm should be liquidated. Bankruptcy court JudgePrudence Abram, in Manhattan, asked Mr. Sofaer to report hisfindings by March 8.   The now-defunct New York law firm filed under Chapter 11of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in 1989. Rather than allow thefirm to reorganize under Chapter 11, the firm's creditors'committee wants the case converted to an involuntary Chapter7 liquidation.   ---   TUMS' AD CAMPAIGN gives Johnson andamp; Johnson indigestion.   Johnson andamp; Johnson sued SmithKline Beecham Corp., accusingthe maker of Tums antacid products of false advertising. Thesuit accuses SmithKline of making misleading claims aboutTums' nutritional value and falsely portraying Johnson andamp;Johnson's own antacid product, Mylanta, as unsafe.   The Tums ads claim that it has more nutritional value thanother antacids because it contains calcium. But Johnson andamp;Johnson, in its suit, said, &quot;The calcium benefits promised inSmithKline's advertising don't come from taking Tumsoccasionally to relieve stomach distress . . . The only wayto derive any nutritional benefit from Tums is to take itregularly over an extended period of time.&quot;   Johnson andamp; Johnson also claimed that the Tums ads misleadconsumers into believing that other antacids, such asMylanta, have &quot;potentially serious safety risks&quot; because theycontain aluminum and magnesium.   Officials at SmithKline, a unit of SmithKline Beecham PLCof London, couldn't be reached for comment. Tums account for$130 million of the $900 million U.S. antacid market, thesuit said, while Mylanta has annual sales of $100 million.   The suit also names as a defendant Jordan, McGrath, Case andamp;Taylor Inc., the Tums ad agency, which could not be reachedfor comment. The suit asked that SmithKline be ordered tohalt the ad claims and run corrective advertising.</TEXT></DOC>