<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910128-0047</DOCNO><DOCID>910128-0047.</DOCID><HL>   Upping the Ante:   Gulf Oil Spill Shows   Iraq's Resolve to Wage   War on Its Own Terms   ---   Largest-Ever Slick Threatens   Area Desalination Plants   And May Hinder Allies   ---   Saudis Are Caught Off Guard   ----   By Barbara Rosewicz   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)AEROSPACE (ARO)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)WATER UTILITIES (WAT)ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   The huge oil spill that Iraq unleashed in the Persian Gulfis Saddam Hussein's latest declaration that he is prepared towage a long and unconventional war.   The spill, measuring 35 miles long and 10 miles wide, isalready the largest in history and its consequences arelikely to be graver than either Saudi Arabia or the U.S.-ledforces are letting on. President Bush calls the Iraqi move a&quot;last gasp&quot; and U.S. military officials say the giant spillwon't hinder military operations. But military planners alsoacknowledge that they will be forced to maneuver around thegiant slick.</LP><TEXT>   Moreover, the black tide creeping down the Saudi coastcould, within a week, temporarily shut down a significantportion of the kingdom's production of drinking water andelectricity. Those disruptions, in turn, could affect theefficiency of the military operations in Saudi Arabia, wheremost of the Allied forces are based.   In an effort to stop the spill, which is spewing from anoff-shore Kuwaiti loading terminal, U.S. planes struck twopipeline installations in Kuwait feeding the terminal. U.S.military officials called the attack generally successful.   In Jubail, Saudi Arabia, home to the nation's largestdesalination plant, people are already bracing themselves forthe worst. The oil could begin washing up on the shorelinehere by the end of the week.   &quot;Everybody wants bottled water fast because of the oil,&quot;said Mohamad Tahir Khan, manager of a chain of grocery storesin the area. &quot;Everyone is panicky.&quot; Mr. Khan told Wall StreetJournal reporter Bob Davis that he sent a driver 60 milessouth to Dammam to buy 500 cartons of water, but could onlyscavenge 100. Demand is so great, he said, the shipment willbe sold out in &quot;20 minutes.&quot;   Saudi officials insist the slick doesn't threaten theirability to produce drinking water or run coastal electricalplants, which use steam produced by the desalination process.But C.J. Green, a pollution control officer at Abu DhabiNational Oil Co., says that no amount of booms laid toprotect the plants can assure that oil won't enter the systemand ruin crucial desalination filters and pipes.   Although Iraq denies it orchestrated the spill, the U.S.military is convinced Saddam Hussein is responsible. And thatfeeds the perception that the Iraqi leader intends to useevery unconventional trick in his book to frustrate the U.S.and ensure that the war is eventually fought on Iraqi terms.   &quot;He has a vast array of possibilities, and we should watchfor those possibilities and be prepared for any of them,&quot;Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of U.S. forces in SaudiArabia, warned yesterday in the capital city of Riyadh.   Already, Saddam Hussein has attacked cities with missiles,set oil facilities afire in Kuwait and, now, unleashed amammoth oil slick -- all to stir chaos while avoiding directcontact with the technologically superior forces arrayedagainst him. He may also eventually make good on his threatto use terrorism and chemical and biological weapons.Moreover, he can wreak worse environmental havoc by spillingmuch more Kuwaiti crude into the sea and setting more Kuwaitioil wells on fire, creating clouds of smoke over the countrythat could disrupt U.S. air operations. In an ominous radiobroadcast over the weekend, Iraq warned that &quot;the power theIraqis have mustered to confront the U.S. and Zionistaggressors is not a conventional one. . . . We also know wellwhen to respond and when to use this power.&quot;   Iraq's threats notwithstanding, Defense Departmentofficials say there is growing confidence in the upperechelons of the Pentagon that the more conventional air waris going well. One top officer asserts that Saddam Hussein'sunconventional actions aren't disrupting the overall wareffort and that planners are confident the Allies willsucceed in any ground attack.   The military's sense of confidence, which Pentagonofficials are downplaying in their public statements, hasbeen heightened in recent days by the fact that Iraqi airdefenses appear to be deteriorating rapidly, making it easierfor Allied planes to fly missions. In addition, militaryplanners are pleased that Iraqi fighter jets have been movingto Iran in recent days. The reason for the move isn't clear,but it apparently leaves fewer aircraft to challenge U.S.forces.   Military officials say the Gulf oil slick began formingwhen Iraq dumped the contents of five Iraqi-flagged oiltankers into the water. The tankers had been docked sincelast fall outside the Mina al Ahmadi port in Kuwait. Inaddition, the Iraqis opened the spigot on the Sea Islandoil-loading terminal about 10 miles off the Kuwaiti coast,U.S. officials said. Word of the slick didn't reach theAllied command until last Friday.   By yesterday, the oil spill totaled an estimated five to10 million barrels, or between 210 and 420 million gallons,according to a Saudi official. That is already far largerthan the record-setting 140-million-gallon slick that spilledfrom the Ixtoc offshore well in the Gulf of Mexico in 1979and 1980. It is also at least twenty times the size of theExxon Valdez spill in 1989.   In an effort to stanch the flow of oil into the Gulf, anAmerican F-111 fighter-bomber took off under the cover ofdarkness late Saturday night and dropped guided bombs on twoonshore pipeline installations that control the flow of oilto the Sea Island terminal.   Gen. Schwarzkopf said there were signs the strikes hadbeen successful. But he said it will take at least 24 hoursto determine if the flow has been stopped because oil in 13miles of pipeline leading to the offshore terminal continuesto drain out. If the spill has been stopped, however, Iraqcould find a way to start it up again. Industry experts saypumps can be jerry-rigged to renew the same flow, or tap intoother Kuwaiti oil facilities. Meanwhile, a small part of theslick near the offshore terminal was on fire yesterday andcontinued to burn. Gen. Schwarzkopf said the blaze wasinadvertently touched off when a U.S. warship earlier firedon a small Iraqi boat.   President Bush has dispatched a team of U.S. governmentexperts to Saudi Arabia to consult on the slick. It was clearthat, for their part, Saudi specialists were caught off guardby the size of the spill. Just a week ago, the kingdom'sexpert on computer simulations of oil spills, Ala AlRabeh,said his worst-case scenario for a spill involved only 21million gallons -- a tenth of what has gushed into the Gulfso far. The Saudi Arabian Oil Co. last week began callingmanufacturers of oil-containment booms as far away asVancouver, Canada; the company wants to buy 10 miles ofbooms, along with other equipment. Exxon Corp. was asked tosend 100,000 feet of booms left over from its Alaska spill,an industry source said.   For the next few days at least, part of the war effort inthe Gulf will focus on Jubail, a grimy industrial town whereoil and water should never mix. Most critical are the twoplants in Jubail that take water from the sea to producefresh water for drinking and industrial use. Fully 90% ofRiyadh's drinking water comes from the Jubail plants.   Projections are that prevailing northwesterly winds andthe counter-clockwise current in the Gulf will nudge theslick straight down the Saudi coastline. According to acomputer simulation done by Malcolm Spaulding, president ofApplied Science Associates Inc., the slick will reach Jubailabout midweek. Within 30 days, &quot;we're showing that thatsection of the coast gets oiled and heavily oiled,&quot; he says.   In the path are the Jubail desalination plants, the Jubailindustrial complex of petrochemical and fertilizer factories,a smaller drinking-water plant at al Khobar, power plantsthat produce 10% of the nation's electricity, the Saudis' twobiggest oil-loading docks at Juaymah and Ras Tannurah and twohuge refineries at Jubail and Ras Tannurah. All rely oncleansed water to operate, and oily water could foul theworks.   &quot;I feel sorry for Jubail,&quot; says Mr. Green, pollutioncontrol officer at Abu Dhabi National Oil Co., who workedmany years in Saudi Arabia.   The desalination operations in Jubail look like powerplants: Giant smoke stacks tower above them and big whiteholding tanks built into the desert surround them. The plantspull in salty water from inlets near the surface, and boil itinto steam which then condenses as fresh water. The steamalso turns big turbines that produce power for industry inthe area and throughout Saudi Arabia.   Abdullah Al-Jholaikh, governor of the Saline WaterConversion Corp., which runs Saudi Arabia's municipaldesalination plants, says the two Jubail plants are eachprotected by long, yard-thick booms which block the oil fromentering the intake valves. The company plans to surroundeach plant with a second set of booms for added protection,he says. But oil spill experts note that the booms may haveonly limited success, and that oil may still get through.   Bottled water was in short supply in the city even beforereports of the oil spill. That's partly because of demandfrom Allied troops. But it's also because some truckers areafraid to make deliveries to Jubail, for fear of being on theroad during Scud missile attacks. The fear of water shortagesin the area is greatest among foreign workers, who hold mostof the blue-collar jobs in this city. Several Saudis say theycan drive 60 miles south to Dammam to pick up water for theirfamilies, but that the foreign workers either don't own carsor can't get the necessary papers to make the trip.   &quot;America, you started this war; now what do you do?&quot; saysa frustrated Raj Mana, an Indian grocery store clerk whoworks in Jubail. &quot;In a few days, we'll have a big problem.&quot;   Outside experts tend to agree, despite Saudi insistencethat the desalination operations aren't endangered. &quot;It's notan easy operation&quot; to protect the plants, says John Bennett,an environmental consultant who has worked on oil spillssince the 1969 Santa Barbara, Calif., spill. &quot;They'll lose afew {facilities}. They won't be successful on all of them.&quot;   So far, there's no sign of concern that front-line U.S.troops could be affected if the desalination plants are shutdown. Troops near the front rely in large part on bottledwater, and the military has in place movable water-treatmentunits. Farther back, however, the troops depend on Saudiwater supplies.   At the very least, Saddam Hussein may be counting oncreating public jitters about Gulf water supplies, thusadding to the political problems Allied leaders face inmaintaining public support for the war. If he succeeds inshutting down some of Saudi Arabia's coastal plants, SaddamHussein will have launched an act of industrial terrorism assuccessful as any string of bombings could have been.   Saddam &quot;understands the impact of harming the water systemand the synergistic effects on other operations, likerefineries and petrochemical plants,&quot; says Edward Badolato, aFairfax, Va., energy consultant with experience in theMideast.   In the Arab world, Saddam Hussein may be scoring pointssimply by complicating American military plans and prolongingthe war. To many Arabs, the standard by which Saddam Husseinwill be judged will be the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, in whichcombined Arab armies lasted only six days against the farsmaller Israeli armed forces. By contrast, Iraq already haslasted twice as long against a big and sophisticatedcollection of Western and Arab armies.   &quot;It's not a bad calculation in terms of appealing&quot; to Arabmasses, says Richard Murphy, former assistant secretary ofstate for Middle Eastern affairs. &quot;It's all part of theimage. He's going to keep standing up and sticking his fingerin our eye. . . . Each day is further strengthening the imagethat Arab resistance can overcome anything.&quot;   The effects of the spill on the environment, of course,will last long after the war is over. The impact of the oilon the shoreline may cause unprecedented damage to organismsat the base of the food chain and take a toll on birds, seaturtles and a variety of fish. The spill occurred just as seabirds arrived in the area on migrations from Europe and justas shrimp started spawning in seagrass beds and tidalchannels along the Gulf Coast. Shrimp and fish support afishing industry in the lower gulf.   The Persian Gulf &quot;will survive,&quot; says Mr. Bennett, thecleanup consultant. &quot;But a slick this size could be aroundfor a couple of years.&quot;   ---   Gerald F. Seib in Washington contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>