<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900806-0110</DOCNO><DOCID>900806-0110.</DOCID><HL>   The Mideast Conflict -- Crisis Decisions:   As Iraq Embargo Gains   Support, Risks Grow   For U.S. and Its Allies   ---   Americans Will Feel Pain   Of Boycott; Military Role   Poses Even More Dangers   ---   Massing on the Saudi Border   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and John J. Fialka   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP JAPAN FREST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Iraqi strongman Saddam Hussein has leftPresident Bush with a very unattractive set of options. Theeconomic sanctions the president is attempting to impose mayinflict as much pain on the U.S. as they do on Iraq, yetthere was growing concern last night that the president mayhave to resort to even more drastic military measures to keepIraq's hands off Saudi Arabia.   Mr. Bush is having surprising early success on theeconomic front, getting both Western Europe and Japan to signon to the U.S.-led global embargo of oil exports from Iraqand the Kuwaiti oil fields Iraq seized last week.</LP><TEXT>   The administration is now considering a move to gainUnited Nations support for a plan to blockade Iraqi oilshipments through the Persian Gulf or either of two majorpipelines carrying oil out through Saudi Arabia and Turkey.The blockade, which would be carried out in internationalwaters, would be accomplished by an international fleet,including U.S. warships.   But the more the embargo succeeds, the more painful itwill be for American consumers. In all likelihood, thereisn't enough extra oil capacity in other countries to make upfor the more than 4 million barrels a day of oil that aboycott and such a blockade would bottle up in Iraq andKuwait.   Under such a scenario, world oil prices could skyrocket,at least temporarily, perhaps to as high as $35 a barrel, 40%higher than they are today, an increase of about 25 cents agallon at American gas pumps.   The resulting disruptions could, in the short run, wreakhavoc on industrial economies world-wide.   The president yesterday used his toughest language yetcondemning the Iraqi move against Kuwait. Mr. Bush declaredthat &quot;these are outlaws -- international outlaws andrenegades,&quot; and he flatly pledged to roll back the Iraqiinvasion: &quot;This will not stand. This will not stand, thisaggression against Kuwait.&quot;   And though Iraq claimed yesterday that it had begunpulling troops out of Kuwait, Mr. Bush charged that Baghdad&quot;lied&quot; and that its forces remained. He declared that Arableaders had &quot;failed&quot; to find their own solution within 48hours of the invasion, as promised.   The president again refused to rule out the use ofmilitary force against Iraq, and it seems clear that the U.S.would move militarily if Saudi Arabia were attacked. U.S.intelligence officials yesterday told the White House ofsigns Iraq is actually preparing to seize the so-calledneutral zone on the Saudi-Kuwaiti border or to invade SaudiArabia itself, according to officials familiar with theintelligence reports.   In one sign that the U.S. is preparing to react to such anevent, Defense Secretary Richard Cheney was dispatched fortalks to Saudi Arabia, which still doesn't want to allowAmerican forces on its soil as a precaution.   In the event of Iraqi aggression against Saudi Arabia, theU.S. would have to hope that the quick dispatch of jetfighters and big B-52 bombers from distant domestic andforeign bases and the rapid deployment of a small contingentof light ground forces would be enough to offset Iraqitroops, who would be far closer to Saudi oil fields and moreheavily armed.   One option under study in the Pentagon, according todefense officials who asked not to be identified, is thepossibility of bombing secret Iraqi facilities where Mr.Hussein has scientists and foreign mercenaries working onnuclear and biological weapons research. Iraq also hasunderground storage sites for chemical weapons that arevulnerable to U.S. bombs, some of which have the capacity topenetrate deeply into the earth. Mr. Hussein &quot;has a greatdeal to lose here,&quot; says one expert.   Yet the complications facing any American military moveare sobering. In addition to the U.S.'s inability to positionforces ahead of time in the region, the puppet governmentIraq has installed appeared to raise a new obstacle yesterdayby hinting that it is prepared to take reprisals againstforeigners trapped in Kuwait, including an estimated 3,800Americans.   There is disagreement among U.S. officials and Arabdiplomats about the chances of Mr. Hussein actually orderinghis troops to drive on into Saudi Arabia. Some diplomatsreported that Iraq has moved into at least part of theneutral zone.   The intelligence assessment was based on satellite photosand human intelligence reports showing the configuration ofIraqi troops, movements between Iraq and Kuwait and the typesof arms and logistical supplies soldiers near theKuwaiti-Saudi border are receiving. Publicly, the White Housesaid Iraqi forces are five to 10 miles from the border.   But some American officials discount the new warnings of apossible Iraqi move against the desert kingdom and itsenormous oil reserves. Middle Eastern diplomatic sources saythe Saudis themselves doubt that Iraq is preparing to moveand don't see the evidence in either satellite photos --which the U.S. has begun providing to them in the last fewdays -- or movements on the ground.   Although the movement toward meaningful sanctions pickedup momentum over the weekend, there remains doubt that theinternational community has the will to make such measuressevere or long-lasting enough to be truly painful to Iraq.   The European Community agreed to impose broad sanctions,including embargos on oil purchases from Iraq and Kuwait andon arms sales to Iraq. And, crucial to hopes for a meaningfultrade embargo, Japan announced yesterday that it also willembargo oil imports from Iraq and Kuwait.   But Japan seemed to want further international politicalcover, suggesting its move depends on the United NationsSecurity Council passing a resolution calling for broadsanctions. American diplomats were busy trying to draft sucha resolution for quick passage. And there were hints thatChina, though it has joined the international move to cut offarms shipments to Iraq, may balk at endorsing broad tradesanctions. As a Security Council member, China could block aresolution it didn't approve of.   Even if a boycott is successfully assembled, bottling upall crude exports from Iraq and Kuwait would drain more than4 million barrels from the world's daily flow of oil. Otheroil exporters have 4.5 million to 5.5 million barrels a dayin currently spare surge capacity, estimates Daniel Yergin,president of Cambridge Energy Associates, aMassachusetts-based research and consulting firm. But perhaps2 million barrels of that is in Saudi Arabia and another800,000 barrels in the United Arab Emirates, both sourcesthat might be reluctant to pump full out while looking downthe barrels of Saddam Hussein's guns, Mr. Yergin notes.   As a result, the world could quickly find itself shortmore than a million barrels a day in total crude supplies, asituation almost certain to set off a price-boostingscramble. In time, the higher prices would call forthincreased supplies and would help induce conservation. And inthe interim the U.S. and other countries could let some oilout of their strategic stockpiles to ease the shortage. For atime, however, the turmoil would likely be intense.   Meanwhile, there's no way of telling precisely how quicklya full-scale embargo would pinch Iraq. But over time, thesting would become painful, particularly because the countryalready is in sad economic shape.   On the military front, two U.S. naval task forces areconverging on the Persian Gulf area. One, including the U.S.carrier Eisenhower, is expected to take a position in theeastern Mediterranean. A second, led by the carrierIndependence, is moving from the Indian Ocean toward aposition near the Strait of Hormuz, at the mouth of thePersian Gulf.   A third U.S. naval task force, which will include thecruise-missile-carrying Wisconsin and the carrier Saratoga,is scheduled to leave Norfolk tomorrow for the Mediterranean.A Defense Department spokesman asserted, though, that themove was planned as part of the normal rotation to replacethe Eisenhower task force.   While attack aircraft from the carriers could reachtargets in Kuwait and Iraq with in-flight refueling, militaryexperts believe that the Saudis would let them operate fromSaudi airfields if the desert kingdom were attacked.Airfields at King Khalid Military City, near the Saudi borderwith Kuwait, have been equipped with spare parts and fuel forsuch a contingency.   Such landing privileges would be seen by Iraq as a seriousprovocation, and so far the Saudis have been reluctant togive them, raising concerns in Washington. Sen. David L.Boren (D., Okla.), chairman of the Senate IntelligenceCommittee, said yesterday on ABC-TV's &quot;This Week with DavidBrinkley&quot; that the Persian Gulf countries at risk &quot;have togive us forward basing rights, to put the air power and otherkinds of military forces physically into the region.&quot;   The U.S. could fly in heavier aircraft, such as tankers,transports and bombers, to a staging point in Oman. ThePentagon has spent over $300 million preparing an airfieldthere, however the Omani government must approve U.S. useduring a crisis.   Mr. Hussein's tank columns, which have operated withlittle air cover up to now, according to U.S. analysts, wouldbe extremely vulnerable to U.S. precision-guided weapons. Ifthe Iraqi dictator was tempted to use his missiles againstSaudi oil installations, the U.S. could retaliate withheavier strikes against Iraqi targets, using FB-111's basedin the United Kingdom or B-52's from the U.S.   Squadrons of U.S. fighters based in Europe also could beferried quickly into the Persian Gulf region, once permissionis given to use the Saudi bases. Some planners think thecombined U.S. and Saudi air forces could defeat Iraq'sSoviet-equipped air forces within a day or two, barringpolitical constraints that would force the U.S. to operatefrom distant bases.   The U.S. would probably move quickly into Saudi Arabiasome additional tactical radar equipment and operators, tocoordinate with American-made Airborne Warning and ControlSystem planes to monitor skies over Saudi Arabia and directSaudi and American fighter planes.   Far more difficult than air or sea support, militaryplanners say, would be to quickly get any significantAmerican ground force into Saudi Arabia to defend againstIraq's heavily armored ground troops. Former DefenseSecretary Harold Brown says that a contingent of Marines ortroops from the 82nd or 101st Airborne Divisions could beflown in, perhaps in as little as one day, because theytravel lightly.   &quot;The trouble is that because they're light they wouldn'tdo well against heavy forces,&quot; says Mr. Brown. And, he notes,Iraq's Mr. Hussein &quot;isn't Gen. Noriega,&quot; and his troopswouldn't be as easy to repel as the Panamanian leader'sforces were. Though American and Saudi air forces have workedclosely together to plan and practice moves that would haveto be taken in a crisis, the U.S. doesn't have any experiencein moving significant ground forces to the kingdom.   Military planners say the Saudis are confident, though,that they have the ability-using fighter aircraft, helicoptergunships and ground forces of their own -- to cut the twomain roads that lead from Kuwait down the Saudi coast to thekingdom's giant Persian Gulf oil fields. If those roads werecut, the tanks would be forced onto the desert to travel,slowing them down and making them far easier targets for airattack by the Saudi's American-made F5 and British-madeTornado aircraft.   One of the Iraqis' most inviting early targets would be anindustrial city the Saudis have built up through investmentof billions of dollars at Jubail, on the Persian Gulf coast.But invading forces would have to move much further down thegulf coast to reach the biggest Saudi oil fields and refiningfacilities near Dhahran.   ---   Walter S. Mossberg and James Tanner contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>