<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900410-0006</DOCNO><DOCID>900410-0006.</DOCID><HL>   Germanys Rate a One-to-One Exchange Deal   ----   By Jude Wanniski</HL><DATE>04/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A24</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl wisely ignored theadvice of all his economists, and of Bundesbank chairmanKarl-Otto Poehl when he campaigned in March in East Germanyon behalf of his Christian Democratic Party's easternpartner, the East German Christian Democrats. In a brilliantstroke, Mr. Kohl promised a monetary union with the East thatwould preserve the hard-earned savings of the people of EastGermany. His learned advisers argued such a promise would beinflationary. The East German people showed their support forMr. Kohl with a dazzling mandate for his conservativepartners.   Now we hear that the economists may have won after all.Where Chancellor Kohl had clearly pledged to honor anexchange rate of one East German mark for one West Germanmark in the new union, the Bundesbank now proposes atwo-for-one rate for all savings above 2,000 marks.</LP><TEXT>   That is, an East German's life savings of 50,000 EastGerman marks will be worth only 26,000 West German marks($15,288), not 50,000 West German marks ($29,400) aspromised. &quot;It's a swindle, pure and simple,&quot; said an EastBerliner quoted by Reuters. Of course it is.   Just as Western capitalists are inviting the Easterncommunists to enjoy the benefits of a system that rewardseffort, powerful financial institutions in Europe are playingRobin Hood with the savings of the most industrious of EastGermans. Why bother changing communists for capitalists?   In the uproar, Chancellor Kohl has at least appointed acommission to mull this over. The commission should discoverthat there is no reason that the one-for-one exchange shouldbe inflationary. It could easily recommend that all EastGerman savings that can be legally accounted for be convertedat that rate. The move would energize the East German economyand set an example for the entire East bloc, including theSoviet Union.   There are other ways to organize the mark-mark exchange.No inflation would occur if the government issued bills,notes and bonds in a combination that satisfied demands forthese in the new monetary union. The Bundesbank would knowthe right combination by observing the price of gold againstWest German marks as exchanges were made, or by observing theprice of U.S. dollars in West German marks. This is becauseall inflations, everywhere, have begun by a rise in the goldprice, or a fall in the value of the currency in questionagainst a foreign currency of stable value.   The bank would begin by issuing 10-year bonds in exchangefor East German marks. Most East German marks are held assavings, and in an exchange, the recipients would continue towish to hold interest-bearing instruments, not cash. If theydesired cash, the citizens who acquired the 10-year bondswould be able to get cash for them in the marketplace, fromthose willing to give up cash for bonds.   This activity would stretch the supply of currency,causing an incipient deflation that pressed down the DM priceof gold. This would send a signal to the bank to buy bondswith new currency until the gold price returned to itsoriginal level. What bonds would it buy? It would buy EastGerman bonds.   During the conversion period, creditors in East Germanmarks would be pulling their savings from East Germany to buythe West German bonds. East Germany would then have to retireobligations denominated in East German marks and float newbonds denominated in West German marks.   Will the market buy DM bonds issued by East Germany? Ofcourse it will. West Germany, in fact, will buy them as ameans of injecting currency into the economy to prevent theprice of gold from falling, as the currency supply isstretched. The public inside and outside the Germanys willalso buy the bonds, observing that the process of politicalintegration is now underway, and that as it is completed, theassets of East Germany will be added to the balance sheet ofWest Germany.   As long as the marketplace understands by word and deedthat the Bundesbank is carrying out this strategy with adetermination to keep the West German mark steady againstgold, commodities and the G-7 currencies, matters willproceed smoothly. The bank can issue five-year bonds and aschedule of notes as well, to satisfy all the liquiditydemands. With computers and a little creativity, the wholething could be done in a matter of weeks. If Ludwig Erhard,the man who engineered the first steps to West Germany'seconomic miracle, were still around as finance minister,computers would not be needed.   Western economists are concerned that the one-to-one ratiowould cause massive unemployment in East Germany, becauseEast German exporters would be unable to sell at that ratio.This, we're told, is because East German workers would be&quot;paid too high a wage.&quot; But these are textbooks assertionsthat have validity only in countries where workers aredebtors as well as creditors.   In East Germany, workers have no debts in East Germanmarks to speak of. Thus, they could readily readjust theirwages downward. They would not have to worry aboutliquidating debts while earning a nominally lower wage. Theywould accept the nominal change, as their real wages would behigher than before. And the cost of capital would have fallendramatically.   The greatest benefit to the unified economy of aone-for-one exchange is that it preserves a pool of capitalin the hands of those most likely to make good use of it --the people who scraped it together bit by bit by the sweat oftheir brows. The quickest way to get East Germany running isby putting liquid assets into their hands, not enriching thestate by having it repudiate its obligations. The accumulatedsavings of the East German workers is the stuff ofenterprise, stuff to be preserved.   ---   Mr. Wanniski is president of Polyconomics Inc., based inMorristown, N.J.</TEXT></DOC>