<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910425-0179</DOCNO><DOCID>910425-0179.</DOCID><HL>   On the Defensive:   Baxter Fails to Quell   Questions On Its Role   In the Israeli Boycott   ---   The Hospital Firm Now Faces   Criminal Probe Into How   It Got Off Arab Blacklist   ---   Jewish Groups Are Furious   ----   By Thomas M. Burton   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   BAX</CO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>ILLINOIS (IL)ISRAEL (ISR)</RE><LP>   DEERFIELD, Ill. -- Confronted with allegations of briberyand illegal actions overseas, Baxter International Inc. lastyear did what most companies do when they find themselves insuch straits: It hired an outside counsel to investigate.   In November, when attorney Stephen Shulman reported hisfindings, the world's largest hospital supplier announced ithad been totally exonerated of the charges, includingallegations that it had used illegal means to get itselftaken off the Arab blacklist of companies that do businesswith Israel.</LP><TEXT>   But then Baxter did something that cast doubt on the wholeaffair. It refused to make the 150-page report available tothe public. The result: Baxter is even more on the defensivethan ever.   Now, the Commerce Department has referred its owninvestigation of the matter to the U.S. Justice Department,which is conducting a criminal investigation into whetherBaxter violated the U.S. law against complying with the Arabboycott -- and paid a bribe to get off the blacklist.   Will Maslow, general counsel of the American JewishCongress, says, &quot;this is the first time that the Departmentof Justice has pursued possible criminal penalties under theanti-boycott law.&quot; The U.S. Attorney's office in Chicago,which is handling the investigation, declines comment.   Baxter Chairman Vernon R. Loucks Jr. says Baxter learned&quot;that the venue of the investigation has shifted fromCommerce to Justice,&quot; but says the company hasn't retained acriminal attorney. &quot;We still are unable to determine thatanything at all was done improperly,&quot; he says.   The Securities and Exchange Commission, meantime, wants toknow if Baxter violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act bybribing Arabs to get off the blacklist. And Jewishorganizations still want Baxter to tell them exactly what itdid to get off the blacklist. &quot;Unless they change, I'll doeverything I can do to make their lives miserable,&quot; vowsRabbi Abraham Cooper of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in LosAngeles. The American Jewish Congress also has blasted thecompany.   The issue drew public attention and intensified governmentscrutiny last year after an article in this newspaper raisedquestions about Baxter's handling of the boycott. Since then,issues have continued to arise about Baxter and the Shulmanreport, including:   -- A 1983 meeting in Paris at which Baxter officialsallegedly arranged to pay a $2.2 million bribe to get off theArab boycott list. Government investigators are looking intowhether the alleged bribe took the form of Baxter waiving adebt due by a company called Saudi Medical Services.   -- A 1988 letter from a Baxter official to the Syrian Armydeclaring that the company has &quot;no present intention to makenew investments in Israel or to sell new technology toIsraeli companies.&quot; The company has repeatedly deniedpromising Arabs that it wouldn't do business with Israel,which is illegal under the anti-boycott law.   -- Questions about why Mr. Shulman, a senior partner atthe law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham andamp; Taft, failed tointerview some key participants in the Baxter affair.   G. Marshall Abbey, Baxter's senior vice president andgeneral counsel who has handled the Arab boycott issue, saysthe company decided against releasing the Shulman reportbecause it contains business secrets and includes informationthat might be embarrassing to some individuals outside thecompany. Why not release the report with those parts editedout? &quot;It would serve no purpose. The people who don't like usnow would say, `Look, you haven't shown us everything,'&quot; Mr.Abbey says.   Baxter has never denied wanting to get off the Arabboycott list to take advantage of lucrative Middle Eastmarkets. It was placed on the list in the first place becauseit owned, since 1971, a plant for synthesizing intravenousfluids in Ashdod, Israel. Baxter has repeatedly said it neverdid anything illegal to accomplish its goal, which it finallyachieved in 1989 after agreeing to build an intravenoussolutions plant in Syria as part of a joint venture with theSyrian Army. The year before, Baxter had sold the facility inIsrael, an event it never publicly announced.   The U.S. anti-boycott law, enacted in 1977, forbidsAmerican companies from participating in any foreign boycottor supplying blacklist officials any information thatdemonstrates cooperation with the boycott. It also would be aviolation of the law if Baxter sold the Israeli plant for thesole purpose of getting off the blacklist. The company saysthat decision was made for unrelated reasons.   Mr. Shulman reviewed the matter for eight months beforesubmitting his conclusions and says that Baxter correctlycharacterized his report as finding the company innocent ofwrongdoing. But he declines to provide details of hisinvestigation and says he doesn't know why the report wasn'treleased. &quot;That was the company's decision,&quot; he says.   Mr. Shulman, who held high-ranking government posts duringthe Kennedy and Johnson administrations, has had close tiesto Baxter officials for nearly 30 years, including Mr. Loucksand Mr. Abbey, and has done legal work for Baxter for almost20 years.   While the Shulman report was available to all of Baxter'sboard members, some only read an executive summary presentedby management. &quot;There are always certain factions that arehoping to stir things up. It seemed to me it's nitpicking,&quot;says one director.   Ralph Falk II, another board member, says &quot;it was prettymuch Marsh Abbey&quot; dealing with the Syrians. He says that Mr.Abbey alone made presentations to the board on the Syriandealings, briefing it &quot;three or four&quot; times over about a yearon how the Syrian plant was coming along. Mr. Falk says hecan't remember if he ever saw the Shulman report and addsthat no board members showed any special interest or concernbecause &quot;the board as a group is pretty high on our seniormanagement.&quot;   One reason the issue won't seem to die has to do with theceaseless energy of one of Mr. Loucks' biggest opponents:Richard Fuisz, a physician and Washington, D.C., businessman.Dr. Fuisz was ousted by Mr. Loucks from his job as chiefexecutive of a Middle East unit of Baxter in 1982 and hasbeen on the warpath against the company ever since.   Most recently, he has provided outsiders with damagingcorrespondence between Baxter and Arab officials, includingletters written by Mr. Abbey. These letters -- on Baxterletterhead, signed by Mr. Abbey and addressed to an officialof the Syrian Army -- raise new questions about Baxter'sforthrightness on the issue because they include detailedinformation about Baxter's sale of its Israeli operations andits previous dealings with Israeli companies, informationthat U.S. companies are, under certain circumstances, barredfrom supplying to boycott officials under U.S. anti-boycottlaw.   Mr. Abbey concedes writing the letters, but says it's amatter of legal opinion whether they prove Baxter violatedany laws. Baxter's defense has been that its communicationswith the Syrian Army were exempt under a provision of theanti-boycott law that allows U.S. companies to shareinformation with their own agents and business partners inthe Mideast.   Still, the conclusion of one of its letters to the SyrianArmy appears to call into question that defense. Baxter saysits officials are &quot;committed to construction in the Arabcountries of factories to manufacture medical supplies andlook forward to your approval to begin those projects.&quot; Theobvious question: Why would Baxter be asking the Syrian Armyfor approval to begin projects in other countries?   Says Mr. Abbey: &quot;I very clearly wanted the Syrians to helpus in getting off the blacklist. . . . I don't know why thatis sinister.&quot;   The alleged 1982 bribe is mentioned, according to courtrecords, in a 1985 wrongful termination suit that Dr. Fuiszfiled against Baxter. Dr. Fuisz contended in court filingsthat Baxter agreed at the meeting in Paris to effectively paySaudi Medical Services $2.2 million to get Baxter off theArab blacklist.   Court documents filed by Dr. Fuisz in the lawsuit infederal district court in New York -- a suit that was latersettled -- say that two now-sealed depositions, as well assome court exhibits, confirm that a bribe was made. Baxterconcedes that it wanted the records sealed, but says theother side did, too.   John Clements, a former comptroller of Baxter's MiddleEast unit who attended parts of the Paris meeting, says healso believes the $2.2 million payment was a bribe. He sayshe concluded this because there was no business reason toreduce Baxter's accounts receivable by $2.2 million. &quot;I'm notwavering on that issue,&quot; says Mr. Clements, who has beenquestioned about the matter by the SEC.   Ghazi Braiche, a former employee of Saudi Medical, saysthe head of the company, Ahmed al-Sanousi, talked aboutfinding a way to get Baxter off the blacklist. Though he sayshis knowledge is secondhand, via Mr. Sanousi and others, Mr.Braiche also says that the $2.2 million transferred at thistime was a bribe connected with getting off the blacklist.Mr. Sanousi says he doesn't recall any of the events.   Mr. Shulman interviewed Mr. Clements, but did not seek tointerview Messrs. Sanousi or Braiche. Mr. Shulman, askedabout this, says, &quot;I feel I interviewed everyone who wasnecessary to do the report.&quot;   Mr. Abbey has come under the most fire for his handling ofthe boycott issue. His dealings in the Middle East were neverreported to the rest of top management in monthly managementmeetings. He was the architect of the Syrian deal andcompleted the negotiations very quietly, with the help ofjust one top aide, John Saboura. Mr. Saboura has since leftthe company and has refused to be interviewed by the CommerceDepartment or this newspaper.   In arranging the Syrian venture, Mr. Abbey made severalpersonal visits to Damascus, on one occasion meeting withGen. Mustafa Tlas, Syria's flamboyant minister of defense.Mr. Abbey stopped by the home of Gen. Tlas, whom theWiesenthal Center describes as a noted anti-Semite who wrotea book suggesting that Jews kill Arabs to obtain blood foruse in making Passover matzoh.   The corporate counsel and Gen. Tlas chatted in thegeneral's study, which was adorned with extensive photos ofAmerican starlets and models, including Brooke Shields. &quot;WhatI really need for my collection,&quot; the general remarked, &quot;isan autographed picture of Joan Collins.&quot; Mr. Abbey arrangedto deliver a signed photo of the star before the Baxter dealwith Syria was consummated.   The Simon Wiesenthal Center has attacked Baxter in newsreleases and articles in the Jewish press for dealing withthe Syrian Army and Gen. Tlas. &quot;To me the Baxter case is socrucial,&quot; says Rabbi Cooper. &quot;The world's largest {medicalsupply} company needs Mustafa Tlas like I need anotheranti-Semite.&quot; Mr. Abbey says his visit was a simple courtesycall to an important government figure.   Baxter is even having trouble giving money away because ofthe flap. The Jewish Federation of Metropolitan Chicago hasbeen hesitating for months to accept a proposed Baxtercontribution of $250,000. Harold Rosen, director ofcommunications for the philanthropic organization, won't saywhy the federation is taking so long to decide whether toaccept the Baxter money. But he says it usually takes&quot;probably not that long&quot; to make a decision, and says he&quot;can't recall any&quot; instances in which the federation hasturned down such offers. Baxter offered the money to set up afund to provide hospital care to Soviet Jewish emigres.   --   Sue Shellenbarger contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>