<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910404-0150</DOCNO><DOCID>910404-0150.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Museum Claims That Miami Persecuted It   ----   By Jose de Cordoba and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   TAXES WNEWS</CO><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><GV>AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD)CONGRESS (CNG)COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)COLORADO (CO)FLORIDA (FL)LOUISIANA (LA)NEW YORK (NY)OHIO (OH)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)SOUTH AMERICA, LATIN AMERICA, CARIBBEAN (SM)TEXAS (TX)</RE><LP>   Proving again that art and politics don't mix well in theexile capital of Miami, a museum of Cuban art has claimed ina suit that the city is persecuting the museum's directorsfor their political views.   The suit against the city follows the unanimous decisionby Miami's commissioners last week not to renew the $1-a-yearlease of the Cuban Museum of Art and Culture. The museum hasbeen embroiled in a bitter controversy since April 1988, whenit exhibited and then sold at a fund-raising auction ahandful of paintings by artists still living in Cuba. ManyCuban-Americans objected to any showcasing of work done inFidel Castro's Cuba.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;The city has been engaged in a pattern of harassmentsince then,&quot; says Maria Elena Prio, a director of the museum,which remains open for the time being. &quot;They have not triedto hide the fact that they are trying to close us downbecause they disagree with our way of thinking.&quot;   Miami City Attorney Jorge Fernandez refused to comment onthe suit, saying that city policy forbade him from discussingmatters under litigation. Members of the five-person CityCommission couldn't be reached for comment or didn't returntelephone calls seeking comment.   The suit marks the latest turn in the museum's three-yearsaga, which has divided Miami's Cuban exile community and hasembarrassed U.S. authorities drawn into the controversy. Themuseum also has been bombed twice by unknown terrorists, andits directors have been excoriated on Spanish-language radiostations.   After the 1988 auction, the city enacted a resolutionrequesting an investigation of the museum by state andfederal authorities and initiated at least three financialaudits. The museum's suit says no irregularities were everfound.   U.S. Customs agents also investigated the museum'sthen-vice president, Ramon Cernuda, who had been the drivingforce behind the controversial exhibition and auction. A yearafter the auction, pistolpacking U.S. Customs agents brokedown the door of Mr. Cernuda's condominium and simultaneouslyraided his office, seizing 219 Cuban paintings.   At the time, U.S. Attorney Dexter Lehtinen accused Mr.Cernuda of being involved in the commercial smuggling ofartwork possibly worth hundreds of thousands of dollars inviolation of the U.S. trade embargo on the island. Mr.Cernuda won a motion to recover the artwork, and JudgeKenneth Ryskamp rebuked the U.S. Attorney's office,questioning its priorities. The embargo on importation ofartwork from Cuba has since been lifted by the U.S. Treasury.   Thereafter, the city began various efforts to evict themuseum, according to the lawsuit, which claims such evictionattempts are aimed at deterring the museum and its directorsfrom exercising their First Amendment rights of political andartistic expression.   &quot;This involves a segment of the community which has beenable to pressure city commissioners into denying FirstAmendment rights. But government officials are supposed tohave backbone,&quot; says Mr. Bruce Rogow, the museum's lawyer whosuccessfully defended black rap group 2 Live Crew onobscenity charges last year.   ---   CENSUS CONCERNS mount as more cities join case alleginginaccurate count.   The case, pending in federal court in Brooklyn, allegesthat an undercounting of the U.S. population last year hitminority communities and urban areas hardest. New York, LosAngeles and other major cities that filed the lawsuit wantthe Census Bureau to make statistical adjustments to accountfor people who were missed. The census numbers are used todivvy up federal aid and to apportion congressional seats.   Peter Zimroth, a lawyer for New York at the firm Arnold andamp;Porter, said that Cleveland, Denver, New Orleans,Philadelphia, San Antonio, Tex., San Francisco, Inglewood,Calif., Oakland, Calif., Pasadena, Calif., and BrowardCounty, Fla., have filed a motion seeking to join the othercities as plaintiffs.   ---   CASE ACCUSING CONGRESSMAN of tax evasion and embezzlementis dropped.   Rep. Floyd Flake (D., N.Y.), pastor of one of the oldestblack churches in New York City, was indicted in August infederal court in Brooklyn. But U.S. Attorney Andrew Maloneydismissed the charges after a U.S. judge rejectedprosecutors' claims that Mr. Flake was illegally paid out ofa sham church account. Charges against Margarett Flake, hiswife, also were dismissed.   Mr. Maloney said the ruling by Judge Eugene H. Nickersonmade it impossible to present to the jury &quot;the heart of thegovernment's case. . . . {The ruling} would have resulted inpresenting the case to the jury on only a fraction of theunreported income charged in the indictment.&quot; The U.S.Attorney's office said it doesn't intend to pursue any othercriminal charges in the case.   The government had claimed that Mr. Flake and his wifeevaded taxes on $141,700 in income from 1983 to 1987,including $75,000 allegedly embezzled from a senior citizenshome built by the Allen A.M.E. Church, where Mr. Flake ispastor. Mr. Flake denied any wrongdoing.   Gustave Newman, an attorney for Mr. Flake, said that themoney paid to the Flakes was taken from &quot;a bona fide churchaccount.&quot; He said the Flakes owed no back taxes on the moneythey received.   ---   RAPE CASE against college social club is settled beforetrial.   Heidi Krizer of New Jersey was a college freshman when sheattended a 1988 party at the Pi Eta Speakers Association, amen's social club at Harvard College in Cambridge, Mass.While at the party, she alleged, she was raped by a guest ofone of the club's members. She sued the club, claiming themembers failed to provide adequate security and soughtdamages for her psychological injuries.   The suit was expected to help define what responsibilitiesmembers of social clubs and fraternities bear for crimes thatoccur at their parties. But shortly before it was scheduledto go to trial before a Boston jury, the case was settled foran undisclosed amount.   Jeffrey A. Newman, a Boston lawyer representing Ms.Krizer, said that between 10 and 15 cases are pending againstfraternities involving alleged rapes at their clubs. Mr.Newman said that the settlement was &quot;substantial.&quot; A lawyerfor Pi Eta couldn't immediately be reached.   A criminal investigation of the alleged assailant is inprogress.   ---   LAWYER ADVERTISING restrictions challenged by threeFlorida attorneys.   In January, Florida adopted a law that banned the use ofdramatizations and client testimonials in broadcastadvertisements by lawyers. The law was promoted by the statebar association as a way to clamp down on ads that it saiddemeaned the profession, encouraged frivolous lawsuits andmisled clients. The law has been upheld by the FloridaSupreme Court.   The first federal challenge to the restrictions was filedin Tallahassee this week. The plaintiffs say the ban violatestheir First Amendment free-speech rights. The lawyers areasking the court to declare the ban unconstitutional and stopthe bar from enforcing it.   ---   ATTORNEY IS ACCUSED of evading taxes on fees from probatecourt.   The federal indictment in Manhattan alleged that New Yorklawyer Vincent J. Catalfo evaded taxes on $770,000 in feeawards by depositing the money in bank accounts under a falseSocial Security number. The indictment said the fees weremainly for Mr. Catalfo's work as a court-appointed guardian,administrator and trustee on more than 70 estate cases.   The indictment also alleged that Mr. Catalfo defrauded a22-year-old man with Down's syndrome in 1988 bymisappropriating $45,000 that had been awarded to the manfrom an estate in probate. The indictment said that Mr.Catalfo's client received none of the money and that Mr.Catalfo then collected an additional $25,000 from the estatefor his work.   Mr. Catalfo, 57 years old, had been reportedly underinvestigation in connection with a wider inquiry involvingthe appointment of guardians and awarding of fees insurrogate, or probate, court in Manhattan.   Kalman Gallop, an attorney for Mr. Catalfo, declined tocomment.   ---   WIRETAPPING CASE brought against Cleveland lawyer indivorce matter.   A Justice Department spokesman, who announced theindictment of William T. Wuliger, said government lawyersbelieve that as much as 75% of all illegal wiretapping occursin domestic-relations disputes. But divorce lawyers saidinstances of such wiretaps are rare, and there have been fewprior indictments.   Mr. Wuliger, 47 years old, represented the husband in a1989 divorce case, according to the Justice Department. Hisclient allegedly taped his wife's telephone calls and gavethe tapes to Mr. Wuliger, who was charged with illegallyusing information from the phone conversations during thecase. The charges carry a maximum possible penalty of 20years in federal prison and a $1 million fine.   Mr. Wuliger's law firm, Wuliger, Fadel andamp; Beyer, referredcalls for comment to another lawyer, who couldn't be reached.   ---   NOTED: Robert E. Hauberg Jr., who spent the past fiveyears with the U.S. Justice Department's Dallas Bank FraudTask Force, will become a partner in Watkins Ludlam andamp; Stennisof Jackson, Miss., Mr. Hauberg's hometown. Mr. Hauberg willrepresent banks, thrifts and their officers, according to JimTohill, managing partner of the 53-lawyer firm. . . . DeputyU.S. Agriculture Secretary Jack Parnell will join the lawfirm of Kahn, Soares andamp; Conway as a government-relationsadviser. Mr. Parnell, a prominent California Republican, hasbeen the No. 2 farm policy maker in the Bush administrationsince April 1989. He will work out of Kahn Soares's officesin Sacramento, Calif., and Washington, advising clients onfarm and trade policy issues.</TEXT></DOC>