<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910114-0155</DOCNO><DOCID>910114-0155.</DOCID><HL>   Feeling the Chill:   Along Its U.S. Border,   Mexico Experiences   North's Economic Ills   ---   Opening Up of the Economy   To Outsiders Makes Cities   Like Juarez Vulnerable   ---   Factory Space Goes Begging   ----   By Matt Moffett   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LATAM C.CMX LABOR</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)BANKS (BNK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   CIUDAD JUAREZ, Mexico -- This border town across from ElPaso, Texas, is the linchpin of Mexico's ambitious drive toopen its economy to the world. And it is feeling a chill fromthe north.   Some 275 U.S. corporations have operations here, includingthe Big Three auto makers and such major companies as GeneralElectric. Exports from factories in Juarez and others alongthe border have grown so much that in some years, mostrecently 1988, they have earned Mexico more hard currencythan oil brought in.</LP><TEXT>   Now, however, the lifeline from the U.S. connects Mexicoto U.S. economic problems. Only four or five new assemblyplants opened in Juarez last year, down from 16 in 1989. Thehelp-wanted section of Juarez's biggest newspaper has thinnedto eight pages from 30 last spring. The city, unable to buildfast enough in the 1980s to accommodate demand, suddenly hasan excess of 1.5 million square feet of manufacturing space.   &quot;This slowdown is simply unheard of in Juarez, and itshows how very sensitive we are to swings in the U.S.economy,&quot; says Andres Ochoa Bunsow, a lawyer in Juarez forthe firm of Baker andamp; McKenzie.   Troubles in the U.S. threaten Mexico's fragile economicrecovery. Four years ago, Mexico scrapped its longstandingpolicy of sheltering its industry in a protected domesticmarket. Under the new program, christened la apertura, or&quot;the opening,&quot; Mexico aimed to attract foreign investment andto export manufactured goods. The outward-looking developmentmodel made 1989 and 1990 the first two years since 1981 inwhich the country's economic growth exceeded growth inpopulation. Now Mexico, dependent as it is on the U.S. fortwo-thirds of its foreign investment and export purchases, isdiscovering that openness has its drawbacks.   &quot;The U.S. slump leaves Mexico vulnerable and not at a goodtime,&quot; says Lorenzo Zambrano, director general of CementosMexicanos, a big cement exporter. Congressional electionsnext August may be a referendum of sorts on the rulingparty's economic policies. The government had hoped toimprove on the roughly 3% economic growth of each of the pasttwo years. &quot;But now we'll probably have to settle for levelgrowth, instead of the 4.5% that we might have had,&quot; says Mr.Zambrano.   So far, effects of the U.S. slump have been cushioned byMexico's $3 billion windfall from higher oil prices. ButMexican officials, fearful that U.S. sluggishness willcontinue to retard Mexican exports, are setting aside about$700 million earned from recent sales of state-ownedenterprises in a contingency fund for hard times. Economistssay Mexico's manufactured exports fall by roughly $600million a year for each one-percentage-point decline in theU.S. gross national product.   It's also clear, though harder to put in numbers, thateconomic problems in the U.S. and other developed countriesare slowing foreign investment in Mexico. Mexico got a record$4.2 billion in commitments last year, but that figure isskewed by relatively liquid investments in the shares ofMexican companies and by the sale of the state telephonemonopoly to a group led by Southwestern Bell Corp. of St.Louis. &quot;Everyone is talking very positively about thepotential of Mexico, but what you don't see much of isdollars actually flowing here in long-term investments,&quot; saysPeter Hutchison, financial director of the Mexicanconglomerate Grupo Alfa.   In some cases, foreign companies have too much to worryabout at home to even think of investing in newly openedsectors of the Mexican economy. Banking is such a case.Mexico's planned privatization of state-controlled bankshasn't attracted the expected U.S. and Japanese interest. Insearch of a foreign partner for a bank takeover, Abaco, a bigMexican brokerage firm, translated its quarterly reports onthe nation's economy into Japanese and shopped them aroundTokyo's giant holding companies. &quot;We found the Japanese aredistracted by their own problems,&quot; says Eduardo Camarena, anAbaco executive. &quot;And the Americans also have big headaches.&quot;   The result: The bank sell-off of the government's 66%stake in 18 banks may not begin until spring, months laterthan planned. And analysts say that government proceeds fromthe move could be 25% below the original asking price of $6billion.   The direct economic effects on Mexico of economic downturnin the U.S. are bad enough. But what could be even worse isthe slump's impact on debate in Washington over a proposedbilateral free-trade pact. President Carlos Salinas deGortari, the architect of la apertura, put forward thefree-trade plan a year ago, hoping to ensure Mexico's accessto U.S. markets, increase foreign investment in Mexico andcement the partnership between U.S. capital and Mexicanlabor. Now Mexican officials fear there could be moresympathy in Washington for union claims that the pact willcost American jobs.   &quot;It would be an error of political vision,&quot; PresidentSalinas said in a recent interview, &quot;that, for a transitorycircumstance, there would be left over this protectionistattitude that creates obstacles to a free-trade agreement.&quot;But the plan's critics in the U.S. Congress, led by Rep.Donald Pease, a Democrat from Ohio's manufacturing belt, arealready trying to derail free trade by attacking Mexico'srecord on social issues. In December, 13 of the 36 members ofthe House Ways and Means Committee signed a letter toPresident Bush demanding that trade discussions also take upthe Mexico's domestic policies on democracy, drug traffickingand the environment. That committee, along with the SenateFinance Committee, is soon to begin discussions on whether toauthorize negotiations.   Cementos Mexicanos, one of the first Mexican manufacturersto export aggressively, knows that political as well aseconomic obstacles arise when the U.S. economy sours. Cemexwas so ambitious that in 1989 it spent $900 million toacquire a pair of Mexican and U.S. competitors.   But shortly thereafter the U.S. construction industry, abellwether of the business cycle, began to falter. &quot;We couldsee a downturn as far back as late 1989 on the East Coast,&quot;says Mr. Zambrano. At the same time, U.S. cement makers,scrambling to preserve their share of a shrinking market,brought an anti-dumping suit that claimed Cemex had an unfairprice advantage. As a result, Cemex was slapped with stiffnew duties on exports to the U.S.   Now Cemex has the worst of both worlds. It is burdenedwith the heavy debt it took on to expand. It also is beingforced to redirect exports of its weighty products to Asiaand Europe, far from their natural market to the north.   Cemex and other Mexican companies can't even draw muchconsolation from their relatively robust domestic market.U.S. companies encountering slack demand at home and in majormarkets such as Canada and England are likely to redirectmore of their output toward the growing market south of theborder. &quot;Because of the relative size of the markets, a U.S.company would only have to divert 10% of its production southto flood the Mexican market,&quot; says Alfa's Mr. Hutchison.   U.S. companies' piggybacking on the growing Mexicaneconomy wasn't what Mr. Salinas had in mind when he beganremaking his nation's industrial policy. For four decadesafter World War II, Mexican industry was protected behind athicket of import permits and sky-high tariffs. The carefullynurtured industrial plant was the engine for an era ofeconomic growth. But by the 1980s, the lack of competitionhad made Mexican businesses soft and inefficient. In 1986 theHarvard-trained Mr. Salinas, who was budget minister at thetime, began cutting trade barriers and stumping forlong-scorned foreign investment.   Hundreds of Mexican businesses faltered in the morecompetitive environment. But enough thrived that, in justfour years, non-oil exports grew to 65% of the total, from35%.   The most impressive growth in both foreign investment andexports was generated by the border plants, or maquiladoras.Under the maquiladora program, introduced in 1965, componentsare shipped duty-free into Mexico, with U.S. duties leviedonly on the value added to finished goods. Since 1986, plantsand workers have doubled in number to 1,800 and 460,000,respectively. The plants now provide about a fifth of allmanufacturing jobs in Mexico.   &quot;These plants have turned border towns into boom towns,&quot;says Ernesto Goeldner, of Juarez's Grupo Bermudez, which runsan industrial park with 35,000 workers. Even thoughunderemployed Mexicans flocked to the border from all cornersof the country, competition for labor among the maquiladoraswas so fierce that turnover sometimes reached 20% a month.   But as the segment of the Mexican economy most closelylinked to el norte, the maquiladora program has been thesector most immediately affected by the U.S. downturn. Newplants grew by just 6% in 1990, compared with the average 23%annual growth since 1986, according to Ciemex-Wefa, aneconomic consulting firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.   Suddenly, the chaotic labor market along the border hasquieted down. &quot;You no longer have to shanghai kids off thestreet,&quot; says Don Nibbe, editor of the trade magazine TwinPlant News. Aureliano Gonzalez Baz, an attorney andconsultant, says one client's turnover has declined by 92% ina matter of months.   Now a new labor problem is emerging. &quot;For the first timein many years, we're having to teach people how to lay offworkers,&quot; says Raul Jaquez, a consultant who has assisted inthe closing of three plants.   Genesco Inc., a Nashville, Tenn., shoe and apparel maker,eight weeks ago closed a plant that made uppers for boots ina border town called Reynosa. Genesco cited &quot;increasedconsumer caution due to the uncertain and slowing U.S.economy.&quot;   Maquiladoras depending on a U.S. &quot;twin plant&quot; areespecially hard pressed. Ansell International, a Columbus,Ohio., rubber-products maker (which in turn is a unit of anAustralian company), recently said it was shuttering a plantin Juarez that packed surgical gloves, along with one inArizona that made them. Citing an &quot;extremely price-sensitive&quot;business climate, the company said it was transferring bothoperations to Southeast Asia.   Other companies are shelving growth plans. RCA Corp.,which was supposed to have begun expanding an electronicsplant in Juarez this month, has put that off until May atbest.   Even though U.S. companies aren't sparing the maquiladorasin their retrenchment, Mr. Gonzalez Baz, the consultant, saysthe U.S. economic slump may ultimately prove beneficial forthe border plants. He thinks U.S. companies will be compelledto take bolder steps to stay competitive, including closingU.S. operations and moving them to lower-cost Mexico.   That is what R.G. Barry Corp., a Pickerington, Ohio, makerof footwear, announced in December it would do. Acknowledgingthat the sluggish economy had &quot;forced us to re-evaluate ourentire business,&quot; Barry said it is shutting down a plant inNorth Carolina and transferring the jobs to Mexico.   Also Ford Motor Co. is expected to announce a major newMexican investment today.   But most analysts think the border has more to lose fromthe U.S. slump than it has to gain. In the worst case of adeep and protracted U.S. recession, up to 20% of maquiladoraworkers could lose their jobs, according to a study byMexico's Colegio de la Frontera Norte.   Times are tough enough already for many companies inJuarez, a fast-growing city of one million whose economydepends almost solely on maquiladoras. Local garment-makersthat supply smocks to the maquiladoras are being forced tooverhaul their apertura-oriented marketing strategy. SaysLuis Colorbio, a business leader: &quot;We're putting aside ourEnglish dictionaries and trying to sell our product incentral Mexico.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>