<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900924-0175</DOCNO><DOCID>900924-0175.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   A General's Fall Raises Troubling Questions   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>09/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   Not many tears have been shed over the firing last week ofGen. Michael J. Dugan, U.S. Air Force chief of staff. Indeed,Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, who wielded the ax, hasbeen praised widely in the press for reasserting theprinciple that the U.S. military is under civilian control.It had been a long time, 41 years, since a defense secretaryhad publicly fired one of the Joint Chiefs. The prevailingsentiment seems to be that maybe it should happen more often.   There is much indeed to be said for high-level firings inthe face of crisis, although Winston Churchill at the outsetof World War II and Abraham Lincoln during the U.S. Civil Warsacked reluctant generals, not overeager ones. Gen. Dugan'soffense was excessive shooting off of the mouth. Whether thatis sufficient cause for firing in this age of garrulousofficialdom might be disputed. But a case can be made on thebasis of the sorts of things the general was saying to thepress. Not only might his bellicose rhetoric have spookedsome U.S. allies in the Persian Gulf, but it raised questionsabout whether the head of the U.S. Air Force reallyunderstood the uses of the modern weapons the U.S. militaryhas at its command.</LP><TEXT>   The general offended his boss by telling reporters that&quot;downtown Baghdad&quot; would be a prime Air Force target in caseof hostilities. Whatever the general was trying to say, hisremarks were interpreted to mean that the Air Force wasconsidering something equivalent to a World War II-styleassault on a population center. If that is what he meant, itraises questions not only about his ability as a diplomat butas a military strategist as well.   Clearly, the first objective of any allied strike shouldbe to destroy, as quickly and thoroughly as possible, Iraq'swar-fighting capacity. Downtown Baghdad, unless Saddamhimself could be effectively targeted, is hardly the placefor that. The first objective would be Saddam's anti-aircraftmissiles and his combat aircraft. Control of the air, onceachieved, would be decisive to the final outcome, becausetanks and other ground forces then would become powerless todefend themselves against air attack.   The weapons deployed by the U.S. and its more-advancedallies for this purpose are called &quot;smart&quot; weapons. Usingadvanced electronic guidance, they can hit and blow up evenrelatively small targets from many miles away. The cruisemissiles on the battleship Wisconsin, now deployed in thePersian Gulf, are such weapons. So are HARM air-to-groundmissiles, used mainly to home in on air defense radars anddestroy them. F-117A stealth fighters, capable of evadingenemy radar for night attacks on major targets, have beendeployed in the region. Other attack planes are equipped fornight attacks with LANTIRN navigation and targeting pods.   These and a wide array of other smart weapons are designedto destroy very specific targets, such as radars, tanks andother aircraft. Those targets can be pinpointed by U.S.satellites. Because of their accuracy, the weapons minimizecivilian casualties. When the head of the Air Force talked ofmassive bombing he may have been merely trying to frightenSaddam. But given the kind of brute Saddam is, he probablywould far rather lose civilians than MiG-29s.   A seeming fixation on old-fashioned methods was the sourceof a major embarrassment during an Air Force sally againstManuel Noriega's Panamanian Defense Forces some months back.Two F-117s, the most-advanced U.S. fighters, were assigned tocreate diversionary explosions near a PDF barracks outsidePanama City. But instead of using the weapons they aredesigned to employ, they simply dropped two World War II ironbombs. One missed its target by 480 feet, a long distanceconsidering the accuracy these airplanes are meant toachieve. Secretary Cheney, who had boasted of the plane'saccuracy, was furious when he learned of the miss.   Results of NATO exercises indicate that U.S. jet pilotsare among the best in the world, but there is less certaintyabout the quality of U.S. military planning. One source ofuncertainty is that old bugaboo, interservice rivalry and, insome cases, intraservice rivalry. A lack of adequatecoordination among the services played a role in the failureof the Desert One hostage rescue attempt during the Carteradministration. A series of fiascoes in Lebanon in 1983 wasblamed on an impossibly convoluted chain of command fromWashington to Beirut, not to mention some foolish demandsfrom the State Department that the U.S. forces not seem toowarlike, even though they were clearly in a war zone.   One has reason to wonder how well coordinated the presentPersian Gulf operation is. If there aren't enough problemsgetting the U.S. services to pull together, how about theproblems of coordinating the forces of 10 countries? Gen. H.Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of U.S. forces, seems to befocusing mainly on getting enough tanks into the area, andperhaps that is prudent. But if air superiority is achievedquickly, will a tank war really be necessary? The army alsohas tank killers, Apache helicopter gunships. One wonderswhether some of the strategy here is not strategy at all, butan attempt to give every service unit a piece of the action.It's a bit like running a war the way Congress runs thePentagon, making sure everyone gets his share.   There also is the question of which department of theadministration is running this operation. The StateDepartment's performance in Lebanon in 1983 and the shockingevidence that it might have caused Saddam to think he had agreen light cast doubt on its reliability in dealing withhard cases. Was Gen. Dugan fired because he didn't knowenough about Navy missiles or because he offended StateDepartment types who still think that Saddam is susceptibleto adroit diplomacy? The fact that the general was chastisedfor sounding too aggressive might suggest the latter.   Finally, there is the question of why a member of theJoint Chiefs of Staff was so out of touch with policy. Hadthe chiefs not had any discussions with Mr. Cheney and thepresident about what form an attack on Saddam would take? Ifthe general was simply blowing diversionary smoke, presumablyhe would not have been fired. But the suggestion is that hedidn't know he wasn't supposed to threaten a bombing ofdowntown Baghdad, or, worse, didn't have a very clear idea ofexactly what the Air Force role in a possible attack wouldbe.   That seems a bit too far-fetched to believe and yet thefact remains that the general was fired for being out of stepwith policy, whatever that policy might be. So a questionarises about whether that was the fault of the general, whopresumably had some abilities worthy of the top job in theAir Force, or the fault of top policy makers? In a vastenterprise such as the U.S. government, one can never besure.</TEXT></DOC>