<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900716-0093</DOCNO><DOCID>900716-0093.</DOCID><HL>   Philippine Economy Is at a Crisis Stage   ---   Aquino's Rule Faces   Ambitious Recovery Agenda   ----   By Steven Jones   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS (BNK)</IN><LP>   MANILA -- The ailing Philippine economy is at a criticaljuncture, with further deterioration possible. The governmenthas begun to address the problem with an ambitious package ofeconomic and fiscal reforms, but few analysts are betting ona rapid recovery.   Growth is slowing as once-robust consumer spending tapersoff. Budget and trade deficits are widening. Inflation andinterest rates remain stubbornly high. Power outages continueto bedevil manufacturers.</LP><TEXT>   Foreign investors and tourists, scared away by the bloodyDecember 1989 coup attempt, have yet to return in largenumbers. The shellshocked stock market dives with every rumorof a new coup.   There appears to be no end to the rumors. Worries persistthat dissident soldiers are regrouping for another armedeffort to topple the government of President Corazon Aquino.The December insurrection was the sixth and bloodiest attemptto overthrow Mrs. Aquino, who came to power in 1986 afterPresident Ferdinand Marcos was ousted by a militaryrebellion.   Communist guerrillas, meanwhile, who oppose the renewal ofleases on U.S. military bases, continue to threaten violenceagainst U.S. military personnel and others alleged to beinvolved in counterinsurgency activities. Negotiations withWashington on a new bases agreement are scheduled to resumein August.   At the same time, Mrs. Aquino's administrationincreasingly is viewed as being at odds with itself as wellas with Congress. Early posturing for the 1992 presidentialelection threatens to slow the already snail-pacedlegislative process and derail administration programs aimedat raising the living standards of the nation's 62 millionpeople, most of whom are poor.   Whether the teetering economy steadies or starts slidingdepends foremost on the avoidance of another coup attempt orother serious political dislocations. Whether the economyrebounds depends largely on the Aquino administration'sability to deliver recently promised reforms aimed at cuttingthe yawning budget deficit, streamlining trade and industrypolicies, and bringing back foreign investors.   Economists and businessmen say Mrs. Aquino's time framefor action is tightening. Election spending starting in 1991could give the economy an illusory fillip and providepoliticians with an excuse to further postpone needed fiscalreforms.   &quot;The big question is whether the economy will beoutward-looking or inward-looking. The momentum is with theoutward-looking guys,&quot; says a foreign economist. &quot;But thingshave to get done before the actual start of campaigning inlate 1991,&quot; the economist warns.   Indeed, if Mrs. Aquino fails to act decisively and soon,businessmen and economists say she will endanger not only herreform package, but also her residual good will among thebusiness community that backed her against Mr. Marcos. &quot;Shehas maybe six months, or she will lose her remaining supportamong businessmen,&quot; says a prominent manufacturer.   Late last month, Finance Secretary Jesus Estanislaoannounced -- and the cabinet approved -- broad reforms thathe said address &quot;all the major problems of the economy.&quot; Thepackage aims to lower interest rates, curtail protectionism,increase exports and raise government revenue through tax andtariff reform.   Despite the cabinet's endorsement of the package, majorturf battles are expected to be fought between technocrats inthe Finance Department and protectionists in the Departmentof Trade and Industry. Influential industrialists already arebeginning to lobby against certain reforms. The industrialsector is based on import-substitution manufacturing that,despite some previous liberalization moves, remains largelyprotected from overseas competition.   Indeed, the Harvard-trained Mr. Estanislao predicted toughtimes ahead for many protected industries as tariff ratesdrop. He also said that the package likely would lead tohigher inflation in the short term-averaging 13.5% on anannualized basis for the next six months, compared with thegovernment target of 12%.   &quot;When you go through a period of reform, there will besome bitter pills to swallow,&quot; Mr. Estanislao said. &quot;But weare doing our best to put in some sweetness.&quot; The long-termeffect, he said, will be a trade and investment regime thatfavors the consumer.   Mr. Estanislao, who was named finance secretary in acabinet shuffle after December's coup attempt, is winninghigh marks from many businessmen and economists for his toughstand on deregulation and reform. His intentions also arewelcome news to the International Monetary Fund, foreignbanks and other lending institutions that are members of thePhilippine debt-rescheduling agreement reached last year. Thecountry's total foreign debt is currently about $28 billion.   A review team from the IMF has been in Manila for the pastweek, measuring the country's economic performance andpolicies against goals set in the 1989 debt-reschedulingagreement. The issuance of IMF credits to the Philippinesdepends on the country meeting the performance goals atregular intervals.   Although the December coup attempt has played havoc withcertain of the country's indicators, especially the moneysupply, private economists and diplomats say the IMF's mainconcern is the widening budget deficit, which is blamed forfueling high interest rates and inflation.   At the current rate of spending, and without additionalrevenue, the budget deficit for 1990 could hit 65 billionpesos ($2.86 billion), more than double the 33 billion-pesotarget in the agreement with the IMF. Most of the fundsneeded to cover the budget gap to date are being raisedlocally through Treasury bills, which are currently carryinginterest rates of about 24%.   &quot;The underlying problem is the size of the fiscal deficitthey are trying to fund,&quot; says a Philippine economist.Political risk, of course, compounds the interest-rateequation.   Bank-lending rates are now ranging from 25% to 27%,presenting a major impediment to business expansion and newinvestment. &quot;With 25% rates, who can afford to borrow andbuy, and who can afford to build?&quot; asks Rafael Buenaventura,president and chief executive officer of PhilippineCommercial International Bank.   Because almost 40% of the budget goes to foreign-debtpayments, there is little room for budget cutting. Buteconomists and businessmen say the government could make moreefficient use of the money it spends.   It is revenue-raising measures that Mr. Estanislao istargeting, though it will be difficult for him to find enoughnew money to sharply narrow the budget gap this year.Congress has already approved an increase in the so-calledsin taxes on alcoholic beverages and cigarettes that isexpected to bring in an additional 4.8 billion pesos a year.   A streamlining of the tariff system and a general loweringof rates is expected to raise revenue collected on imports,half of which are now estimated to slip through withoutpayment of tariffs or other charges. The government also isexpected to announce soon an expansion of its program forpre-shipment inspection of imports that is now conducted bythe Swiss firm Societe Generale de Surveillance S.A., knownas SGS.   The Finance Department and the Central Bank of thePhilippines also plan to reduce bank costs as a way oflowering interest rates. Bankers expect that a tax on abank's gross receipts and a withholding tax on interestincome will be abolished or reduced. They also expect reserverequirements to be lowered.   Mr. Estanislao would like to abolish a costlygasoline-price subsidy, but this is a politically sensitiveissue and appears unlikely this year. The December coupattempt followed a round of fuel-price increases.   Whatever the final makeup of Mr. Estanislao's reformpackage, economists and businessmen expect that this year andnext will be difficult ones for the economy. The outlookbeyond 1992 may well depend on who follows Mrs. Aquino aspresident -- and the chances of Mrs. Aquino running againcan't entirely be discounted.</TEXT></DOC>