<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910116-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>910116-0005.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Libel Suit Over Letter to Editor Dismissed   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   RAD VIA</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)DRUG-BASED RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS, PHARMACIES (RTD)STOCK AND BOND REGISTRATIONS, PRICINGS (REG)</IN><LP>   New York's highest court dismissed a libel suit concerninga letter to the editor of a scientific journal, declaringthat the state's constitution provides broad protection forstatements of opinion.   The suit filed by Immuno AG had been sent back to the NewYork Court of Appeals by the U.S. Supreme Court to bereconsidered in light of the high court's recent ruling inMilkovich vs. Lorain Journal Co.</LP><TEXT>   In Milkovich, the Supreme Court ruled that the FirstAmendment of the U.S. Constitution offers no special immunityagainst libel suits based on expressions of opinion. But thatruling didn't prevent individual state courts from decidingthat their own state constitutions offer such immunity.   The Immuno case arose from a letter published in theDecember 1983 issue of the Journal of Medical Primatologythat criticized a plan by the company to set up a facility inSierra Leone for hepatitis research using chimpanzees. Theletter was written by Shirley McGreal, head of theInternational Primate Protection League, an organizationconcerned with the welfare of primates. Immuno, amultinational concern based in Vienna that manufacturesproducts derived from blood plasma, alleged that the letterwas false and defamatory.   In its decision, the New York appeals panel ruled thatImmuno had failed to demonstrate that the facts underlyingthe opinions in the letter were false. Therefore, the courtruled, the letter was entitled to protection under the FirstAmendment, even as interpreted in the Milkovich opinion. Whenit comes to purported statements of fact, truth is anabsolute defense in defamation actions, libel lawyers said.   But the state court went further, finding that the NewYork state constitution provided independent grounds todismiss the case. The panel said that it considered the stateconstitutional issues because of ambiguities about the scopeof the Milkovich decision and because of the state's statusas the home to many of the nation's media companies. In sodoing, the appeals panel determined that the stateconstitution provides protections that go well beyond thoseof the U.S. Constitution.   By ruling that independent grounds exist under the stateconstitution to dismiss the case, the appeals panel seems tohave precluded the U.S. Supreme Court from reviewing the caseagain, said media defense lawyers. The New York Court ofAppeals is the final arbiter of issues concerning the stateconstitution.   Raymond S. Fersko, a New York attorney for Immuno, said hewould seek review by the U.S. Supreme Court despite theobstacles presented by the appeals panel's opinion. &quot;It iswrong to insulate a case that deals with federal questionsfrom review by the U.S. Supreme Court,&quot; Mr. Fersko said.   The case is particularly important because the New Yorkcourt is influential in libel law and its decision couldaffect how other states resolve the issue, said Philip Byler,a New York attorney for Jan Moor-Jankowski, co-founder andeditor of the publication.   Despite the ruling, Mr. Moor-Jankowski said he isconsidering abolishing the letters to the editor section ofhis journal. &quot;I do not want to have to judge whether topublish a letter to the editor by asking myself whether I canbe sued,&quot; he said.   ---   RITE AID settles suit against former prosecution witness.   The drugstore chain, based in Harrisburg, Pa., dropped itsdefamation case against an Ohio Pharmacy Board member whoalleged in a criminal case that company president Martin L.Grass offered him a bribe to resign his post. In exchange,the witness, Melvin T. Wilczynski, signed a written apologyto Mr. Grass &quot;for any damage, inconvenience or embarrassmentthat I may have caused you. . . .&quot; Rite Aid Corp., thenation's largest drugstore chain, pursued the civil caseafter state bribery charges against the company and Mr. Grasswere dismissed by a Cleveland judge in July, following atwo-week trial. The judge found the evidence in the case tooweak to overcome Rite Aid's defense that its dealings withMr. Wilczynski could plausibly be construed as legitimate.   Mr. Wilczynski alleged that Mr. Grass offered him cash,health benefits and a company car if he resigned from thestate pharmacy board, which licenses and regulates drugstoresin Ohio. Rite Aid operates 250 stores in the state and wasallegedly trying to pack the board.   In his apology, Mr. Wilczynski said he was under a&quot;mistaken impression&quot; regarding any alleged bribes andsuggested that he was &quot;following directions&quot; from thePharmacy Board and law enforcement officials when he made theallegations. Rite Aid said it pursued the civil suit to clearits reputation and &quot;establish the facts.&quot;   But in an interview, Mr. Wilczynski's Cleveland attorneyThomas Schrader said Rite Aid's lawyers drafted the letterand Mr. Wilczynski signed it because &quot;of practicalconsiderations.&quot;   &quot;He couldn't afford to take on Rite Aid and Jones Day,&quot;Mr. Schrader said, referring to Rite Aid's lawyers at theCleveland firm of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue.   Mr. Grass could not be reached for comment, but hisfather, Alex Grass, the company's chairman and chiefexecutive, said Rite Aid considered the settlement &quot;a totaland complete victory.&quot;   In exchange for Rite Aid's dropping its civil suit, thesettlement requires Mr. Wilczynski to drop his counterclaimseeking $33,249 under a severance agreement he had with LaneDrug Co., which Rite Aid acquired in early 1988. Mr.Wilczynski also agreed to pay court costs.   ---   SHOWTIME TO PAY musicians $4.7 million, settling suit overfees for movies.   The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publisherssued Showtime in 1985 for music fees for movies shown on thepay-cable channel from 1982 to 1984. Although the Viacom Inc.unit and Ascap later adopted a rate-setting agreement, itwasn't retroactive. Ascap represents its 45,000 members incollecting fees for performances of their musical works.   Kenneth Steinthal, an attorney for Showtime, said thepayment works out to about 15 cents a subscriber, the sameamount the company currently pays Ascap. Bernard Korman,general counsel for Ascap, said the per-subscriber cost ofthe settlement could be valued at a higher level, dependingon how it is calculated.   Ascap and another performance-rights licensing group,Broadcast Music Inc., have stepped up their efforts tocollect more money for the music heard on cable television.Although large cable companies have music-rights agreements,many cable channels don't.   Under the settlement, approved by federal Judge CharlesTenney in Manhattan, Showtime will pay the $4.7 million atthe end of this year, and Ascap will distribute the money toits members.   ---   CHILDREN MUST RECEIVE life-saving medical treatment, statecourt rules.   The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court said that achild's right to live transcends the parents' right topractice a religion that may disapprove of the medical care.In a separate opinion, the court ruled that adults do havethe right to refuse medical treatment for religious reasons.   The decisions bring Massachusetts in step with many otherstate's courts.   &quot;The freedom to {religious} beliefs is unrestricted,&quot; saidJohn Kiernan, an attorney at the Boston firm Murphey, DeMarcoandamp; O'Neill. &quot;But, the states are saying, the freedom topractice whatever the beliefs entail is restricted when itcomes to a child's welfare.&quot; Mr. Kiernan, who was a specialprosecutor on a separate Massachusetts case earlier thisyear, called the decision &quot;a great victory for children.&quot;   Both of the Massachusetts rulings concerned Jehovah'sWitnesses who believe that receiving blood transfusions willprohibit people from being resurrected after death.</TEXT></DOC>