<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900925-0079</DOCNO><DOCID>900925-0079.</DOCID><HL>   Chase Manhattan Cuts Dividend, Staff   Presaging More Bad News in Banking   ----   By Fred R. Bleakley   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   CMB BKB CHL MHC CCI BT BK CBK</CO><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)BANKS (BNK)DIVIDENDS (DIV)EASTERN U.S. BANKS (BAE)</IN><LP>   NEW YORK -- For some big investors in the stock of ChaseManhattan Corp. the good old days were a week before lastwhen the giant bank holding company assured them the dividendwas safe.   It wasn't. On Friday, breaking a hallowed tradition amongNew York City money-center banks, Chase sharply cut itsdividend. For the third quarter, shareholders will receiveonly 30 cents a share instead of the usual payout of 62cents. The action stemmed from Chase's decision to set asidein the current quarter more than $650 million as additionalreserves against potential losses on domestic loans, mostlyin real estate. The company also decided to reduce its staffby 5,000 employees.</LP><TEXT>   Chase's decision to cut the dividend came only lastTuesday, after new projections on the performance of thebanking company's loan portfolio. Richard Boyle, a Chase vicechairman and the bank's senior credit officer, laid out thecase for the $650 million reserve at a meeting with thecompany's highest executives in the early afternoon on the17th floor at Chase Manhattan Plaza near Wall Street.   Chase's decisions seem to presage additional bad news --but not disaster -- for the nation's banking system.Increases in loan-loss reserves by other banks were seenprobable in light of Chase's.   &quot;This will certainly pave the way for other banks to getaggressive with real estate by the end of the year,&quot; saidJames McDermott, head of research at Keefe, Bruyette andamp; Woods,a New York investment banking firm. He and others noted thatregulators would welcome dividend cuts, and are not onlyconcerned about falling real estate prices but also areurging banks to strengthen their capital structure. Oneanalyst said he would not be surprised to see another moneycenter bank cut its dividend by year's end and two or threedo so next year.   Securities analysts and shareholders were surprised by thesize of Chase's retrenchment. Both the increase in reservesand the reduction in staff were twice what had been expected.Chase's stock, already trading at only a third of its 52-weekhigh, fell by $1 a share to close at $12.75 in New York StockExchange composite trading. Share prices on other big NewYork banks also fell. The group as a whole lost about $1billion, or about 5%, of its market value, in Friday'strading.   Other banks also shrank their dividend payouts Friday ormay do so in coming months. Midlantic Banks, one of NewJersey's largest, cut its dividend; Southeast Bancorp, aFlorida giant, eliminated its dividend entirely. Analystsexpect the Bank of Boston to reduce or eliminate the dividendThursday; the bank declined to comment. Some other banks inthe Northeast and an increasing number in the Southeast areconsidered candidates for dividend cuts and increases inloan-loss reserves.   Tempted by huge fees and fat interest rates, commercialbanks in the 1980s aggressively increased their lending oncommercial real estate. Now they are paying the price as thereal-estate market deteriorates in one state after another.   &quot;This reflects the kind of time we are in,&quot; said Arthur F.Ryan, the driving force, Chase insiders say, behind the toughaction. He will become president and chief operating officerand Thomas G. Labrecque will become chairman and chiefexecutive officer next month. Willard C. Butcher, now chiefexecutive, is retiring a year ahead of schedule.   As for the New York money-center banks, Chase isn't theweakest, according to a banking executive who said he wastold so last Friday morning by a top official at the New YorkFederal Reserve Bank. The Fed official was said to besurprised that it was Chase and not another bank getting somuch negative attention in the stock market. He didn't namethe other bank or cite his criteria for weakness, the bankingexecutive said.   Securities analysts say they are hardpressed to figure outwhich, if any, of the big New York banks might need moreattention. They say exclusive of Third World debt, ChemicalBanking Corp.'s Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanoveralready have loan-loss reserves as high, as a percentage ofassets, as Chase's new level. Moreover, both banks havereduced their staffs by thousands in the past few years,while Chase is only now adopting such belt-tightening inearnest.   A $700 million increase in Citicorp's loan-loss reserveswould raise its level to Chase's 1.8% of assets. But Citibankhardly seems a candidate for such a large increase because ofits conservatism. It has customarily written off problemloans earlier than other New York banks. Hence its remainingloans seem &quot;cleaner,&quot; in banking parlance, and less likely tosour.   For now, Citicorp believes its level of caution is aboutright. &quot;No one around here is talking about a dividend cut,&quot;said Michael A. Callen, group executive in charge ofCitibank's wholesale banking division for the U.S. and therest of the developed world. He added: &quot;I don't think we willhave change in the pattern of reserving and write-offs that'sin place; I think we've got a hold on it.&quot;   A Comptroller of the Currency examination of Citibank'sloans is under way. Mr. McDermott said he anticipates nosurprises, &quot;though that risk is present.&quot; A number of banksin the Northeast have been forced to increase reserves afterexaminers found loans they considered risky.   Rather than take a big one-time hit like Chase is taking,Citicorp is spreading the adjustments to its books over time.Reserves and write-offs in the first two quarters wereincreased at the rate of about $600 million a year, a trendMr. Callen sees continuing because, he said, &quot;I don't think1990 will see the end of this.&quot;   To reflect the downturn in the corporate banking business,his division began &quot;right-sizing,&quot; as he put it, two monthsago. That, he said, is aimed at reducing the division's $2.5billion annual expense budget by $250 million to $300 milliona year. Mr. Callen said he could not estimate how many of the15,000 jobs on the payroll would be eliminated.   After Friday's stock-price decline of 87.5 cents a shareto $15.75, Citicorp's shares yield more than 11%, not aslofty as Chemical's 16% yield or Manufacturers Hanover's14.26%. Higher yields are considered less secure. &quot;A numberof the New York banks are trading down as if investors expectthe dividends to be cut,&quot; said Thomas Hanley, an analyst forSalomon Brothers. Chase shares, which had been yielding morethan 17%, will yield 9.41% at the new dividend rate based onFriday's closing stock price.   Executives of other banks were quick to point to thedifferences between their institutions and Chase. JohnMcGillicuddy, chairman of Manufacturers Hanover, said hisbank has one-fifth the real estate exposure of Chase. &quot;Wesure as heck don't see anything down the road to change thedividend,&quot; he said. &quot;It's hard for me to figure why our stockis getting hammered.&quot; His bank declared its normal dividendlast week.   Loans to finance highly leveraged corporate transactionscould explain the market's concern. Investors fear theseloans will create big new problems. Bankers Trust New YorkCorp. also has a large exposure in that sector. But investorsmay be overconcerned. Bank lenders usually take precedenceeven over bondholders in corporate defaults, and are evenbetter protected by collateral than they are in real estatelending. &quot;It would take an Apocalypse Now to burn into that{protection}&quot; said Mr. McDermott.   Even so far as real estate is concerned, to assume thatall big banks are in the same boat as Chase involves &quot;adanger in extrapolating,&quot; said J. Carter Bacot, chairman ofThe Bank of New York Corp. Its dividend yield is 10.34%, andMr. Bacot said the dividend is &quot;well-covered&quot; by earnings.Chase's wasn't, because of large additions to reserves overmuch of the past year.   At Chicago's Continental Illinois Bank andamp; Trust Co., withfewer than half the 13,000 employees it had in 1984 when itwent bankrupt, Thomas Theobald, chairman, said staff cutbackslike Chase's will become more widespread in banking becauseof overcapacity. In the second quarter his bank announced a12% cut in payroll to 5,700 employees. As for the need to cutContinental's dividend, now at a rate yielding 11.27%, hesaid, &quot;We have no reason to believe that's a necesssity.&quot;Charles Sanford, chairman of Bankers Trust Co., New York,said he felt his bank's reserves were &quot;adequate, and I don'tsee anything wrong with our dividend, which we declared lastweek.&quot; Thanks to record profit in the first half, BankersTrust's stock has held up better than most banks and nowyields a relatively modest 6.8%.   For Chase Manhattan, Friday's lengthy news announcementwas humbling. Besides cutting the dividend, the bank isshrinking its presence in world banking, a presence that setformer Chase chairman David Rockefeller as an internationalbanking figure and which Mr. Butcher remained loyal to beyondits economic justification. Citibank now remains the onlyU.S. bank committed to global banking on a large scale.   Roughly 1,600 of Chase's 5,000-person payroll cut willcome from overseas, mainly Brazil, and from convertingfull-service branches in Europe to representative offices. Ofthe other staff cuts, 1,600 people in the U.S., mostly NewYork, opted for voluntary retirement and left last week. Theremaining 1,800 cuts also will be in the U.S., again mostlyNew York, where employees will be let go or be part of a solddivision. Prior to the reduction, Chase had 41,000 employees.   Despite the cutbacks, Chase remains a U.S. powerhouse. Italso keeps a foot, at least, in nearly every major city inthe developed world. And most important, analysts say, itisn't a critically troubled bank. If anything, its ability totake such a big hit and still declare its capital ratios incompliance with 1992 standards is a sign of underlyingstrength, they say.   &quot;The rumor-mongering can stop now,&quot; Mr. McDermott said ofspeculation about the depth of Chase's problems over the pastweek or so. Though Wall Street was taken aback by Chase'snews, Mr. Hanley said he &quot;applauds&quot; it. &quot;If they had come indirectly in line with expectations there might have been morecredence that it would get worse soon,&quot; he said.   Rodgin Cohen, whose banking law practice for Sullivan andamp;Cromwell keeps him intimate with bank finances, said, &quot;It isinconceivable to me that Chase would become anotherContinental,&quot; referring to that bank's 1984 problems. Chase'sasset mix is much less risky and its funding base is &quot;muchdeeper and broader,&quot; he said.   Indeed, the lion's share of Chase's $80 billion in fundingneeds are met by retail banking customers, a groupContinental sorely lacked at the height of its problems.Moreover, other sources of Chase funds -- money market funds,other banks and corporations with spare cash -- showed noevidence of cold feet in the hours following Friday'sannouncement.   Helping to bolster confidence was the prediction byChase's new management team, which takes over in October,that the fourth quarter would show a profit of at least $140million. In contrast, the third quarter will show a pretaxloss of about $625 million, Chase said, as a result of theloan provision and a $350 million expense for the staffreduction and other restructuring.   By taking such a large dose of medicine at once, Chasealso positions itself to strengthen its capital in futurequarters. It said that in the fourth quarter it will setaside between $170 million and $200 million, lower than eachof the first two quarters of this year. &quot;That will build upequity capital quickly,&quot; said Frank DeSantis, of PaineWebber.Chase said that after posting its financial figures,tier-one, or equity, capital will be just above the 4% ofrisk-adjusted assets called for under the 1992 internationalstandard.   Chase has about $4.2 billion in equity now. Cutting thedividend will save more than $25 million per quarter. Therestructuring and staff reductions are aimed at increasingprofits by saving $300 million in expenses annually.   Chase also said it might sell assets in addition to thesale of its Frankfurt, West Germany, office building, whichnetted a third-quarter gain of $117 million. Other analystssee Chase selling its leasing operation, which has 1,000employees and more than $2 billion in assets, and sellingloan assets as securities, to raise capital levels.   The big if, for Chase and the banking system as a whole,is how far and fast the real estate decline will go. For now,analysts say, Chase has put its portfolio of loans under themicroscope and adequately reserved for the foreseeablefuture. The wild card is what the portfolio might look liketwo, three or four quarters from now.   Even after the shock wears off of Friday's news, investorsare likely to be wary of Chase's stock. &quot;This is a companythat has a big surprise annually,&quot; said one analyst. Anothernoted that Chase officials had talked glowingly of 1990earnings on an investor road-show last fall to sell $600million of stock. They also promised expense reductions thatdidn't materialize in the first half and infuriated many ofthe buyers of the new stock issue by diluting the stockfurther through a new dividend reinvestment plan, he said.   &quot;Investor credibility is very low for Chase. It will takea while coming back,&quot; said Mr. McDermott.   Mr. Boyle and his group had spent last Monday and theweekend immediately preceding it totaling and double-checkingChase's loan portfolio, including nearly $10 billion incommercial real estate loans. A U.S. Comptroller'sexamination had already been the determining factor in a $225million loan-loss reserve in the quarter ended June 30. Sincethen, &quot;There was no question that there was furtherdeterioration in Northeast real estate, including the NewYork metropolitan area,&quot; said Mr. Ryan. In its news release,Chase said it would write off $65 million in commercial realestate loans in the third quarter, up from $15 million and$21 million, respectively, in the first two quarters.   &quot;We looked into the foreseeable future and took everysignificant project on a low, medium and high likelihood ofwhether we were going to lose money and how much,&quot; Mr. Boylesaid. In the end it was a &quot;judgment call,&quot; he added,especially since nailing down a property's fair-market valuefor accounting purposes is elusive in the current market.   A team led by Mr. Ryan was giving much the same scrutinyto each of Chase's business operations and finding where tomake staff cuts. The 15-person group had met weekly for thepast several months, with small subsets getting togethernightly while dining on pizzas and the like.</TEXT></DOC>