<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900427-0083</DOCNO><DOCID>900427-0083.</DOCID><HL>   Lingering Cloud:   Soviet Nuclear Power   Attempts a Comeback   Following Chernobyl   ---   Plant in Snechkus, Lithuania,   Typifies Recent Progress   But Has Safety Problems   ---   Broken Parts, Escaping Steam   ----   By Richard L. Hudson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)</IN><LP>   SNECHKUS, U.S.S.R. -- It is a typical day at Ignalina,site of the world's largest nuclear-power reactors.   In the dimly lit control room of Reactor No. 2,instruments show that three electronic sensors are brokeninside the reactor's core.</LP><TEXT>   Nearby, white-coated technicians tend a computer systemthat has had six broken components in the past month. Out inthe vast reactor hall, the vibrating steel heart of thisradioactive machine has some loose gaskets that are leakingsteam from a half-dozen points at once.   Individually the problems at the Lithuanian plant aren'tdangerous. But collectively they underscore a fundamentalsafety flaw facing the entire Soviet nuclear-power industry:At a higher rate than reactors elsewhere in the world, partsare falling apart. The failures, most often in the reactors'electronic systems, are caused by shoddy manufacturing andsloppy maintenance.   In fact, four years after the Chernobyl accident, theenormous Soviet nuclear-power industry is struggling for itssurvival. The April 26, 1986, accident killed 31, dousedthousands more with radiation, and cost the crippled Sovieteconomy billions. But there was another little-notedcasualty: the industry itself, a nationwide complex oflaboratories, factories and reactors that supplies 12% of allSoviet electricity and ranks as the world's third largestsuch system after the U.S. and France.   Shortly after the Chernobyl accident, the Kremlin shookthe industry out like a dusty old rug. Ministriesreorganized. Safety codes toughened. Old reactors wererepaired and new ones redesigned. Yet experts say safetyremains an elusive goal in the Soviet nuclear-power industry.   The campaign has had its successes. Industry specialists,both East and West, say safety has improved and the specificcauses of the Chernobyl accident have been corrected. Thecost to the struggling Soviet economy: perhaps $10.5 billion.   But thanks to glasnost, it now is possible to examine theproblems afflicting the Soviet nuclear-power industry, longsecretive because of its kinship to nuclear weaponry. In thenew spirit, the Research and Development Institute of PowerEngineering -- the Moscow agency that designed the Chernobylreactor -- authorized and arranged a reporter's tour of twonuclear-power plants, three research centers, a reactorfactory and other sites. Some had never before been visitedby a Western journalist. Evidence collected on the recentthree-week tour suggests that the East has yet to achieveWestern standards of safety.   Shortcomings include:   -- Some of the country's oldest reactors lack safetysystems that are standard in the West and in newer Sovietreactors.   The gaps, especially severe in four 20-year-old reactors,include lack of powerful emergency cooling systems and lackof the &quot;containment&quot; domes of concrete and steel to preventradiation leaks. These old reactors have 10-times-greaterrisk of serious accident than other Soviet or Westernreactors, according to Nikolai Yermakov, chief of reactordevelopment in the Ministry of Nuclear Energy and Industry.But he calls the risks remote and says safety surveillancehas been stepped up.   -- Because of inadequate analysis, Moscow doesn't know howsafe or unsafe its reactors are.   To assess safety, Western engineers conduct hours-longcomputer simulations of possible accidents. Few Sovietcomputers can hack such calculations, and even fewer Sovietengineers care. Many Soviet risk analyses &quot;are based on sliderules&quot; and aren't reliable, says Prof. Leonid Bolshov, FirstDeputy Director of Moscow's Institute of Nuclear Safety.&quot;It's a very important problem, and the attention paid to itisn't enough,&quot; he warns.   -- Many Soviet reactors suffer, not only from broken partsbut also from careless workers. Because of frequent equipmentfailures, Soviet safety philosophy relies heavily on reactorstaff members to spot and fix problems early. But much slipsby the workers. Last year, at its first-ever inspection of aSoviet reactor, the International Atomic Energy Agencyfaulted &quot;weak&quot; quality assurance; it cited such uncorrectedflaws as &quot;missing or damaged insulation&quot; on dusty electricalcables, a fire hazard. Though it called the plant safelyoperated overall, the Vienna-based United Nations affiliateurged &quot;better workmanship.&quot;   The West's stake in Soviet safety is high. &quot;If we haveanother accident similar to Chernobyl, I suspect it's goingto be difficult for any nuclear plant throughout the world tokeep operating,&quot; says Michael Sellman, an official ofNorthern States Power Co., a Minneapolis-based utility thatexchanges technical visits with a Soviet nuclear plant. TheChernobyl accident strengthened anti-nuclear movements in theWest, roiling industry expansion plans and showing &quot;we're allin this together,&quot; Mr. Sellman says.   In Moscow, the official line acknowledges suchshortcomings but maintains that Soviet reactors are safetoday and will be safer tomorrow. Progress since Chernobylincludes new safety devices, better computers and tougherrule-books.   But among Soviet industry leaders, frustration runs highat what they call the slow pace of their safety programs. Theobstacles include lack of money and political turmoil. InSoviet journals, some impatient industry officials have begunproposing radical solutions: ranging from privatizing thenuclear plants to putting former nuclear submarine operatorsat their controls.   The most desperate protest of all came in 1988, whenValery Legasov, who supervised emergency work at Chernobyl,committed suicide. In memoirs published posthumously inPravda, he excoriated the Kremlin for ignoring warnings ofChernobyl and lessons from it.   Just how much -- and how little -- his words were heededcan be seen at the Ignalina nuclear power station, in verdantLithuania.   Visited on a March day, before tensions erupted over therepublic's independence movement, the complex is firstspotted by its four idle construction cranes, towering overnearby forests. Local protests halted construction of a thirdreactor here, one of 30 Soviet reactors for which plans werecanceled or postponed after Chernobyl. There was an extragripe here: In 1988, a serious electrical fire broke outunder the control room floor. Nobody was injured. It wascaused by workmen improperly laying power cables beside otherwiring and then installing the wrong size circuit-breakers.   Like most Soviet reactors, Ignalina forms a vast complexwith nearly four times as many workers as equivalent Westernreactors. To shelter them and their families, an entire townfor 32,000 was built. Called Snechkus, it is a Soviet visionof heaven, with a sunny lakefront, a big cinema, a newhospital and grocery stores with ample, if uninteresting,food. There is also something rarer: The liquor store stocksvodka, and the line to buy it is only 15 deep. Rumpled men,getting off work, banter and swap jokes as they wait. Howeverbleak life in Moscow may be, here at a nuclear plant Sovietplanners want only happy workers.   The two reactors in the nearby power plant are of a uniqueSoviet design that normally operates more smoothly andcheaply than Western models -- except when things go wrong. Asimilar design was at Chernobyl. It is called a water-cooled,graphite-moderated, channel-type reactor, or RBMK in itsRussian abbreviation, and like most reactors it is just a bigteakettle to boil water. Its steam turns turbines that makeelectricity. Its heat comes from nuclear fission. Unlike inWestern reactors, its core is honeycombed with steel pipesthat hold its uranium fuel rods in place and channel coolingwater to prevent overheating.   The Chernobyl accident forced immediate changes. Theaccident occurred while operators at the Ukrainian reactorwere testing an electrical system. Under pressure to finishthe job quickly, they disconnected safety systems. Then,because of a design flaw, the normal chain of atomicreactions inside the reactor raced out of control. In twoblinding seconds, the roof blew off, fire spread, andradiation vomited into the sky.   Ignalina and other RBMK engineers took vital steps toensure no repeats. They altered the mix of uranium and othermaterials inside the reactor, and installed fasteremergency-shutdown systems. They revised staff training,toughened plant-safety procedures and rewired the reactors'safety systems so operators now need two separate keys todisconnect them. The work has already paid off at Ignalina:Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency lastyear praised the plant's tenfold drop in reactor &quot;events&quot; --problems that force braking of the reactor.   But that doesn't mean all is quiet here. Consider thesteam leaks. Wearing a white coat, white cap, and plasticbags on his shoes to prevent tracking radiation around,Deputy Chief Operations Engineer Aleksandr Voretsky leads theway into the vast, concrete hall housing Reactor No. 2.Radiation levels in here are far above normal, outdoorlevels, but still relatively harmless for a short visit. Hestands casually atop the reactor's steel cover, as itvibrates gently with the flow of coolant water inside. From ahalf-dozen points around the cover, small jets of steam rise.   Nothing to worry about, Mr. Voretsky assures. The leakscome from some ill-fitting gaskets on the coolant pipes. Solong as the leaks don't worsen, they won't endanger safety orhealth, he says, adding that he is watching them closely.   But the view in Moscow is less casual. On hearing of theleaks that night by telephone, Prof. Yevgeni Adamov, directorof the institute that designed the reactor, orders the plantto plug them. &quot;I used some old-fashioned Russian language&quot; onthe plant manager, Prof. Adamov later explains. He confirmsthe leaks aren't dangerous in themselves, a position whichWestern experts support. But Prof. Adamov condemns thecareless work habits they symptomize. Worker discipline, hesays, is a growing problem in many branches of Sovietindustry.   The quality of the equipment is a problem too. AtIgnalina, plant officials grumble there is little they can doabout it. In theory, says Mr. Voretsky, Soviet manufacturersguarantee their components against failure, as in the West.When a part breaks, he gets it fixed and notifies thefactory. But nothing happens. No penalty is paid. And underSoviet central planning, he can't switch suppliers the wayhis Western counterpart can. &quot;In our country,&quot; he says, &quot;themanufacturers are monopolists.&quot;   Prof. Bolshov of the nuclear-safety institute isn't havingan easy time of it either. Mr. Bolshov's institute wasfounded after the 1986 Chernobyl accident by the U.S.S.R.Academy of Sciences, to improve industry safety. It wasassigned an unwanted ministry outbuilding, a dump even byMoscow's flea-bitten standards. At the institute's founding,Kremlin officials had pledged support with grand words. Now,Prof. Bolshov gestures around his cramped office: &quot;You seethe gap between words and reality.&quot;   His institute's main work has been a struggle, too. TheSoviet nuclear industry is a proud institution; it frowns onoutsiders, new ideas and imported techniques. Prof. Bolshovrepresents all three. He's an academic physicist trying tointerest Soviet safety engineers in his institute'sWestern-style computer programs. Though some bite, manydon't. Engineers at Gydropress, a big Soviet reactordesigner, won't use them. One Soviet reactor operatorcommissioned his institute's help but never found the moneyfor work to begin.   &quot;Opposition? Of course, there's opposition,&quot; Prof. Bolshovsays. &quot;We are trying to create something new and unusual.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>