<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911011-0098</DOCNO><DOCID>911011-0098.</DOCID><HL>   Small Is Beautiful   ----   By Robert J. Barro</HL><DATE>10/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   FORGN</CO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The U.S. government is instinctively opposed to secession.It has not supported the Kurds in Iraq, the Croats inYugoslavia, the Ibos in Nigeria or the Quebecers in Canada.We were pretty much the last major country to sign on tosovereignty for the Baltic states, and we have not endorsedthe independence movements of any of the other Sovietrepublics.   There seem to be two main reasons for this opposition. Thefirst is the potential trouble from changing borders. Evenborders that were drawn in an arbitrary manner sometime inthe past -- such as in Yugoslavia, Iraq and much of Africa --may reasonably be defended because the process of changeinvolves disruptions, possibly including armed conflict. Ofcourse, the attempt to maintain unsatisfactory boundaries maycause even more disruption.</LP><TEXT>   The intense opposition of the U.S. government to secessionalso reflects the specifics of American history. The U.S.Civil War -- by far the most costly conflict ever fought byAmericans -- was waged primarily to maintain the union. Thewar caused more than 600,000 military fatalities and anunknown number of civilian deaths, and severely damaged thesouthern economy. Per-capita income in the South fell fromabout 80% of the northern level before the war (using thesketchy data available for 1840) to about 40% after the war(based on the more complete data for 1880). The fall inper-capita income reflected the destruction of capital --plant and equipment, livestock and educated labor -- and theend of the plantation system based on forced labor.   Although only the first part of the fall in measuredper-capita income represents a true cost of the war, theoverall setback to the economy was striking: It took morethan a century after the war's end in 1865 for Southernper-capita income to reattain 80% of the Northern level. Thisrate of convergence of the poor South to the rich North mayseem slow, but the pace is typical of regional growthprocesses observed in other times and places.   If the U.S. government were to support the right ofsecession in some other part of the world, such as the SovietUnion, then it might seem indirectly to be challenging thebasic premise of the Civil War. Why is it desirable forSoviet republics to have the right to secession when it wasundesirable for U.S. states to have the same rights? We wouldthen force ourselves to reconsider whether the enormous costof the Civil War was worth it. Instead of being the greatestof American presidents, as many people believe, AbrahamLincoln may instead have presided over the largest error inAmerican history.   Although the desire to free the slaves was not the primarycause of the Civil War, one might argue that the eliminationof this disgraceful oppression nevertheless made the warworthwhile. Two problems with this argument are first, thatthe setback to the Southern economy harmed the Southernblacks along with the whites, and second, that theelimination of slavery did not prevent blacks from sufferingthrough nearly an additional century of semi-legaldiscrimination and segregation after the end ofReconstruction in the 1870s. Everyone would have been betteroff if the elimination of slavery had been accomplished bybuying off the slaveowners -- as the British did in the WestIndies in the 1830s -- instead of fighting the war.   Whether the blacks would have been better or worse off ifthe North had accepted the secession of the South requires aforecast of how the institution of slavery would have faredin an independent South. Some relevant information is thatslavery was abolished without war in the other parts of theWestern hemisphere where it had existed (except for Haiti inthe 1790s) and that the last country to act, Brazil, beganthe process in 1871 and finished it in 1888. Thus, theexperience of the rest of the hemisphere suggests thatslavery in the U.S. south would have been eliminatedpeacefully in not very many years.   If we put the experience of the Civil War behind us andalso abstract from the transitional problems of redrawingborders -- that is, the stability issue -- then theevaluation of a secession depends on whether, starting fromscratch, reasonable borders would have been drawn verydifferently from those that currently prevail. Some of thearguments that have been used in this context to criticizethe breakup of states are wrong.   For example, it is often said that a potential new stateis too small to be economically viable: Soviet Georgia orCroatia -- or Quebec or Catalonia -- could not make it on itsown. The empirical evidence about the economic growth ofcountries conflicts sharply with this view. There is norelation between the growth or level of per-capita income andthe size of a country, whether measured by population orarea. Small countries, even with populations of as little asa million, can perform well economically, as long as theyremain open to international trade. In fact, smallness tendsto encourage openness because the alternative really would bea nonviable economy.   A related specious argument is that a state cannot prosperif it lacks a key natural resource, such as oil or fertileland. The experience with economic growth across countriesreveals little relation between economic performance and thepresence of natural resources. Japan and the Asian tigers, aswell as most of Western Europe, have done fine withoutdomestic sources of oil. With access to internationalmarkets, a country can specialize in what it does well andthen trade its goods for the commodities, such as oil oragricultural products, that it lacks domestically.   A characteristic that does promote economic growth is goodgovernment in the sense of maintenance of property rights,avoidance of trade barriers and absence of other marketdistortions including excessive tax rates and regulations.Thus, in evaluating a change of international borders, a keyissue from an economic standpoint is whether the newgovernment would be better or worse in terms of thesegrowth-promoting traits. In the case of the Baltics, Croatiaor Kurdistan, there is little question that secession wouldlead to improved government.   Although it may be an unpleasant commentary on humannature, a central driving force in defining a state is thedesire to have a reasonably homogeneous population within itsborders. It is clear from observing the places wheresecessionist movements tend to occur, such as Yugoslavia andthe Soviet Union or Spain and Canada, that ethnic identity isa central driving force. There are cases in which governmentshave dealt more or less successfully with sharp ethnicdiversities, such as Switzerland and even the U.S., butproblems are easier to pinpoint than triumphs.   Political economy explains some of the benefits fromhaving a homogeneous population within a given state. Ifdiversity is great -- measured say by the inequality inpotential earnings -- then there is a strong incentive forpeople to spend their energies in efforts to redistributeincome rather than to produce goods. In particular, a greaterdispersion of constituent characteristics leads to thecreation of interest groups that spend their time lobbyingthe central government to redistribute resources in theirfavor.   We can think of a country's optimal size as emerging froma tradeoff: A large country can spread the cost of publicgoods, such as defining a legal and monetary system andmaintaining national security, over many taxpayers, but alarge country is also likely to have a diverse populationthat is difficult for the central government to satisfy. Thereason that small countries perform reasonably well inpractice is that the public-goods argument may not be soimportant. For instance, a larger country has more propertyto protect from foreign aggressors and therefore requireslarger outlays for national defense than a small country.Empirically, the ratio of defense expenditures to grossnational product is uncorrelated with the size of thecountry: If the public-goods argument were compelling, thenlarger countries would tend to spend less on defense as ashare of GNP. No doubt, it is inefficient for sovereignstates to be too small, but the minimum size for a viablestate seems not to be very great.   The bottom line is that political separation is sometimesa good idea: The benefits can outweigh the losses, includingthe transitional costs of changing borders. We can usuallyjudge whether the benefits from change exceed the costs byrelying on self-determination. After all, most of the costsfrom changing governments and establishing new institutionsare borne by the secessionists -- if a clear majority ofresidents in an area indicates their desire to becomeindependent, then they are saying that the benefits exceedthe costs.   The situation is considerably more complicated ifcompeting groups lay claim to essentially the same territory,as in Lebanon, Israel, South Africa and Northern Ireland. Butmany situations are more straightforward: examples ofindependence movements that warrant our support -- at leastin terms of recognition -- are the Croats, the Kurds and thepeoples of the Soviet republics.   ---   Mr. Barro, a Wall Street Journal contributing editor, is aprofessor of economics at Harvard.</TEXT></DOC>