<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911008-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>911008-0095.</DOCID><HL>   Expensive Suits:   How a Small Company   Fell Deeply Into Debt   To Its Own Law Firm   ---   Cost of Defending Pesticide   Zoomed as More Lawyers   And Experts Joined Case   ---   `Genghis Khan on the Steppes'   ----   By Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PATENTS (PAT)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)</GV><RE>DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)MINNESOTA (MN)MISSOURI (MO)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Jack and Margie Roberts know all about killing ants,cleaning toilets and wiping out pesky household odors. Butthey're still learning about lawyers.   For three generations, the Roberts family has owned andoperated little Senoret Chemical Co. of Kirkwood, Mo., whoseBrite-Blue toilet bowl cleaner, Scent-Go house fresheners andTerro Ant Killer have stocked grocery and hardware shelvesnationwide. But in 1987, the Environmental Protection Agencycame knocking.</LP><TEXT>   The EPA raised questions about Terro's potential risk forchildren, and, to defend its product, Senoret hired a top lawfirm. The EPA challenge was the most serious threat Senorethad ever faced. Then it met its lawyers.   Three years later, Senoret, which had never grossed morethan $1.4 million a year in sales, faces a $457,000 legalbill that it says it can't pay. The company is also facing alawsuit filed by the law firm demanding payment. If Senoretloses, it could be forced to file for bankruptcy-courtprotection.   The firm that Senoret hired -- 203-lawyer Robins, Kaplan,Miller andamp; Ciresi in Minneapolis -- lost the EPA case.   The Robertses story is particularly instructive becauseRobins Kaplan's staffing and billing practices in the case,far from extraordinary, appear largely typical for firms ofits size and expertise in dealing with a problem as legallydifficult as trying to block the EPA from taking a productoff the market.   Robins Kaplan's managing partner, Thomas C. Kayser, sayshe's &quot;still puzzled over what exactly they're unhappy about&quot;and what more Robins Kaplan could have done to better servethe Robertses' needs. &quot;The way it looks to me,&quot; says Mr.Kayser, &quot;they are disappointed litigants who don't want topay their bill.&quot;   Yet what happened to Senoret helps explain the currentgroundswell of resentment against lawyers by their ownclients, a phenomenon that law-firm managers say is changingtraditional notions of the lawyer-client relationship.&quot;Consumers,&quot; says law-firm management consultant JoelHenning, in Chicago, &quot;are in revolt.&quot;   With legal costs rising out of control, some clients arestarting to insist that their lawyers involve them moreclosely in major decisions, provide detailed fee estimates upfront, stick to budgets, communicate more clearly and explainthe risks and benefits of each alternative along the way. Thelesson, though, comes too late for Senoret.   The history of the company and its chief product are thestuff of small-business legend. Mr. Roberts's grandfatherfounded the company and, working in his garage in 1917,invented Terro while experimenting with patent medicines. Theelder Mr. Roberts accidentally broke a bottle containing asmall amount of sodium arsenate, a mild form of arsenic,laced with sugar. The concoction, he noticed, attractedvarieties of sweet-eating ants, so-called because they seeksweet foods. It also did a pretty handy job of wiping outtheir infestations. Thus was born Terro Ant Killer.   Over the years, the formula -- 2.27% sodium arsenate --remained unchanged. At $1.98 for a one-ounce bottle, the antkiller made up 90% of the company's $1.4 million in grosssales in 1988, its biggest year. A few drops on a cardboardsquare or in a bottle cap was usually all it took to rid akitchen or a pantry of sweet-eating ants.   But in the mid-1980s, EPA enforcers became concerned aboutthe possibility of arsenic poisoning in children, who mightbe attracted to Terro's taste. By 1987, the agency hadreports of 1,475 &quot;exposures&quot; involving children and arsenateant poisons such as Terro. None involved any serious injury;fewer than 10% of the children had any symptoms at all. Butthe EPA thought the risk might be too high.   After on-and-off talks with the Robertses over severalyears, the agency wrote in July 1988 suddenly cancelingSenoret's federal registration for Terro. The company had 30days to stop all sales or file an appeal. &quot;It was like,`Boom] You're out of business,'&quot; says Jack Roberts, 61,Senoret's owner and president.   Senoret needed a law firm that could take on the EPA, andRobins Kaplan seemed right for the job. Politicallywell-connected and highly aggressive, it was winning widenotice. In 1984, star litigator Michael Ciresi put the firmon the map when he extracted a dramatic pretrial confessionfrom a former lawyer for A.H. Robins Co., makers of thecontroversial Dalkon Shield birth-control device. Thelawyer's admission that he had destroyed company documentsabout the dangers of the device led to a $38 millionsettlement for Mr. Ciresi's 198 clients.   More recently, the firm had scored a major coup by signingup the government of India in the litigation against UnionCarbide Corp. over the 1984 poison gas leak in Bhopal. FacingRobins Kaplan in court, the firm liked to boast in adbrochures, &quot;was a little like encountering Genghis Khan onthe steppes.&quot;   Another selling point: Robins Kaplan, which was booming,had recently opened an office in Washington, D.C. In atelephone conference call from the firm's St. Paul office,the Robertses talked to the Washington managing partner atthe time, Charles R. Johnston Jr. He told them he hadexperience &quot;in EPA matters.&quot; The Robertses hired him on thespot: &quot;We wanted someone who was expert to handle this thing.We felt we were in safe hands,&quot; says Mr. Roberts.   A two-track strategy emerged: To buy time, Robins Kaplanwould request a formal hearing before an administrative-lawjudge to contest the EPA's conclusion that Terro wasdangerous. While the lawyers gathered experts and evidence,Senoret would devise a childproof dispenser to try to settlethe case before it got too costly.   A hearing would cost &quot;no less than $100,000,&quot; Mr. Johnstonwrote in a contract letter, which the Robertses signed. Amore exact total, he added, &quot;is dependent on too manyvariables to be predictable. . . .&quot; If no settlement could bereached, he wrote, the Robertses and the law firm would &quot;haveto make a decision regarding the cost-benefit of a fullprosecution&quot; before proceeding.   &quot;We told him at the time there was no way we could affordthe $100,000, and we hoped it wouldn't come to that amount,&quot;says Margie Roberts, 53, Mr. Roberts's wife and Senoret'sbookkeeper. Mr. Johnston quoted the Robertses the firm'shourly rates ($200 for senior partners, $120 for seniorassociates, $60 for legal assistants). Paid experts mightalso be needed from time to time, he wrote: &quot;Their fees, ifany, will be incorporated in our statements.&quot;   To the Robertses, Mr. Johnston expressed no opinion abouthow much they might have to pay ultimately, but to his ownfirm he was more exact. In a memo to the Minneapolis homeoffice, he placed Senoret's &quot;fee potential&quot; at $150,000.Meanwhile, he assigned the case to a senior associate, PamelaM. Deese.   Mr. Johnston had experience with the EPA, but not in acomplex adversarial setting like this. Ms. Deese's backgroundwas in international trade; she had no experience with theEPA or in litigation. In fact, no lawyer at Robins Kaplan'sWashington office had trial experience. The first expertcontacted by Robins Kaplan was another lawyer, RobertHerbolsheimer, a former EPA attorney at another law firm.   For the next several months, Mr. Herbolsheimer helped Ms.Deese and Mr. Johnston research EPA regulations andadministrative procedures, prepare documents, developstrategy and attend prehearing conferences with the EPA,according to the summary of the $2,865 bill he submitted.Robins Kaplan told the Robertses he was needed for hispolitical contacts and to serve as a go-between. Says Mr.Herbolsheimer: &quot;The only role I played was helping them getthe ball rolling.&quot;   Throughout the summer and fall of 1988, Ms. Deesenegotiated possible settlement terms with the EPA lawyer onthe case, while the Robertses tried to develop a suitableprototype for a childproof dispenser. Legal bills beganarriving the first week of every month giving summaries ofwork performed but no breakdown of hours spent and timebilled. By early December 1988, the total had come to about$30,000.   The prospect of a settlement, meanwhile, hinged on whetherthe Robertses would be required to recall all existing stocksof Terro from store shelves -- a prohibitively expensiveproposition -- or whether they would be required only tocease further sales immediately pending EPA approval of asafe dispenser.   Settlement talks apparently went well at first. A draftproposal satisfactory to the EPA lawyers emerged Dec. 12.Terro could stay on store shelves for another six months.Sales would then cease, but the EPA would agree to speed upits review of a child-resistant dispenser. If it passed EPAtesting, it would be approved. The proposal made no mentionof a recall.   This was the crucial juncture for the Robertses. Lookingback, they say they would have accepted the settlement hadthey known its terms. But, they say, Ms. Deese informed themby telephone that the offer meant a recall. Ms. Deesedisputes that, though she made the same assertion in alast-ditch appeal to EPA Administrator William K. Reilly inJune 1989: &quot;EPA would only agree to settle if Senoret wouldalso recall the product . . .,&quot; she wrote.   Whether there was a critical miscommunication is one ofthe issues now in dispute in the law firm's suit seekingpayment of legal fees. Ms. Deese maintains that her secretaryfaxed a copy of the proposal to the Robertses, but the lawfirm has no record of a fax transmission or a cover sheet.For their part, the Robertses concede they were tiring ofsettlement talks and wanted their lawyers to prepare fortrial. &quot;With those instructions,&quot; says Ms. Deese, &quot;it wasapparent we were going to trial.&quot;   This was the time, other lawyers suggest, for RobinsKaplan to have another talk with its client about fees. Sofar, the bills had been relatively modest. But litigating wasa far more costly matter. The EPA has never lost a suitcontesting its decision to cancel the federal registrationfor an insecticide. And, says Cara Jablon, who tried the casefor the EPA, &quot;When a company decides they are going to takeon the EPA, it's going to cost them. You can't try even asmall case for under $200,000.&quot;   Yet just as the meter was about to start running overtime,no one at Robins Kaplan pressed the Robertses to ensure thatthey understood that, for them, the costs of litigation mightexceed the benefits. Mr. Johnston, of Robins Kaplan, hadpromised just such a cost-benefit analysis before decidingwhether to proceed to a full hearing. But the Robertses nevergot one, and they didn't push the subject themselves.   To prove its case to the EPA, Senoret would have to showthat Terro worked better than other ant poisons -- and thatit was safe. The outcome would depend entirely on scientificdocumentation and the word of experts. From the EPA'sperspective, says Ms. Jablon, the case against Terro was aclose call. &quot;This was not a case where it was clear-cut onits face,&quot; she says. Both sides began to scramble.   For Robins Kaplan, there was professional pride, as wellas the client's needs, at stake. &quot;We wanted to show the EPAthat Robins Kaplan, and its size and all of its resources,was willing to bring to bear the toughest possible caseagainst them,&quot; Mr. Johnston says. The job called for a toughtrial lawyer.   A month before the scheduled hearing, Mr. Johnstonrecommended that Thomas Hamlin, one of Robins Kaplan's toplitigators in Minneapolis, take over the case because therewere no trial lawyers in the Washington office. Ms. Deesewould work as his assistant, while Mr. Johnston would retainhis peripheral supervisory role.   This was the first time the Robertses ever heard theymight need an expert trial lawyer. They had thought that Mr.Johnston would represent them before the EPA, but now thefuture of the company was in the balance. There seemed noalternative but to go along. &quot;I felt we were stuck,&quot; saysMrs. Roberts.   Now Senoret was paying for three attorneys. Almostimmediately, fees and expenses began to mount. In the daysfollowing the decision to bring in Mr. Hamlin at $160 anhour, he billed Senoret $4,700 for familiarizing himself withthe case. But legal fees for three lawyers were only a partof overall costs. The hearing, scheduled to begin Jan. 23,was four weeks away and Senoret needed to hire experts.   In late December, Mr. Hamlin flew to Salt Lake City toline up an expert in pediatric critical care, then flew toMadison, Wis., several days later to meet with apoison-control expert. Total expenses to the Robertses:$1,555 in travel, $2,890 in fees.   Ms. Deese, meanwhile, flew to Boston ($369) to line up themost critical witness for the Robertses, James Traniello, aBoston University expert on the foraging and eating habits ofsweet-eating ants. At $100 an hour, Dr. Traniello was hiredto review the EPA's many documents and conduct tests provingTerro's efficacy. Ms. Deese had asked him to keep his totalfees under $4,000, but his final bill after he reviewed 250technical reports was $19,800. &quot;There was no way this wasgoing to be done in 20 hours' work,&quot; he says.   Meanwhile, at Robins Kaplan's Washington office, more than850 exhibits were gathered and filed.   Mrs. Roberts stayed in daily contact with Ms. Deese,constantly asking for updates and seeking to monitor theprogress of the case, including its cost. While Ms. Deesesays her clients were kept up-to-date on costs, Mrs. Robertscontends that she was told that precise estimates wereimpossible because her lawyers didn't know enough about howthe EPA planned to present its case.   &quot;I think at one point I told them early on it would be inexcess of $50,000 or $60,000, but I had no way of knowing howmuch it would be,&quot; Ms. Deese says.   For the month leading up to the hearing, legal fees alonewere averaging $2,314 a day. Six experts were retained totestify for Senoret. Expenses for computer research,photocopying, phone calls and postage got so big that RobinsKaplan stopped itemizing them. Instead, Mr. Johnston told theRobertses in December that the firm would charge them apercentage of its office overhead in Washington.   The Robertses say they got their first inkling of wherethings were heading only after the hearing was under way. Inmid-February, they received a combined bill for the months ofDecember and January: $79,000. Prior to that, the total billhad been only $30,000.   Mrs. Roberts put in a panicked call to Mr. Johnston. &quot;Isaid we can't afford this, we're broke,&quot; says Mrs. Roberts.To ease the strain, Mr. Johnston proposed that Senoret pay$15,000 a month. In addition, the total bill would be paidoff by the end of the year if Robins Kaplan won the case.   By now, the hearing had been under way for three weeks.The EPA had three attorneys and several hundred documents ofits own. At the end of each day, the lawyers on both sidesexchanged statements from coming witnesses. Senoret's teamwent back to its offices, often working until midnightpreparing for the next day's cross examinations. Daily legalfees over the five-week period now averaged $3,426. Allexpenses for lawyers and experts were charged to theRobertses as well.   &quot;At the time, I thought, `Well, we've never been in asituation like this before,' &quot; says Mr. Roberts. &quot;I said,`Well, I guess they're doing a good job.' They kept tellingus we were going to win.&quot;   Work didn't stop on weekends, though Mr. Hamlin flew hometo Minneapolis four times to work from there, billing theRobertses $4,192 for his airfare. Even the mileage to andfrom his home to the Minneapolis-St. Paul airport showed onone bill: $2.52. In Washington, he stayed with relatives, buthe rented a car, an additional $3,310 expense for Senoret.   All these expenses are considered customary by most lawfirms. And, fees notwithstanding, Robins Kaplan put on aformidable defense of Terro. &quot;I learned a lot from watchingthem try the case,&quot; says Ms. Jablon, the former EPA lawyerwho handled the Senoret case. &quot;We worked very hard at the EPAresponding to their legal briefs. We thought they did a realgood job.&quot;   The Robertses, of course, are not inclined to agree. Theoriginal bottom line estimate of &quot;no less than $100,000&quot;seemed extravagant at the time they hired the law firm. &quot;Inmy worst scenario, I couldn't imagine it being more thandouble,&quot; says Mrs. Roberts.   The total came to $375,587.79 in fees, plus $81,440.78 inexpenses.   For all that, the Robertses lost the battle. The final EPAorder came down in July 1989 prohibiting all further sales ofTerro. Its risk to children, though minor, was still toogreat to ignore, wrote the EPA's chief administrative judge,Ronald L. McCallum. &quot;At worst, cancellation of these productswill result in consumers tolerating the presence of a smallnumber of ants -- a small price to pay to protect the healthof hundreds of small children each year.&quot;   The Robertses found a safe substitute for sodium arsenic:borax. The acidity in Terro Ant Killer II takes longer tokill ants, says Mrs. Roberts, but it's effective. Senoretissued $400,000 in credit slips to its retailers for Terro IIand has almost paid them off. &quot;Fortunately,&quot; says Mr.Roberts, &quot;our customers stayed with us.&quot;   But the Robertses still were forced to cut their ownsalaries by half and lay off 10 of their 25 employees. Abankruptcy lawyer advised filing for protection from theircreditors under federal bankruptcy law, but the Robertsesbalked. Instead, they stopped making their monthly $15,000legal payments in August 1989, after paying $128,000. &quot;Atthat point,&quot; says Mrs. Roberts, &quot;I felt {they} were wellcompensated.&quot;   Robins Kaplan promptly sued them for breach of contract.The Robertses sued back, alleging that Robins Kaplan hadbreached its obligation to inform them of the legal andfinancial risks they were taking, and what their alternativeswere. The dispute landed in the lap of U.S. District JudgeDavid S. Doty in Minneapolis, who last month held a three-daynon-jury trial, but has not yet ruled.   For the Robertses, all of this has meant more lawyers.This time, they hired a sole practitioner who shares atwo-story office building with 40 other lawyers near thecity's downtown courts. They gave him a $50,000 limit. Sofar, Charles S. Clayton, the attorney, and a part-timeassociate, Timothy W. Fafinski, have kept fees and expensesunder $28,000.   Across town in LaSalle Plaza, in a new wheat-coloredhigh-rise filled with modern art, Robins Kaplan occupies thetop six floors. The suit against the Robertses was handedover to a senior litigator, an associate and a paralegal.When clients don't pay their bills, says Mr. Kayser, themanaging partner, &quot;sometimes you take it to court, sometimesyou don't. It depends on the circumstances.&quot;   In this case, he says, the Robertses benefited despitelosing because they were able to continue selling Terro for ayear while Robins Kaplan fought the EPA. &quot;This was, fromtheir standpoint, a bet-your-company case,&quot; says Mr. Kayser.   Now that they're looking at a $457,000 legal bill, theRobertses disagree. At that price, even if they had beatenthe EPA, says Mr. Fafinski, &quot;they still would have lost.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>