<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900928-0113</DOCNO><DOCID>900928-0113.</DOCID><HL>   Destroying the Banks to Save Them   ----   By Peter Wallison</HL><DATE>09/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   There's a simple way to describe Washington's currentresponse to financial weakness in the banking industry:panic. Fearful that banks may be going the way of the Sandamp;Ls,policymakers are uncritically advancing solutions that willbring about the result they are hoping to avert.   In July, several officials called for higher capitalrequirements for banks -- a goal that was widely endorsed inCongress and the press. In August, the FDIC proposed raisingdeposit insurance premiums for banks by the maximum allowableamount -- to almost 20 cents on every $100 of deposits --again to resounding applause. In September, the ComptrollerGeneral of the United States, in testimony before the SenateBanking committee, reported that the FDIC's bank insurancefund was near depletion and recommended that the FDIC bepermitted to raise deposit insurance rates without limit inorder to restore the integrity of the fund. This idea wasendorsed even by the Treasury Department and legislation tobring it about was passed by the House and introduced in theSenate by Donald Riegle, the Chairman of the Senate BankingCommittee.</LP><TEXT>   How would banks that are required to raise their capitalbe expected to do so? There are basically three ways: sellshares, retain earnings or sell off assets (and shedcorresponding liabilities). The success of the first twoobviously depends on the ability of management to earnprofits. The sale of shares is heavily disfavored because itdilutes the ownership of current shareholders -- but it isunlikely to be a viable option in any case because (as theSandamp;Ls have discovered) there is no market for the shares of adepository institution that is only marginally profitable.   Increasing profitability, on the other hand, meansincreasing risk, since the more profitable loans andinvestments are those that have the greatest inherent risk.Selling assets and shedding liabilities is a viable course,but in practical terms it also means increasing risk becausethe market is interested only in buying the banks' leastrisky assets. Thus, it is not necessarily true that raisingcapital standards for banks will leave them stronger; infact, if banks must strive to meet higher capitalrequirements they may weaken themselves by increasing therelative riskiness of their portfolios.   Then there is the issue of deposit insurance premiums.Obviously, an increase in these premiums will reduce theprofitability of banks, making it harder for them to increasecapital or to maintain the capital levels they already have.And although a deposit insurance premium of almost 20 centson every $100 of deposits does not sound very large, it isimportant to remember that a reasonably well-managed U.S.bank earns about $1 on every $100 of assets, with moneycenter banks generally below this level. Since banks fundabout 75% of their assets with deposits, a deposit insurancepremium even at the current level represents about 15% ofpretax earnings and is thus a significant amount. An increasein this obligation will obviously further reduce the earningsof banks and cause them -- if they are to remain profitable-- to take on greater risk even if they don't have toincrease their capital.   Thus, not only is there a contradiction between higherdeposit insurance premiums and requiring banks to increasetheir capital, but both steps -- together and separately --will weaken the financial condition of banks by causing themto take on more portfolio risk. Why, then, have both ideas --together and separately -- been so widely applauded inWashington?   The reason seems to be that Washington policymakers havemistakenly assumed that the best protection for the taxpayersis the health of the deposit insurance funds. This iscompletely wrong. As clearly shown by the Sandamp;L debacle, thebest protection for the taxpayers is not the size of thedeposit insurance funds; it is the health of the institutionsthese funds insure.   Once a substantial portion of a whole industry begins toslip toward insolvency, the deposit insurance funds have nomeaning. The liability of the taxpayers for the Sandamp;Lindustry's massive losses goes far beyond the size of theinsurance fund that once guaranteed the deposits in Sandamp;Ls,even when the insurance fund was at its healthiest. For thisreason, the current debate about the optimum size of the bankinsurance fund is a sideshow -- except to the extent that thepolicies chosen to rescue the fund contribute further to theweakness of the industry the fund insures.   To some extent, Washington is confused by its ownrhetoric. Deposit insurance was presented as insurance, inmuch the same way and for much the same reason that SocialSecurity was. But deposit insurance is insurance in nameonly. The size of the deposit insurance fund bears norelationship to the risks it is intended to cover. Thepremiums paid by insureds bear no relationship to the risksthey impose on the fund, and are not intended to -- and donot -- affect the riskiness of their behavior.   It is important to make this distinction, because ifdeposit insurance were in fact insurance then the properresponse to a decline in the size of the deposit insurancefund would be higher premiums on banks -- since higherpremiums in a true insurance scheme would discourage thebehavior insured against. But deposit insurance premiums arenot insurance premiums; they are a tax on the bankingindustry, levied for the privilege of receiving federalgovernment and ultimately taxpayer backing for certainliabilities. If there were ever any doubt about thisproposition, it was removed by the Sandamp;L bailout, in which thepresence or absence of an insurance fund was largelyirrelevant. Depositors were bailed out by the taxpayers; theFSLIC fund served at most as a small deduction from thetaxpayers' total bill.   Looked at in this way, it becomes far less clear that anincrease in deposit insurance premiums is the appropriateresponse to a decline in the size of the deposit insurancefund. Clearly, there is growing financial weakness in thebanking industry. This weakness has already caused asubstantial decline in the size of the deposit insurance fundadministered by the FDIC. The relevant question, however, isnot how to shore up the fund but how to address the bankingindustry's weakness. It cannot seriously be contended thatbanking or any other industry will be strengthened whenhigher taxes are levied on it.   When Congress was considering the Sandamp;L bailout legislationlast year, it was warned that the Sandamp;L industry could notsurvive increased capital requirements, increased depositinsurance premiums, reduced investment opportunities andlower earnings from its investment in the Home Loan BankSystem. Although this would seem fairly obvious to mostpeople, the purpose of the legislation was not the survivalof the industry but the survival of the legislators. A yearlater, we can only hope that policymakers will take a longerterm view.   ---   Mr. Wallison, White House and Treasury department counselduring the Reagan administration, is an attorney inWashington.</TEXT></DOC>