<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900813-0130</DOCNO><DOCID>900813-0130.</DOCID><HL>   Technology --   Video Phones:   Picture Looks   Brighter at Last   ----   By Paul B. Carroll   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   CLIX PCTL S</CO><IN>COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)</IN><LP>   Video telephones are finally catching on -- a mere quarterof a century behind schedule.   Prototypes were a hit at the 1964 World's Fair, promptingpeople to jump way ahead of reality and start worrying about,say, how to turn off the camera if they came running out ofthe shower to answer the phone. But the technology wasn'tready, and the economics never worked. Despite 20 years oftesting, the devices were never more than a novelty.</LP><TEXT>   Now, however, several hundred video conferencing units arein use around the world, and market researchers say themarket for video telecommunication equipment could reach morethan $100 million this year. They add that it could grow atleast 50% annually for the next several years.   At the moment, the video conferencing market is dominatedby two small companies, Compression Labs Inc., of San Jose,Calif., and PictureTel Corp., of Peabody, Mass. Other, biggerfirms, such as the Bell companies, are likely to enter themarket as it grows, either with their own products or throughalliances.   Promoters of the technology are no longer using theirthis-will-mean-the-end-of-life-as-we-know-it rhetoric. Butthey do expect the technology to spread broadly throughbusinesses over the next decade, as it lands on many desktopsin some combination of personal computer and telephone. Andthis time they may even be right.   &quot;The market is just exploding unbelievably,&quot; says Al Lill,who follows the video teleconferencing market for GartnerGroup Inc., a market-research firm.   Current systems are still clunky. If sold as a totalpackage, they can be as big as oversized refrigerators, witha large television screen, camera and &quot;codec,&quot; whichcompresses the video for faster transmission over phone linesand decompresses incoming signals. The systems also come withmicrophones and a control panel.   Prices typically range from $65,000 to $80,000 for eachunit, steep enough to give pause to many businesses. Butprices have come way down, from around $500,000 in themid-1980s, and the systems have improved greatly. The imagesproduced by the codecs are far clearer than they were a fewyears ago.   The phone companies have done their part to make thetechnology easier and more affordable to use. In 1984, thehigh-speed lines required for video conferences had to bereserved well in advance, and they might cost $1,000 an hour.Now, no warning is needed, and the lines may cost $15 anhour, roughly what a normal long-distance line would cost.   Prices for the hardware are expected to continue plunging-- as always seems to happen with new types of electronics.Mr. Lill of Gartner Group predicts that the cost of a codecwill fall from $30,000 to $1,000 within three years,suggesting that total systems could come in under $10,000.Even if he's overly optimistic by a few years, that's stillthe kind of price that would get lots of people to startconversing face-to-image with their colleagues.   Even at the current prices, many users say the systems'costs are justified by savings on travel. When First ChicagoCorp. bought a Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. business in NewYork, it purchased conferencing systems from PictureTel.First Chicago used the systems to help manage the takeoverand found itself saving so much on travel between Chicago andNew York that the systems paid for themselves within threemonths.   When Air Products andamp; Chemicals Inc. had a plant built inHouston, it installed systems so that people at headquartersin Allentown, Pa., could easily talk about changes inblueprints and schedules with people at the plant site.(Graphics can be printed out on paper and held in front ofthe camera or sent directly from a personal computer into thevideo conferencing equipment.)   Tom Hickey, manager of corporate communication services atAir Products, says the system allowed for much fasterdecisions, without travel. In the past, he says, significantchanges would have involved &quot;repeated phone calls andletters, and then probably a visit anyway.&quot;   Video telephones have proved useful even whenlong-distance communication isn't necessary. San Diego Countyinstalled a Compression Labs system when constructiontemporarily left the courthouse 45 miles from jail. Ratherthan transporting the judge or the prisoners back and forth,the court used a video link.   Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. hasn't tried to quantify any savingsfrom its use of video conferencing but still has investedheavily, because it feels that video improves the quality ofthe communication. Sears has Compression Labs equipment in 43rooms across the country, has 921 further rooms that canreview broadcasts from those rooms and has trained more than8,000 people to use the equipment. Sears spokesmen say theretailer is even looking to expand use of its network,especially to talk to outsiders, such as suppliers.   That may be difficult because of an old bugaboo incomputers and electronics: compatibility. PictureTel systemscan talk to other PictureTel systems but not to CompressionLabs systems or those made by anyone else. And that won'tchange until the industry agrees on standards.   An initial attempt at that should bear fruit this fall,but that will just start to solve the problem. Standards tendto be lowest common denominators, so each company's systemstill will work best with a sister system, rather than someother company's system.   In addition, the initial standard, called PX64, mainlycovers very high-speed transmissions, which offer a betterpicture. But low-speed communication is the fastest-growingpart of the market. When transmissions occur at low speeds,quick movement blurs the picture.   There are plenty of other bugs to work out, too. Althoughthe hardware is reliable these days, a recent demonstrationof a PictureTel system included an embarrassing 11 systemcrashes in an hour.   More importantly, some intended uses may turn out not tobe practical. Some retailers, hoping to send fewer people onclothes-buying trips, have found that a video link doesn'treplace being there to feel the cloth and see how it hangs ona mannequin.   Video communication forecasts start to get fanciful againwhen proponents talk about putting a system on every desktop,but there has been some progress there, too. Harris Corp.recently introduced personal-computer-based systems sellingfor about $25,000 apiece. Some of the big semiconductorcompanies are expected to produce chip sets over the nextyear or two that could allow codecs to be produced on singlecircuit boards, which could then be slipped into personalcomputers.   It could well take years before the desktop situationsorts itself out. The personal-computer types,video-conferencing types and telephone-company types willall, no doubt, think of these desktop systems as extensionsof their own technologies, and there could be a fight overwho controls the standards for how an image is displayed. Assometimes happens in technological changes, some othertechnological constituency might join in the fun, too.</TEXT></DOC>