<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910221-0121</DOCNO><DOCID>910221-0121.</DOCID><HL>   Counterpoint:   War Is the Wrong Cure for Our Wretched Oil Dependency   ----   By Carl Sagan</HL><DATE>02/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   If the Middle East had been oil-poor, would we have puthalf a million of our sons and daughters in harm's way? Wouldwe have dropped more than a million tons of high explosivesto dislodge, say, India if it had invaded Bhutan? Or if Zairewere in Rwanda, or Argentina threatening Paraguay? Among thereal and purported justifications offered for the U.N.'spunitive Middle East expedition, the one that makes the mostsense is oil -- and the prospect that some 40% of the world'soil supply might be in the hands of an uncooperative or evenhostile nation.   And so we have deployed astonishing technical wizardry --low-flying missiles that follow the terrain's every contour,munitions that can enter an air duct and demolish the innardsof a building, ground-launched missiles that shoot down othermissiles in mid-flight. At least thousands of people havealready been killed, including many women and children whocertainly themselves had no designs on the oil supply of theindustrialized world. Huge numbers more will die if the warproceeds to its next phase, ground combat. Meanwhile, adiscernible instability is growing in Muslim nations thatsupport the coalition, one of the worst oil spill in humanhistory is oozing down the Gulf, and some of the Kuwaiti oilfields are ablaze. (These fires may presage the Iraqis'threat to torch all the oil wells there; the smoke from suchfires could lead to a crop-destroying cold and drought inSouth Asia.)</LP><TEXT>   If all or much of this is to protect the economies of theU.S., Western Europe and Japan, dependent as they are onimported oil, it is reasonable to ask what efforts are beingmade to cure us of this wretched dependency. Moreover, inpeacetime, the burning of oil -- along with coal and naturalgas, the other principal fossil fuels -- generates a steadilyincreasing quantity of the main greenhouse gas, carbondioxide. All state-of-the-art computer climate modelsproject, over the next decades, warmer temperatures, moredrought in continental interiors and rising sea levels. Sincethe six hottest years of the 20th century were in the decadeending in 1990, some experts think the &quot;signature&quot; ofincreased greenhouse warming may be already here. Others aremore cautious. But the chief area of debate is not whether,but when.   You might have thought the dangers of dependence onforeign oil, apparent since the early-1970s, would haveprovided adequate reason for moving to alternative energysources. You might have thought the threat of global warmingwould have led to the same conclusion, and that theconcatenation of the two arguments would have beenpersuasive. Western Europe and Japan are convinced. They'veannounced long-term programs to wean themselves, at least inpart, from the fossil-fuel economy and reduce their carbondioxide emissions. But the U.S. -- the chief carbon dioxidepolluter -- has not.   How much money does the federal government spend each yearfor research and development into non-nuclear alternatives tofossil fuels? Roughly as much as is spent on the Gulf war inan hour. This disproportion is staggering. We are willing topay out vast sums to deter others from depriving us of ouroverseas oil, and to punish them if they do; but hardlyanything at all to free us from the debilitating necessity ofdeterring and punishing.   Along with an energy policy that looks as though thefederal government doesn't believe Americans have much of afuture is our near abandonment of effective education,including education in science and technology; our soaringhomelessness; our collapsing infrastructure; aninfant-mortality rate still the highest of all majorindustrial nations; the largest prison population of anynation on the planet; and the conversion of the U.S. from theworld's largest creditor to largest debtor.   The one alternative to fossil fuels that has beenvigorously pursued and handsomely subsidized is nuclearpower. Nuclear-power plants, whatever else you might sayabout them, certainly do not produce greenhouse gases and donot contribute at all to global warming. They might providean acceptable alternative if the following criteria weresatisfied:   1) Economic competitiveness (remember, to do this fairly,you must allow for all subsidies).   2) Long-term operational safety.   3) Absolutely reliable containment or disposals ofradioactive wastes, over the multithousand-year half-lives ofthe longer-lived radioisotopes.   4) Guarantees against diversion of weapons-grade uraniumand plutonium to nuclear weapons.   To the best of my knowledge, the simultaneous fulfillmentof these four criteria has not been accomplished.   In contrast to the free-spending government support forthe nuclear-power industry -- justified partly by the overlapwith the nuclear-weapons industry -- other alternatives tofossil fuels have had to go it pretty much on their own.Nevertheless, there are a range of alternative technologiesready or nearly ready to move into large-scale application --including solar and wind power, biomass conversion, andhydrogen fuel. When we take account of the real cost of oil-- including what it costs to protect sources of supply andto clean up the environmental damage -- some of thesetechnologies are already cheaper than oil, as well as clean,nonpolluting and inexhaustible.   A wide range of new technologies could greatly increasethe efficiency with which we use fossil fuels -- includingsafe automobiles with good acceleration that get twice oreven three times the mileage efficiency typical on Americanhighways. Some practical alternative-energy technologies andcost-effective ways to use fossil fuels more efficiently aredescribed in last September's Scientific American. Thereprobably are other technologies, yet to be invented, thatwould supply still greater fossil-fuel efficiency or evenmore compelling alternatives to fossil fuels. Where is thatold-fashioned Yankee ingenuity?   With any sensible redisposition of national priorities --by tax incentives, say, or sales-tax rebates -- theentrepreneurial opportunities in these new technologiesshould be breathtaking. But present U.S. policy seems bettersymbolized by the sale of one of the leading U.S. solarenergy companies, a subsidiary of Arco Petroleum, to anoverseas corporation.   Besides technical innovation, there are other ways inwhich corporations can contribute. For example, AppliedEnergy Services, an Arlington, Va., company, estimated theamount of carbon dioxide that would be emitted to theatmosphere during the operational lifetime of its newcoal-fired power plant, and is planting a forest in Guatemalathat will remove more than that amount of carbon dioxide fromthe atmosphere. This is responsible corporate behavior.   Sooner or later even the U.S. will have to come to gripswith the twin perils of energy dependence and global warming.As in the Darwinian paradigm of the free enterprise economy,some nations and corporations will be more ready than others.They will survive and prosper.   ---   Mr. Sagan is director of the Laboratory for PlanetaryStudies at Cornell University. His most recent book (withRichard Turco) is &quot;A Path Where No Man Thought: NuclearWinter and the End of the Arms Race&quot; (Random House, 1989).</TEXT></DOC>