<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900424-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>900424-0089.</DOCID><HL>   Sane U.S. Policy on Hostages -- at Last   ----   By Steven Emerson</HL><DATE>04/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   The weekend release of American hostage Robert Polhillafter long captivity in Lebanon shows us something important:Holding firm against terrorism works. Just last week,President Bush was facing strong criticism for refusing tosend an envoy to Damascus at the demand of Mr. Polhill'scaptors to negotiate the terms of Mr. Polhill's release. ButMr. Bush chose not to accede to such demands -- and Mr.Polhill went free all the same.   The hope is that this lesson will not be forgotten by theBush administration. It is a lesson that bears on along-standing problem: The release of this American hostageoccurred nearly 10 years to the day after President Carter'smission to save American hostages in Iran failed.</LP><TEXT>   Three U.S. administrations have been manipulated byhostage-takers. That terrorists, released hostages and thefamily members of hostages will work together to pressure theU.S. government to meet terrorist demands is understandable.What is not understandable is how the media and successiveAmerican governments have succumbed to the belief that a&quot;goodwill&quot; gesture by the U.S. toward the hostage-takers isnecessary.   Let's take a moment to review how terrorism really works.In Lebanon, Hezbollah and its front groups have beenresponsible for the kidnapping of at least 51 foreigners inLebanon from 1983 to the end of 1989. According to the latestintelligence figures, 13 of those hostages died in captivity,as a result of poor medical care, maltreatment or outrighttorture. But uncritical reporting has helped to create thepowerful illusion that the hostages have been killed inresponse to the failure of the U.S., Israel or Europeannations to meet the demands of the hostage-takers.   In general, the bark of terrorists holding hostages inLebanon has been much worse than their bite. During the pastfour years, Lebanese hostage-takers have issued more than 80threats to kill hostages. Yet, each deadline named by theterrorists has passed without incident.   In one study, released in 1989, authors at Tel AvivUniversity's Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies reportedthat:   &quot;Whatever the intent of the terrorists, no directconnection has been established between the threats and thedeath of hostages. Not only have most of the threats not beencarried out, but the few deaths that have occurred servedessentially as retaliation for specific developments orresulted from deterioration in conditions of captivity andthe state of the health of the hostages.&quot;   The report added that &quot;hostages died of sickness ortorture or were shot trying to escape. Yet their deaths werelater presented by Hezbollah as `executions' and thereforeserved the organization's propaganda purposes.&quot;   Let's examine several cases. Islamic Jihad declared inMarch 1986 that it had executed French scholar Michel Seuratin &quot;retaliation for the expulsion of 13 Moslems from France,including two opponents of the Iraqi regime.&quot; A photo ofSeurat was sent to the Beirut news agencies. In fact,intelligence sources say Seurat died of liver failure --specifically, hepatitis brought on by unsanitary conditionsand lack of medical attention. Dennis Hill, a Britishcitizen, was shot to death while attempting to escape twodays after he was kidnapped in May 1985.   American Peter Kilburn's body was found in April 1986,immediately after the U.S. bombing of Libya. But there hadbeen no ultimatum issued by his captors or killers. Kilburnhad been &quot;purchased&quot; from Hezbollah by Libyan agents andexecuted by them.   Islamic Jihad sought to exploit its capture of CentralIntelligence Agency Beirut station chief William Buckley byissuing a series of threats to kill him in the 13 monthsfollowing his kidnapping in 1984. The threats stated thatunless the government of Kuwait released the Al-Dawa 17 --Shiite terrorists arrested for a series of lethal bombings inKuwait -- or, if Kuwait carried out the death sentences thathad been imposed on three of the Al-Dawa 17, then IslamicJihad would kill Buckley. In June 1985 the Iranians toldAmerican and Israeli intermediaries that Buckley was stillalive and that his release could be arranged through barter.   In fact, Buckley almost certainly died in May 1985. He waseither executed outright or died from wounds suffered intorture inflicted by his captors. His body has never beenrecovered. In any case, his killing is virtually certain tohave occurred in the course of a brutal interrogation. Theexistence of a 400-page transcript of his &quot;confession&quot; wasfrequently mentioned throughout the Iran-Contra affair. Butthe purported transcript has never been retrieved and it isnow believed by some American intelligence officials that theIranians fabricated the document to enhance their leverageover the U.S.   The Iran-Contra affair itself demonstrated the futility ofsurrendering to the demands of hostage-takers. To induce theIranians to release three American hostages, the U.S. soldthem missiles and performed other acts of capitulation. Thehostages were released -- and three more were taken captivesoon afterward.   Last summer, President Bush faced his first challenge fromHezbollah. Israel had kidnapped terrorist commander SheikAbdul Karim Obeid from south Lebanon on July 28 and thenoffered to trade the sheikh for two Israeli soldiers and forthe American hostages held by Hezbollah. Within 36 hours ofthe abduction of Sheik Obeid, a typewritten threat was handedto news agencies in Beirut that said that Lt. Col. WilliamHiggins would be hanged unless Israel released the sheik.   The first White House reaction to the threat to killHiggins was a blunt refusal to be blackmailed. But theadministration's tough stance soon crumbled. Senate MinorityLeader Robert Dole, in remarks that White House and StateDepartment officials now say were cleared in advance, accusedIsrael of &quot;endangering American lives.&quot; Mr. Bush himselfechoed Sen. Dole's comments, criticizing the capture of SheikObeid. The president effectively equated the kidnapping ofthe sheik with Hezbollah's abduction of Higgins and otherAmericans.   Then, on July 31, Hezbollah announced to the world that ithad hanged Higgins. The organization distributed a grislyvideotape that showed the colonel twisting at the end of arope. Several days later, however, American intelligencefirmly concluded that Higgins had actually been executed somesix months earlier by his captors. The tape had been releasedin an effort to create the false impression that Higgins haddied because of America's and Israel's failure to heedHezbollah's demands.   At the same time, Hezbollah continued the game. Itthreatened to kill a second American hostage, JosephCicippio. This time the U.S. tack was the right one. TheWhite House ordered a review of the military optionsavailable against Hezbollah, including raids against theorganization's bases in Lebanon by American bombers andbombardment by U.S. battleships in the Mediterranean. TheWhite House issued a stern warning to Hezbollah unambiguouslyindicating that it would take military action if theterrorists killed Mr. Cicippio. Deterred, Hezbollahrepeatedly extended its &quot;deadline&quot; for the execution of Mr.Cicippio -- and then finally dropped the threat altogether.   But, within six weeks of the release of the video showingHiggins' death, the administration saw fit to reward Iran. InSeptember, the administration did nothing to impede anout-of-court settlement of a 10-year-old lawsuit betweenAshland Oil and the National Iranian Oil Co. that called forAshland to pay Iran $325 million. Weeks later, the U.S.agreed to allow $567 million held in escrow in an Englishbank account to be transferred to the Iranian government. Thereason given was that the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal wouldotherwise have forced the administration to free up thesefunds. But U.S. officials have admitted that there were atleast two years worth of stalling techniques left to the U.S.-- had it wanted to take a firm line against Iran. Therelease of funds to Iran amounted to a decision to letterrorists get away with killing an American.   The president's refusal to cave in to the hostage-takers'demands that he send a top American official to Damascus, andhis pointed refusal to reward Iran for Mr. Polhill's release,are good signs. But it would be wrong -- and a betrayal ofthe 600 Americans who have died since 1983 inIranian-sponsored terrorist attacks, like the Lockerbie andMarine barracks bombings -- to &quot;forgive&quot; Iran or Hezbollaheven if all the remaining hostages are released. For themoment, though, the U.S. government seems to be headed in theright direction.   ---   Mr. Emerson is the co-author of &quot;The Fall of Pan Am 103:Inside the Lockerbie Investigation,&quot; just out from Putnam.</TEXT></DOC>