<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900820-0111</DOCNO><DOCID>900820-0111.</DOCID><HL>   Ominous Pattern:   Before Its Invasion,   Iraq Strengthened Ties   To Terrorist Network   ---   Groups Invited to Baghdad,   Intelligence Agencies Say;   Hussein's Motives Unclear   ---   Abu Nidal and Hezbollah   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   WASHINGTON -- In the months leading up to Saddam Hussein'sinvasion of Kuwait, the Iraqi dictator secretly built newties with a long list of terrorist operators, U.S.intelligence agencies say.   Now he is in a position to deploy those killers andkidnappers to strike at Americans, Europeans and moderateArabs, if he decides to turn to the terrorist option in thePersian Gulf crisis.</LP><TEXT>   U.S. officials stress that the Central Intelligence Agencyand other U.S. and Allied intelligence operations haven'tdetected any specific terrorist moves to retaliate forPresident Bush's swift military deployment to the Gulf. Andthey are anxious to head off public alarm; portents ofterrorist attacks have been wrong in the past.   But the West's counterterrorism networks have gone intohigh gear in the past 10 days, issuing alerts across theworld and even within the U.S. Their worry has increased asanalysts have revisited past intelligence reports with theadvantage of hindsight and concluded that, well before theinvasion, the Iraqi dictator seemed to be methodicallyknitting together a network of old and new terrorist allies.Although for years Saddam Hussein had sat on the terrorismsidelines, even expelling some groups, now he appears in aposition to get back into the game if he chooses.   By one foreign intelligence estimate, there may be as manyas 1,400 active international terrorists now in Iraq, whichis double the estimate of just a year ago. Any attack theymight stage against Americans could put pressure on PresidentBush to order military retaliation, risking wider combat. &quot;Wehave conveyed the message to Saddam Hussein that an act ofterror will be viewed as something for which he'll be heldresponsible,&quot; says a senior administration official.   Nobody in the West knows for sure whether Saddam Husseinwill choose the path of terrorism. He faces political andlogistical problems in using terror tactics, and a growingAmerican military force on his doorstep. Experts warn thatintelligence in this field is slippery, sometimescontradictory, and subject to differing interpretations.   However, American, French and Israeli sources familiarwith intelligence on the subject say Saddam Hussein took anumber of key steps earlier this year to build up histerrorist capabilities. The various spy services don't agreeon all the details, but all are convinced that the terroristpattern is real. Among the actions by Saddam Hussein theycite are these:   -- He began reinstalling the notorious Abu NidalOrganization in Baghdad this spring. It had been exiled foryears to Libya, where it suffered a debilitating internalsplit. By some estimates, there now are hundreds of Abu Nidaloperatives training in and around Baghdad in case they areordered to repeat the group's earlier exploits, such asmachine-gunning airports and synagogues. Abu Nidal himselfmay now be in Baghdad.   -- He gave haven to his longtime terrorist protege AbuAbbas, after Mr. Abbas publicly took responsibility for anaborted attack on an Israeli beach that forced the U.S. toend talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization. Mr.Abbas's Palestine Liberation Front is also responsible forthe 1985 hijacking of the Achille Lauro cruise ship in theMediterranean, in which a wheelchair-bound American was shotand thrown into the sea.   -- He permitted Yasser Arafat and the rest of the PLOleadership to move key parts of their headquarters to Baghdadfrom Tunis. While many PLO leaders play no direct role interrorism, Western experts claim that Abu Iyad, an Arafatdeputy who is suspected of directing the killing of a U.S.diplomat in the Sudan, is in Baghdad, along with elements ofForce 17, a PLO military arm that has engaged in terrorism.   -- He opened contact with Ahmad Jibril, leader of thegroup that is believed to have blown up Pan Am flight 103over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. According to Frenchsources, Mr. Jibril was invited to open an office in Baghdadfor his Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-GeneralCommand, even though his patrons are Iraq's worst Moslemenemies: Syria and Iran. Mr. Jibril is thought to havedeclined, but has changed patrons before.   -- He may have gained a lever over another bloody groupthat is an unlikely ally: Lebanon's pro-Iranian ShiiteHezbollah, or Party of God. By seizing Kuwait, Saddam Husseinwon control over 15 Shiite terrorists in prison there,including the brother-in-law of one of Hezbollah's mostbrutal operatives, Imad Mugniyah. French intelligence sourcessay the prisoners are now in Baghdad, and Saddam is offeringto free Mr. Mugniyah's brother-in-law if Hezbollah plays ballwith him. If true, that could be ominous for the six Americanhostages the group holds, including two controlled by Mr.Mugniyah.   -- He is bidding for the backing of some groups with whichhe doesn't appear to have made contact, by calling on devoutMoslems to help him stand up to America. U.S. intelligence isespecially worried that Iraq may recruit the Islamic Jihad, aLebanon-based Palestinian group that in February shot up anIsraeli tourist bus in Egypt.   In addition to these contacts, two other major terroristfigures have long lived in Baghdad. One is Abu Ibrahim, themaster Arab terrorist bomb-maker, who devised the hiddensuitcase bomb for destroying airliners and trained others whobuilt even smaller and cleverer bombs. Mr. Ibrahim issupposedly retired, his terror group disbanded, but he is apotential asset for Saddam Hussein.   Another terrorist based in Iraq is Abu Salim, whose group,the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-SpecialCommand, claimed responsibility for the 1985 bombing of aSpanish restaurant frequented by U.S. servicemen.   Lesser groups also call Baghdad home. Iraq sponsors amarginal group called the Arab Liberation Front, and it hasbacked Kurdish terrorists in Turkey and Iranian terrorists inIran.   The last time American forces were on the ground in theMideast, it was terrorism, not conventional arms, that drovethem off, through the stunning 1983 bombing of the Marinebarracks in Lebanon.   This time, terrorists are again issuing threats. HusseinMusawi, a leader of Hezbollah, the Lebanese group that killedthe 241 Marines in 1983, has called for &quot;suicide attacks&quot;against U.S. interests, even though his pro-Iranian group hasalso condemned the Kuwait invasion. Abu Abbas, the man behindthe Achille Lauro hijacking, has told his followers to&quot;strike with your strong arms at all U.S. interests.&quot;   And, in addition to the prominent, methodical groups,experts fear that Saddam Hussein's flaming anti-Americanrhetoric could incite quicker, free-lance terrorism byunknown individuals.   &quot;Saddam Hussein is building up something, obviously,&quot; saysa French terrorism expert who writes under the pen name ofXavier Raufer. &quot;It seems that even in May and June, SaddamHussein already had something in mind.&quot;   Gary Sick, a former National Security Council specialiston the Gulf, thinks terrorist actions inspired by SaddamHussein are &quot;highly probable.&quot; He notes: &quot;This can bedirected not only at us, but also at the Saudis and theEgyptians and all of those Arab forces who have chosen tooppose him.&quot; In case of terrorism, he says, &quot;Bush will findit very hard to sit still with all those forces there.&quot;   Two days after Mr. Bush announced the U.S. intervention,the U.S. issued an innocuous-sounding travel warning that waslost in the tide of crisis coverage. &quot;The Department of Stateadvises that the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait may raise the riskof terrorist incidents directed against American interestsoverseas,&quot; it said, adding, &quot;There is, however, no specificinformation available at this time concerning such terroristoperations.&quot;   The bland announcement was the public manifestation of anintense counterterrorism effort. Since U.S. troop deploymentsbegan, American embassies and military bases have been toldto increase security. The FBI has stepped up surveillance inthe U.S., especially where troops and arms concentrate ontheir way to the Mideast. The CIA has redoubled its detectionefforts overseas, searching for signs that Iraq-inspiredgroups might be activating terror cells to kill Westerners,incite Israel to enter the fray or destabilize Arab allies ofthe U.S.   In Washington, a little-known interagency counterterrorismgroup has met frequently, sifting a surge in clandestineinformation and tips, most of them of little value. Expertsfrom the National Security Council staff, the CIA, the FBI,the Defense Intelligence Agency and the State Department alsoconfer frequently, and terrorism intelligence is a regularpart of Mr. Bush's crisis briefings.   For most of the 1980s, Iraq wasn't a leading terrorsuspect. As part of his effort to win help in the long waragainst Iran, Saddam Hussein barred active terrorism out ofBaghdad in the early 1980s. Iraq was removed from the U.S.list of terrorist states in 1982, and the next year expelledthe Abu Nidal Organization.   Now all terrorist-trackers are focused on Baghdad again.&quot;We are very, very concerned,&quot; says a senior U.S.counterterrorism official. &quot;In the context of everythingelse, it looks very ominous.&quot;   Intelligence officials are especially concerned about theAbu Nidal and Hezbollah groups -- proven masters of thebloodiest and most calculated sort of terror, with experienceoperating far from home.   Abu Nidal's band had been widely reported shattered insevere infighting that peaked last year in Libya, and AbuNidal himself (whose real name is Sabri al-Banna) has beenreported dead or imprisoned in Libya. But U.S. officials nowbelieve at least a remnant of the group has emerged infighting shape in Baghdad. The group had been expert atconcealing cells of killers in Europe, and U.S. intelligencewas particularly alarmed this spring at sudden signs that AbuNidal operatives there were stirring, traveling and holdingmeetings, after long being dormant.   French and Israeli sources go further: Both say Abu Nidalhimself is now in Baghdad. By some foreign accounts, theterrorist chief was escorted to the Iraqi capital from Libyaby a brother of Saddam Hussein. They also note signs thatscores of PLO fighters have recently defected to Abu Nidal inLebanon.   Hezbollah is doubly dangerous: It is as bloody as AbuNidal's band and despises the U.S., plus it holds the sixU.S. hostages in Lebanon. The key to its posture may lie inIran's attitude toward Iraq, and especially in the fate ofthe 15 Shiite prisoners Kuwait had held. Twelve of those areIraqi exiles who have tried to unseat Saddam Hussein, a pastthat would normally mark them for death in Iraq. But Frenchsources contend that all 15 have been taken to Baghdad, wherethey could be used as bait to coax new anti-U.S. terrorismfrom Hezbollah's Mr. Mugniyah, who holds hostages TerryAnderson and Thomas Sutherland. U.S. intelligence is strivingto locate the 15 Shiite prisoners.   Hussein Musawi, a Hezbollah leader, has called onterrorists to help dislodge the U.S. from the Persian Gulfand said that &quot;releasing the (U.S. hostages) now would be areward to the Americans for their invasion of the Gulf.&quot; IfIraq's new peace bid to Iran succeeds, the pro-IranianHezbollah may take an even harder line.   Despite the assets Saddam Hussein seems to have assembled,he still would face several obstacles that could slow or evenstop him from moving to terrorism. One is that Syria, Iraq'senemy and rival in the Arab world, opposes his invasion ofKuwait and has sent troops to help keep him out of SaudiArabia. Many of the most radical Palestinian and Shiiteterrorists owe some allegiance to Syria, which has let themoperate from Syria or Lebanon.   Moreover, though Saddam Hussein now portrays himself as aMoslem seeking to oust foreign infidels, he remainshandicapped by being known as a secular Arab who spent eightyears fighting Iran, the Shiite Moslem theocracy thatinspires some of the most active Shiite terrorists.   An additional obstacle is that most professional terroristacts take months to plan.   And, of course, the biggest constraint may be the simplefact that Saddam Hussein would have to contemplate launchingterrorism with tens of thousands of American troops on hisnation's doorstep -- a far different situation than inearlier outbreaks of terrorism, when any U.S. forces thatcould retaliate were far away.</TEXT></DOC>