<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910520-0137</DOCNO><DOCID>910520-0137.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Whom Do We Blame for Stompie Moeketsi's Death?   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>05/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A19</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>EUROPE (EU)SOUTH AFRICA (SF)</RE><LP>   Whether Winnie Mandela will ever serve the six-year jailsentence she received in a Johannesburg courtroom last weekremains problematic. Given the drawn-out appeals process inSouth Africa and her unique role in the country's turbulentpolitics, the odds are fairly high that she will never seethe inside of a jail cell.   Whether she is a villainess or herself a victim will bedebated in the drawing rooms of Georgetown and Kensingtonwith the usual fervor that surrounds all things having to dowith South African politics. It will be argued by those whowish her well that her husband, Nelson Mandela, spent 26years in jail on charges of subversion and that such asentence should be enough for the two of them.</LP><TEXT>   But the question of whether Mrs. Mandela's intense hatredof the South African system drove her to her crimes is thestuff of revolutionary debate and Greek tragedy.Revolutionaries, and those who sympathize with revolutionfrom the safety of well-ordered societies, can be left toargue her case.   A larger question has to do with whether U.S. and Europeanpolicies toward South Africa have themselves been partlyresponsible for the brutality that has come to characterizelife in South Africa's black townships. In answering thatquestion it is useful to think a bit about the main victim ofthe Winnie Mandela affair.   He was Stompie Moeketsi, a 14-year-old street urchin whowas one of four youths kidnapped from a Methodist church inSoweto in December 1988 and brutally beaten in one of Mrs.Mandela's houses. There will be no appeal for Stompie becausehe is dead. Jerry Richardson, 42, captain of a corps of thugscalled the &quot;Mandela United football team,&quot; was convicted ayear ago of slitting Stompie's throat not long after thebeatings.   In an article in London's Sunday Telegraph last July,Kenny Kgasi, another victim of the December assault,described Richardson's beating of Stompie: &quot;He kicked Stompieagainst the wall and around the room. Stompie was a bravechild and instead of lying there he struggled to get up.Every time he did so, he would be kicked in the face again. Abig lump swelled on the side of his head. Jerry looked atStompie, wriggling in agony, utterly destroyed.&quot;   Mrs. Mandela was convicted last week of kidnapping theyouths and of having been an accessory to the beatings. Thejudge accepted her claim that she was not actually presentwhen the beatings occurred. Richardson's motive for killingStompie was that he was alleged to have been an &quot;informer&quot;against the African National Congress (ANC). The threesurviving youths were beaten for their association with thechurch and its white minister, Paul Verryn.   While little Stompie's is a sordid story, it is no more sothan many hundreds of other killings of recent years.Apartheid is being dismantled and President F.W. de Klerk istrying to lead the nation toward a new racially neutralconstitution and voting rights for all nonwhites. But in whatappears to be a related phenomenon, black politics arebecoming more violent.   There are three competing black movements. Inkatha, led byMangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, is made up mostly of Zulus, thetribe that once dominated much of South Africa. Inkathalately has been attracting white members, who see it as themost moderate and progressive of black movements.   In philosophy, Chief Buthelezi is a free-market democrat.One might say he is more so than past leaders of SouthAfrica's ruling National Party. That party's patron saint,H.F. Verwoerd, not only invented apartheid but extended hissocial-engineering talents to the country as a whole, withthe result that South Africa is fundamentally a socialistcountry, even though, like Sweden, it has spared importantindustries from nationalization.   Inkatha's major rival for power is the ANC, which itselfincreasingly displays tension between its relatively moderatewing, represented by Nelson Mandela, and its Communist wing,led by a white man, Joe Slovo. ANC and Inkatha are fighting alow-grade civil war.   Finally, there is the Pan African Congress (PAC), which issounding more and more racist and anti-white. It seems to bepicking up more young black members as a result. Whether thePAC will have a role in the new South Africa, and what kindof role it will be, largely depends on how serious theproblem of black radicalization and polarization becomes.   Apartheid was clearly the root of that radicalization. Butthere are other contributing factors. The country has 5.5million unemployed, 40% of the work force. Black educationhas broken down as radical movements have pulled youths outof school. Population growth last year was 2.7%, but GNP fellslightly. Partly because of educational and industrialdisruptions, some 200,000 jobs for skilled workers gounfilled. No wonder there are thousands of young men spoilingfor trouble of the kind that occurred in Mrs. Mandela'shouse.   A sad thing about all of this is that the policies of theU.S. and Europe contributed to it, just as Chief Butheleziand other wise South African blacks predicted they would. Byforcing American and European companies to sell or closetheir South African operations, by cutting off most banklending, and by imposing trade sanctions, these policieswiped out many thousands of jobs that could now be allowingblack youths to be upwardly mobile. Equally clearly, theharshness of the Western strictures were motivated more byracial politics in the U.S. than by any serious concern forthe welfare of South African blacks.   It will, of course, be argued that these policies broughtthe National Party to its knees, forcing the changes nowcoming about. But in fact, liberalization began in the 1970s,forced by natural causes that if allowed to evolve with lessoutside interference would have reduced today's risk of adisastrous blood bath. Responsible white leaders in SouthAfrica decided years ago that blacks, Asians and coloredswould have to be granted a larger economic and political rolebecause the South African economy could not continue todevelop otherwise. It was that realization, not thesanctions, that created most of the momentum for change.   The European Community, which had mainly followed the U.S.lead on sanctions, now has removed them and European firmsare again showing an interest in South Africa. The Bushadministration is trying to do the same thing, but it appearsthat part of its deal with Congress will be to leave in placea 1983 act barring U.S. support for International MonetaryFund facilities for South Africa, which will continue tolimit that country's access to bank lending.   Will there be more Stompie Moeketsis? Of course there willbe, along with other radicalized Winnie Mandelas. Blame H.F.Verwoerd and his social engineering, but blame also someAmericans and Europeans who should have known better.</TEXT></DOC>