<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900822-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>900822-0059.</DOCID><HL>   International:   As Decaying East German Economy Collapses,   New Privatization Chief Is Struggling to Dig Out   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)</IN><LP>   EAST BERLIN -- Even before he assumed the presidency ofthe agency charged with privatizing East Germany's collapsingeconomy, West German businessman Detlev Rohwedder was dauntedby its problems.   &quot;Most of the letters I receive here with my name on them Isimply cannot answer,&quot; said Mr. Rohwedder, surveying a stackof correspondence last week.</LP><TEXT>   While Mr. Rohwedder struggles to find answers, EastGermany is coming apart at the seams. Production is spiralingdownward as unemployment soars. Most investors remain on thesidelines, and companies can't sell their products toconsumers, who prefer Western goods. Thousands of angryfarmers drove here in tractors and reapers last week to peltEast German government ministers with eggs and tomatoes theycouldn't sell.   Mr. Rohwedder was interviewed a few days before he becamepresident of the trust company set up to safeguard EastGermany's 8,000 companies -- and to liquidate those thatcan't survive in the capitalist atmosphere that will prevailwhen Germany unifies later this year. Until Monday, he wasthe administrative supervisor of the agency, called theTreuhandanstalt, but then succeeded Reiner Maria Gohlke, whoresigned. Industry sources say that Mr. Gohlke wasoverwhelmed by the task and that Bonn was frustrated by hispoor results.   Mr. Rohwedder says his staff is already overwhelmed bypetitions from people demanding help -- dubious investorsentangled in legal webs, desperate company managers and angryworkers.   Now, East Germany's governing coalition has collapsed.Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere, more in an act of economiccapitulation than political triumph, yesterday announced anagreement with most East German political parties to set Oct.14 as the date for unification, six weeks ahead of theoriginally planned Dec. 2 date. But within hours, the SocialDemocrats rebelled and said they would push for even earlierunification -- on Sept. 15 -- because of the speed of EastGermany's economic collapse.   Meanwhile, all that is keeping East Germany alive is WestGerman largesse -- grants, subsidies and loans from agovernment that must fear the electoral consequences ofeconomic chaos in East Germany when it faces all-Germanelections in December. Heiner Flassbeck of the GermanEconomic Research Institute in Berlin already is raising hisestimate for the two Germanys' budget deficit for this yearby 10 billion marks ($6.39 billion) to 66 billion marks,almost all of that due to the cost of unification. WestGermany's budget deficit was only 4.5 billion marks lastyear.   Yet at the Treuhandanstalt, Mr. Rohwedder still hasn'tenough information on East German companies to properly passout some 22.5 billion marks in emergency lending that hasalready been approved for East German companies.   &quot;We do not even yet know whether we are giving the cash tothe right people,&quot; says Mr. Rohwedder, who adds that thecompany's books are in such chaos that the Treuhandanstaltwon't know their true status until their first, Western-styleprofit-and-loss statements arrive Sept. 30. &quot;We can't eventell yet which companies don't need help at all and whichothers don't deserve it.&quot;   The sheer size of the task not only challenges West GermanChancellor Helmut Kohl, who is campaigning to lead thereunited Germany, but it also raises profound worries aboutthe prospects for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. Sovietleader Mikhail Gorbachev has told West German officials thathe needs success in East Germany to sway skeptics in his owncountry, a senior Bonn official says.   &quot;We are still far away from collapse,&quot; says Mr. Rohwedder.&quot;But if the transitional problems are so complex anddifficult in East Germany, with its strong partner in theWest, it is difficult to see how the Russians would ever copythe situation unless someone {with lots of money} takes themby the hand and leads them. Against this background, I amgloomy about the potential of Russians recovering or changingtheir economic system. . . . This thing has never been donebefore, and it is very complicated.&quot;   Visits to East German companies and farms show an economydangerously adrift. Industrial companies lack liquidity andinvestors, farms don't have customers or competitiveproducts, and consumers are spending little of what moneythey earn on East German products.   Less than one year ago, the chairman of East Germany'slargest and only tire-making company, Norbert Novakowski, wasfinishing his studies at the elite Communist Party CentralCommittee training institute in Berlin. Yet West Germanbankers now consider Mr. Novakowski to be one of the mostskilled converts to capitalism.   Mr. Novakowski was among the first to begin privatizinghis company. He sold off a retread company that could only beprofitable in an East German economy of tire shortages, andhe closed down a motorcycle and bicycle-tire company thatcouldn't compete with Western prices. But now he has runaground in an economy that lacks paying customers.   Nervous consumers either are buying Western cars for whichhe can't yet make tires or saving their money in expectationof hard times. His biggest industrial customer, the giant IFAtruck-making factory, is still ordering tires, but it can'tpay its bills. In response, Mr. Novakoski isn't paying forhis synthetic rubber shipments from Buna AG, one of thecountry's largest chemical companies. &quot;I can produce as muchas I want, but no one I deliver to in East Germany can payme,&quot; he says, &quot;And that means I can't pay others.&quot;   &quot;This vicious cycle is repeated almost everywhere in theEast German economy,&quot; says Kurt Kasch, a board member atDeutsche Bank, which Treuhandanstalt officials estimate ismanaging nearly half the loans they are distributing. &quot;Whatwe are witnessing is an economy without cash. The toughchoice for Bonn is either to throw more money into industryor allow unemployment to spread. If Helmut Kohl, who has beenso successful in foreign policy, is not careful, East Germaneconomic problems could harm his election campaign.&quot;   But if East Germany's industrial picture is bleak, itsagricultural outlook is disastrous. Werner Wuehst, presidentof the farmers association, says more than half of the 3,850agricultural cooperatives are near collapse. Many haven'tpaid salaries since July. Their products are poorly packaged,don't taste as good and cost more to produce due to outmodedtechnologies and forced use of relatively unproductive land.After farmers' protests that included herding pigs to theParliament, dumping milk on city council steps and burningcrops that couldn't be sold, Bonn pledged 5.6 billion marksto support agriculture.   The chairman of one of East Germany's largest agriculturalcooperatives, Wilfried Klatt, complains that he can't evensell his goods to the local supermarket, Kaufhalle, in hisfarm's home village of Klosterfelde. He offered the storewholesale beef prices that were 20% below what it was paying,but the owner declined the deal. The owner explained that hiscontract only allowed him to buy from his West Germandistributor. Increasingly emotional East Germans suspect aWest German plot to so undermine their companies and farmsthat they can be bought cheaply.   So Mr. Klatt declared war on the supermarket, cutting hisprices even lower and selling them out of a truck at the backgate of his cooperative. Word has spread that the battle isagainst the West German distributor, and local buyers line upto support the fight.   Having heard of Mr. Klatt's economic woes, West Germanmerchants came to town last week to offer to buy 300 of hiscows for half the price they would pay their own farmers. &quot;Itwas humiliating. Do you know what I would like to do withthese people?&quot; he says, twisting his thick hands together asif to break a neck.   Yet Mr. Klatt is optimistic that he'll survive underfree-market conditions. He's cutting production of potatoesand grain in half -- the soil is too sandy to grow themeconomically. He'll concentrate on livestock, milk cows andgrain. Mr. Klatt has already consulted a Dutch designer tomake his packaging more attractive.   &quot;None of us wants to go backwards, but we also need timeto become competitive,&quot; says Helgard Krowal, who managesanimal production at the cooperative. &quot;Other EuropeanCommunity countries, such as Spain and Portugal, had years toadjust their agricultural policies before joining, so why dothey expect us to do it overnight?&quot;   She can't imagine that the West German government canallow the cooperative, however inefficient, to go underovernight. The cooperative consists of 4,000 hectares of land(9,880 acres), 5,300 head of cattle, 1,600 milk cows and7,500 pigs. It produces 17 tons of milk a day, and 8,000 tonsof potatoes a year. As Mrs. Krowal walks through a huge barn,she frowns.   &quot;You can't just stop milking those cows,&quot; she says. Shenotes that while fewer than 300 days have passed since theBerlin Wall was opened, it takes 329 days to breed a pigbefore slaughter and more than twice that time for cattle.   &quot;The problem is that the unification process has takenless time than the cycle for a pig,&quot; she explains.</TEXT></DOC>