<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910521-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>910521-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Moscow Spring:   In the Soviet Union,   Infighting Gives Way   To a Fragile Optimism   ---   Gorbachev and Rivals Agree   On Initial Steps to Divide   Power, Reform Economy   ---   But Many Tensions Remain   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- In this nation of shortages, where optimism isperhaps in shortest supply of all, something unexpected ishappening: Suddenly, a few rays of hope are piercing theclouds.   After months of paralyzing battle between PresidentMikhail Gorbachev and the leaders of the Soviet republics,the parties have agreed to put aside their differences andtry building a peace. For the first time, they have made acommitment, on paper at least, to turn the U.S.S.R. into avoluntary union of sovereign republics, with a legitimatelyelected government and a market-based economy.</LP><TEXT>   When such an agreement was signed on April 23 by Mr.Gorbachev and the leaders of nine of the 15 republics,including Boris Yeltsin of Russia, many thought it was just acynical Kremlin ruse to buy time. But events in succeedingdays seem to indicate otherwise.   Just last week, the central government and officials frommost republics made significant headway on the key issue ofhow to divide economic power among themselves. Ivan Silayev,the prime minister of the Russian republic, says an accordthat would transfer much of the Kremlin's control over theeconomy to the republics should be ready in about two weeks.It would provide the basis for an agreement on a newpolitical structure that could be signed soon thereafter.Several months later would come a new constitution andnational government elections.   This new cooperation could still easily founder. Thepressure from hard-liners that led Mr. Gorbachev to rejectearlier attempts at decentralization is still there.Moreover, the task of revamping the nation's highlycentralized structure is vast and complex, and it may be madeharder by lingering personal bitterness between theparticipants. Civil strife still threatens daily.   But &quot;the situation is now changing quickly,&quot; insistsValentin Sergeyev, chief spokesman for the Russiangovernment. &quot;The confrontation has gone.&quot;   Even some who have been especially despondent in recentmonths are starting to perk up. &quot;I don't know how to evaluatethe changes,&quot; says Yelena Kotova, an advocate of marketeconomics who heads the Moscow city council's privatizationagency. &quot;But in my feelings, the situation is much morefavorable for a radicalization and acceleration of reform.&quot;   Two major forces are driving the new spirit ofconciliation. The first is a realization on all sides thatmonths of confrontation have achieved little but chaos. Thesecond is the catastrophic decline of the economy, a declinedue partly to deadlock between the Kremlin and the republics.   If the current movement toward compromise continues -- andthat remains a big if -- the Soviet Union could potentiallybe transformed into a more democratic entity, one in whichthe republics' leaders play a much greater role. Even beforesuch a process gets under way, the West will have to decidewhether and how to support it. The Kremlin is alreadycanvassing for Western financial and technical aid. Mr.Gorbachev himself is angling for an invitation to the Julymeeting of the group of seven industrial nations. And he ispressing hard for a meeting with President Bush in the nearfuture.   Graham Allison, a Harvard professor who has monitored thesituation, contends that &quot;two shoes have to drop&quot; before theWest should offer aid. First, the Soviets should achievepolitical democracy with an elected government. The April 23agreement suggests this is at least in the cards, he says.Second, a market-oriented economic plan must be put in place.Here, too, there are some early signs of movement. Severalrepublics, notably Russia, are drafting their own plans tofree up prices, sell state-owned enterprises on a large scaleand promote fiscal discipline.   Meanwhile, Grigory Yavlinsky, a reformist Soviet economistwho devised a plan to overhaul the economy last year, only tohave it rejected by Mr. Gorbachev, is at work again -- thistime with assistance from American economists. They includeJeffrey Sachs, who helped devise Poland's market reforms. Adraft program, which relies heavily on Western aid, isexpected to be ready by the end of this week.   Mr. Yavlinsky says he has received tacit support from Mr.Gorbachev. But in a sign of how fragile the new peace is, Mr.Yavlinsky says he declined to be included in a planned Sovieteconomic mission to Washington, even though Mr. Gorbachevinvited him. Still suspicious of the government's motives, hewarns: &quot;You have to be very careful.&quot;   Officials say the emerging agreement on a new Sovieteconomic structure differs markedly from the radical &quot;500Day&quot; plan presented last August. That plan provedunacceptable to hard-liners because it raised the risk of acomplete breakup of the U.S.S.R. The new accord, by contrast,would maintain a clearly defined role for the Kremlin.   A central bank would continue to function, guaranteeingmonetary union, and the republics would continue to fund anational budget. Although the Kremlin would cede most of itspowers over industry, natural resources and foreign trade, itwould still run the army, the railroads and other crucialinfrastructure. It would retain a monopoly on the licensingof some exports, including strategic technology, Mr. Silayevsays.   Some Western analysts say this makes sense. &quot;Some thingshave to be done at a union level. You can't decentralizecompletely,&quot; says Stanley Fischer, a Massachusetts Instituteof Technology economist who has studied the Soviet economy.   It remains uncertain whether Mr. Gorbachev can winbroad-based support for the new proposals. The ministry ofdefense, for example, recently submitted a list of its owneconomic demands that runs counter to the trend. According tothe independent Interfax news agency, they include strictereconomic centralization.   But for those republics seeking to leave the U.S.S.R.,particularly the Baltic states of Latvia, Estonia andLithuania, the new consensus is clearly reason for hope. TheApril 23 accord specifically said that every republic wouldhave the right to decide whether to join the new federation.The statement &quot;is very interesting. We look at itoptimistically,&quot; says Janis Jukans, Latvia's foreignminister. Soviet officials say secession still would probablybe extremely complex, involving a long process of negotiationand popular votes.   The new mood of conciliation comes just a few months afterrelations between Mr. Gorbachev and most of the country'srepublics hit an all-time low. When Soviet troops stormed theTV station in Lithuania earlier this year, killing 13civilians, resistance to the central national authority wasgalvanized. Most republics later refused to sign a new treatyof the union put forward by Mr. Gorbachev, saying it didn'tgo nearly far enough in respecting their sovereignty.   Events came to a climax at an extraordinary Congress ofRussian Deputies that started in late March. Communisthard-liners called it hoping to unseat Mr. Yeltsin in theRussian republic, but the tables quickly were turned. Thehard-liners backed down, and Mr. Yeltsin won sweeping newauthority to rule. To the surprise of some, he concluded theCongress with a conciliatory speech.   &quot;The U.S.S.R. president and the union leadership shouldknow that any disagreements, however acute they may be, willnot impede businesslike cooperation between the union and theRussian leadership,&quot; he said, to strong applause.   Many see that speech as a turning point. The newconciliation evident in the U.S.S.R. &quot;is a logicalextension,&quot; of Mr. Yeltsin's remarks, says Mr. Silayev, theRussian republic's prime minister.   Mr. Gorbachev began to cooperate with Mr. Yeltsin, eagerto quiet unrest at home and assure the West that he remainedcommitted to reform. He took several Yeltsin aides with himon his April trip to Tokyo. Then days after his return toMoscow, Mr. Gorbachev spent 10 hours at a government dachawith republic leaders, discussing many of their basicdisagreements and signing the landmark April 23 accord.   A few days later, Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Yeltsin quicklyresolved one of the most contentious issues hampering theircooperation: the question of what role the so-calledautonomous regions within the Russian republic should play ina new federal structure. Russian officials had worried thatMr. Gorbachev, by seeking to give these entities upgradedstatus, was trying to destroy the territorial unity of therepublic. But the two men were able to find a compromise --the regions could sign a new union treaty, but only as partof the Russian republic -- that proved acceptable to all butone of the autonomous regions.   &quot;For the first time, Mikhail Gorbachev agreed with ourposition that the most important thing is to preserve theunity of Russia,&quot; says Ruslan Khasbulatov, a Yeltsin aide whoattended the meeting.   There were other factors, too, pressing the nation'sleaders to put aside their personal differences. Soviet grossnational product is falling rapidly -- about 10% in the firstquarter -- and is expected to continue its slide this year.Oil production, which has kept the economy afloat fordecades, is slumping, as is foreign trade. Exports declinedby 18% in the first quarter, while imports plunged by 45%.The only indicator that is rising is inflation: The CIA lastweek estimated it will top 100% this year.   Worst of all, the nation has growing balance of paymentstroubles. Its financing requirements to service foreign debtare estimated at more than $20 billion this year -- money thenation just doesn't have.   Against this bleak backdrop, Mr. Gorbachev's attempts toshore up the economy with centralized actions have failedmiserably, further alienating the disgruntled population.Notably, big price increases that the government had hopedwould put more goods on store shelves haven't had thateffect.   Thus, to stave off complete collapse, the warringpolitical factions were in large measure forced into eachother's arms. Of course, too much can be expected from thenew spirit of cooperation in Moscow, for old grudges diehard. On the very Tokyo trip that highlighted the new jointefforts between Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Yeltsin, the Sovietpresident couldn't resist taking a shot at his Russian rival.At a press conference, Mr. Gorbachev complained that Mr.Yeltsin is inclined to say one thing one day, &quot;but wait acouple of days and you may hear something utterly differentfrom him. I know, I have had that experience.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>