<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900703-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>900703-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   The Right Not to Agree</HL><DATE>07/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><LP>   I was amused to see your June 18 editorial &quot;The Flag andthe Community&quot; glorifying the repression of free speech inthis country directly above another denouncing a similarmovement in Romania. I'm not so amused by the idea that youand Ion Illiescu seem to agree on so many issues.   You blame the media for the hype surrounding theflag-burning amendment, 2 Live Crew's outlawed album and manycontroversial art exhibits. Mr. Illiescu blames the media forthe anti-government uprisings in his country. It's not therepressive governmental policies that matter to you, it's thefact that the media is letting the people know what'shappening. It's funny what a stir the truth can cause.</LP><TEXT>   You write that a community has rights superior to anindividual's. It can force individuals to have cleanthoughts, provide them with sanitized artwork, and make themrespect the community's symbol of liberty. Mr. Illiescu hasshown us that a truncheon is a very effective tool for acommunity trying to teach its members which opinions areacceptable.   We need judgment, you say; we need standards. Never mindthat artistic opinions are subjective, and that anindividual's definition of quality art and acceptable speechmay not agree with a community's good taste. It's notacceptable for those with minority opinions to create andappreciate their art. It needs to be outlawed, repressed,forced underground. A club-wielding mob is the only organismwith a valid opinion. We need judgment. We need standards.   Free speech doesn't mean the right to governmentsubsidies, or the right to force your work upon an unwillingcommunity. It means the right not to agree with thecommunity; the right not to accept what its symbols have cometo represent; the right to choose what you read, say, view,think; the right to be left alone.   Jonathan Velline   Richmond, Calif.   ---   Bravo] It gives me great pleasure to see a voice of reasonand common sense. More people need to realize that communitystandards are established so that we might have a stablefoundation in our society. They are not established torepress individualism, but to give individuals theopportunity to learn and grow.   Thomas Wall   Loveland, Ohio   ---   I hate to break the news to you, but community standardshave been in decline for years, torn apart by drugs,homelessness and racial tension.   You presume our homespun values are suddenly under attackby leftist zealots. Some perspective may help. BasilPatterson's displeasure with crudity could apply to 1970,1980 or 1990. Foul language heard on the streets, on TV or inmusic has long existed. When Trent Lott pontificates aboutAmerica &quot;drifting into moral decay&quot; it sounds as thoughMcCarthy hearings are back in session. These media-hungrypoliticians fish for soundbites while ignoring the rootcauses of despair.   Rather than dwell on burning flags, why not examine thecauses of flag-burning, the daily horrors of poverty andself-destruction that drive people to set fire to aconveniently potent symbol.   Morey Stettner   Sacramento, Calif.   ---   Your views on flag desecration, abortion, gay rights andpornography as art show remarkable insight into today'smorass of liberal media distortion. I may not agree with yourevery editorial view, but as a conservative Christian, Iappreciate your paper as a breath of fresh air.   Tom Chaffin   Principal   Liberty Baptist School   San Jose, Calif.   ---   There is a choice available currently. You can go see 2Live Crew (and be warned in advance of the explicit nature ofthe performance) or you can stay away. The marketplace candetermine whether 2 Live Crew should be allowed to perform.If the performance is foul and rude and unacceptable bycommunity standards, people will cease buying their product.   You say: &quot;It is sometimes called having a sense ofjudgment.&quot; Your position would disallow me the opportunity tomake such a judgment for myself. What we are arguing is amatter of taste, and there is no dispute in matters of taste.   Cary M. Crisp   North Plainfield, N.J.   ---   You seem to feel it's OK for government to enforce a&quot;sense of community&quot; by arresting people who make phonographrecords or who protest against the government by attackingits symbol (the flag). At the same time, you seem to thinkit's a bad thing that in Romania printers of a newspaper --&quot;doubtless pushed by the government&quot; -- interfere with thepublication of a newspaper critical of that government. I'msure that, for the moment, you would be able to draw somelines differentiating these two positions. But I think that,in the case of the U.S. Constitution, those sorts of lineshave to last for, and be more enduring, than the moment.Let's let ideas compete in the marketplace, too.   Mark Goldstein   Senior Director of Business Affairs   Warner Bros. Records   Burbank, Calif   ---   Liberal activists claim to oppose a constitutionalamendment allowing Congress and the states to prohibitflag-burning because such an amendment would somehowdestabilize the Bill of Rights. But how stable is a 5-4decision of the Supreme Court? One vote by an unelectedlawyer is hardly the bedrock upon which to base an allegedlyfundamental right of free expression for an entire nation.   The liberal pundits opposed to the proposed flag amendmentconveniently ignore the ultimate provision of the Bill ofRights: &quot;The powers not delegated to the United States by theConstitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, arereserved to the States respectively, or to the people.&quot;   At the heart of the flag-burning controversy is thefederal judiciary's usurpation of a power &quot;reserved to theStates respectively, or to the people&quot; by the 10th Amendment.The proposed flag amendment simply states that, &quot;The Congressand the States shall have power to prohibit the physicaldesecration of the flag of the United States.&quot; Had thisamendment been drafted by James Madison, it may well haveread: &quot;Among the powers reserved to the States respectively,or to the people, is the power to prohibit the physicaldesecration of the flag of the United States.&quot; Far fromdestabilizing the Bill of Rights, this new proposed amendmentmerely reaffirms the ultimate provision of the Bill of Rightsin one specific context.   The American system of government is based upon theconsent of the governed. The Declaration of Independenceproclaims that &quot;Governments . . . deriv(e) their just powersfrom the consent of the governed,&quot; the opening words of theConstitution are &quot;We the people,&quot; and Article V of theConstitution requires the consent of three-fourths of theStates for amendments to the Constitution.   If the states and the people wish to exercise theirconstitutional power under the 10th Amendment to prohibitflag-burning, and to amend the Constitution pursuant toArticle V so as to prevent the federal judiciary from furtherusurping that power, the proposed flag amendment is by farthe most stability-enhancing measure for &quot;We the people&quot; toprotect our rights and powers under the Bill of Rights.   Joseph E. Schmitz   Washington   ---   I couldn't agree more with your seeing something&quot;preposterous&quot; in stopping flag-burning by amending ourConstitution.   Whatever became of our old-fashioned remedies such as&quot;Citizens-arrest&quot; and the &quot;Disturbing-the-peace&quot; ordinances?   Or have we patriotic, peaceful and law-abiding folksomehow, somewhere along the way lost another constitutionalright?   Roy B. Lang Jr.   Sunnyvale, Calif.   ---   Every country has a flag. It is the Constitution that setsthe U.S. apart, and the Bill of Rights is the Constitution'ssoul. To restrict the First Amendment to ban flag desecrationis to desecrate the Constitution. Ideals and principles aremore important than symbols.   F. Richard Cosin   Administrative Law Judge   San Francisco</TEXT></DOC>