<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900907-0048</DOCNO><DOCID>900907-0048.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Ex-Thomson McKinnon Director   Is Indicted in Insider Trading Case   ----   By John R. Wilke and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/07/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   S.ABB ASEAY LABOR TMA UTX</CO><IN>BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SECURITIES (SCR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   Charles H. Howard III, former director and first vicepresident of defunct Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc., wasindicted by a federal grand jury on conspiracy, obstructionand perjury charges in connection with a broad Securities andExchange Commission investigation of insider trading in NewEngland thrift stocks.   Mr. Howard, 45 years old, was once a star performer forthe firm and a key player in the hot market for New Englandthrift stocks in the mid-1980s. Thomson McKinnon Securitiesfiled for bankruptcy-court protection last year.</LP><TEXT>   The Justice Department said the charges are related to theSEC's 1987 investigation of alleged insider trading inconnection with the public announcement that Suffield SavingsBank, Suffield, Conn., planned to acquire Coastal SavingsBank of Portland, Maine.   The investigation touched off a broad probe of insidertrading in New England bank stocks, and resulted inadditional charges of securities violations by ThomsonMcKinnon Securities. The firm paid $320,000 in fines lastyear to four New England states to settle charges that Mr.Howard and others sold securities without licenses.   The investigations also led to a blizzard of lawsuits andto the conviction in New Haven of Robert C. DiGennaro,Suffield's former chairman and chief executive, on insidertrading and other charges.   According to the indictment of Mr. Howard, announced byU.S. Attorney Wayne A. Budd in Boston, Mr. Howard conspiredwith others to conceal that investors had purchased Coastalstock prior to the announcement of the merger on the basis ofinside knowledge. The indictment also charges that he triedto obstruct the SEC's investigation and perjured himself intestimony before commission investigators.   Mr. Howard made his name mainly as a financial adviser tosmall New England savings banks, many of which converted frommutual to public ownership in the mid-1980s. During much ofthe bull market, New England thrift stocks were starperformers, and Mr. Howard was their most visible andflamboyant advocate.   He not only helped the fledgling public companies drum upinterest in their shares, he helped invest the capital theyraised in the public offerings. In many cases, the banks headvised invested large amounts in each other.   But things began to sour two years ago, as federal andstate investigators poked into irregular trading in NewEngland bank stocks and many of the banks sustained steepportfolio losses.   Mr. Howard couldn't be reached for comment. But hisattorney, Steven M. Gordon, said Mr. Howard &quot;has known thathe was a target of a federal investigation for a number ofyears.&quot; He said that Mr. Howard is &quot;in some respects relievedthat he will now be provided with the specifics of theallegations against him and be permitted to fully contest thecharges.&quot; He declined to comment further.   ---   NEW CHARGES are filed in Combustion Engineeringinsider-trading case.   The Securities and Exchange Commission filed an amendedcivil suit making new allegations in the case involving AseaBrown Boveri Group Ltd.'s takeover last year of CombustionEngineering. The amended complaint, filed in federal court inManhattan, names Christian Norgren, a former director of ABB,as a defendant and accuses him of tipping off a friend and abusiness associate about plans for the $1.6 billion takeover.   Mr. Norgren, a Swedish citizen living in Liechtenstein,resigned as a director of ABB, a Swedish-Swisspower-generation company, last November, a few days after theinitial SEC suit was filed in the case. Mr. Norgren also wasfired as president of Bank in Liechtenstein. He is part ownerof Finacor Anstalt, a Liechtenstein financial-services firmcharged in the SEC suit of making illegal profits of $2.5million on the alleged insider trading.   The SEC accused Mr. Norgren of purchasing CombustionEngineering common stock and call-option contracts throughFinacor just days before the $40-a-share offer was announcedon Nov. 13. In the amended suit, the SEC said Mr. Norgrenrecommended the stock to a friend as &quot;the chance of alifetime.&quot; In the suit, the SEC said that the friend sold thesecurities at a small loss the next day after he learned fromMr. Norgren that the recommendation was based on insideinformation. The SEC said the friend warned Mr. Norgren thattrading on such information is illegal in the U.S.   Mr. Norgren couldn't be reached for comment. Finacor saidthe amended complaint &quot;represents an unwarranted effort toexpand the charges in this case.&quot; Finacor's attorney, ThomasE. Engel of New York, said that the SEC had &quot;frustrated&quot;Finacor's efforts to rescind the trades and has &quot;refused toconsider any reasonable resolution&quot; of the matter.   In connection with the alleged insider-trading scheme, theSEC also filed a civil suit yesterday against HowardMarguleas, a businessman in Rancho Mirage, Calif. Mr.Marguleas agreed to settle the suit, without admitting ordenying the allegations, by instructing his brokerage houseto turn over to the SEC $229,000, which the SEC said wasillegal profits from the alleged insider trading. The moneywas held by the brokerage house after Mr. Marguleas tried toreverse the transactions.   The SEC alleged that Mr. Norgren told Mr. Marguleas aboutABB's planned offer during a business meeting in New York onNov. 7, 1989. The SEC said in the suit that Mr. Marguleasagreed to buy the securities on Mr. Norgren's behalf, butthen tried to reverse the transactions after the takeover wasannounced.   Mr. Marguleas said he tried to reverse the transactionafter having second thoughts about its legality. He said hevoluntarily reported the trading to the SEC and that he hascooperated fully with its investigation. The SEC sought nofines or injunctions against Mr. Marguleas.   ---   JUDGE REFUSES TO DISMISS obscenity charges in Mapplethorpeexhibit case.   Cincinnati's Contemporary Arts Center and its director,Dennis Barrie, previously were indicted on charges ofviolating Ohio's obscenity law in April by displayingsexually graphic photographs in an exhibition of works by thelate photographer Robert Mapplethorpe. They sought dismissalof the charges on grounds the material isn't obscene asdefined under constitutional law.   But Hamilton County Municipal Judge F. David J. Albaneserejected the argument, saying it is up to a jury to decidethe obscenity issue. He ordered the defendants to stand trialSept. 24, the same day they will be tried on a relatedmisdemeanor charge stemming from the Mapplethorpe exhibit.   Judge Albanese also upheld a prosecutors' motion to limitthe evidence in the obscenity case to five photographsdescribed in the indictment. The defendants had contendedthat the five pictures must be considered in the context ofthe entire exhibit, which included photographs that weren'tsexually oriented. But Judge Albanese ruled that &quot;eachphotograph has a separate identity.&quot;   Marc Mezibov, an attorney in Cincinnati for thedefendants, said, &quot;We're certainly not pleased&quot; with theruling.   He said the judge is expected to issue guidelinesclarifying his opinion and that a decision on whether toappeal won't be made until then.   ---   CARPENTERS UNION in New York is sued for alleged ties toorganized crime.   The U.S. Attorney's office in Manhattan filed a civillawsuit under the Racketeer Influenced and CorruptOrganizations Act accusing the leaders of the carpentersunion of running a protection racket that collected payoffsfrom contractors.   The suit claims that union leaders and organized-crimefamilies extorted the payments in exchange for guaranteeinglabor peace. The suit, the result of a joint federal, state,and city investigation, says some contractors were allowed toget around union work and safety rules in return for thepayoffs.   The suit asks that an independent trustee be appointed torun the 30,000 member union, the largest construction unionin New York City.   &quot;Union members' rights have been systematically traded forsecret payoffs,&quot; says the suit, filed in federal court inManhattan. &quot;Those who opposed this corrupt state of affairs-- whether employees or union members -- have beenintimidated into silence by violence, threats, economiccoercion, and the known ties between corrupt union officersand organized crime.&quot;   The defendants include the governing body of the union,four union officials and six alleged members of the Genoveseorganized-crime family. The suit doesn't specify how much theunion leaders and the mob allegedly received fromcontractors.   A spokesman for the union declined to comment on theallegations.   ---   DISTRIBUTOR WINS $6 million in damages in a verticalprice-fixing verdict.   A federal jury in Atlanta awarded $2 million in damages,to be trebled under antitrust law, to DeLong Equipment Co.,an Atlanta distributor of metal-polishing agents, in aprice-fixing case. DeLong alleged that it was terminated as adistributor of a polishing agent made by Washington MillsAbrasive Co., North Grafton, Mass., because DeLong wouldn'tjoin in a scheme to fix the price of the material sold to thePratt andamp; Whitney Aircraft division of United TechnologiesCorp. Pratt andamp; Whitney used the material in making jet-engineparts for the U.S. military and others.   DeLong alleged that Washington Mills relabeled genericpolishing material as &quot;special&quot; and doubled its price.   An attorney for Washington Mills said the company will askthe judge to set aside the jury verdict.   ---   Wayne E. Green and Martha Brannigan contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>