<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910605-0094</DOCNO><DOCID>910605-0094.</DOCID><HL>   Soviets Need Honest Money, Not Aid   ----   By Steven H. Hanke</HL><DATE>06/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   Mikhail Gorbachev hopes to attend the London meeting ofthe seven major industrial nations this month in order toplead his case for Western economic aid. Earlier this month,the Soviet Union's prime minister, Valentin Pavlov, explainedthat one of the major reasons for that aid is to prevent acomplete collapse of the ruble.   Since the Soviet government canceled its 50- and 100-rublenotes earlier this year, individual Soviets have had noconfidence in the ruble. To protect their wealth fromovernight expropriation, Soviets substitute &quot;zelyonenki&quot;(greenbacks) for rubles. That substitution is very costly forthe Soviet Union. Individual Soviets probably hold about $10billion in foreign currency, or about $30 per person. Toobtain those little bits of paper, which are produced byWestern central banks at virtually no cost, Soviets mustexchange real goods and services. The flight from the rublegenerates a perverse form of foreign aid that flows from theSoviet Union to the West.</LP><TEXT>   To reverse that aid flow, the Soviet Union must install amonetary system that is sound, well understood and simple tooperate. A currency board system would meet theserequirements.   More than 60 countries (mainly former British colonies)have had currency boards. So long as they kept their boards,all of those countries successfully maintained convertibilityat a fixed exchange rate.   Under a currency board system, there is no central bank.Instead, the currency board issues notes and coins. These areconvertible into a foreign reserve currency at a fixed rateand on demand. As reserves, the board holds high-quality,interest-bearing securities denominated in the reservecurrency. Its reserves are equal to 100%, or slightly more,of its notes and coins in circulation, as set by law. Acurrency board does not accept deposits and it generatesincome from the difference between the interest paid on thesecurities it holds and the expense of maintaining its noteand coin circulation. It has no discretionary monetarypolicy. Instead, market forces alone determine the moneysupply.   As long as they used the currency board system, Britain'scolonies enjoyed the same relatively low inflation rates asdid the metropolitan center they were linked to by theirreserve currency; branch banks from the metropolitan centerswere prominent; residents had access to capital atcompetitive rates; indigenous firms, often with correspondentarrangements in the metropolitan centers, developed tointermediate between local savers and investors; and relativeprices were roughly in line with those on world markets.   With independence and as an expression of nationalism,most currency boards were replaced by central banks. Inconsequence, the quality of their domestic currenciesdeteriorated sharply. However, currency boards still exist inHong Kong, Singapore and Brunei, where they continue tooperate with great success.   There is even an historical precedent in Russia for acurrency board. After the Bolshevik revolution, when troopsfrom Britain and other allied nations invaded northernRussia, the currency was in chaos. The Russian civil war hadbegun, and every party to the conflict was issuing its ownnear-worthless money. There were more than 2,000 separateissuers of fiat rubles. Trade was difficult because fewpeople would accept fiat rubles in exchange for goods andservices.   To facilitate trade, the British established a NationalEmission Caisse for northern Russia in 1918. The caisseissued &quot;British ruble&quot; notes. They were backed by poundssterling and convertible into pounds at a fixed rate. BritishForeign Office archives reveal that the father of the Britishruble was none other than John Maynard Keynes, who was aBritish Treasury official at the time.   Despite the civil war, the British ruble was a greatsuccess. The currency never deviated from its fixed exchangerate with the British pound. In contrast to other Russianrubles, the British ruble was a reliable store of value.Naturally, the British ruble drove other rubles out ofcirculation. Unfortunately, the British ruble's life wasbrief: The National Emission Caisse ceased operations in1920, after allied troops withdrew from Russia.   To establish a convertible ruble, the Soviets should heedPaul Volcker's warning delivered last summer to a gatheringof central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyoming: Marketsdeveloped long before central banks appeared; in fact,central banks could be one Western institution that mightactually retard the transition to markets.   So the Soviets should abolish Gosbank and replace it witha currency board. The best way to begin would be to freezethe existing supply of ruble notes and coins. Then the rubleshould be allowed to float against other currencies for aspecified period, so that its free market exchange ratescould be observed. With the information gained during theperiod of floating, the authorities should fix the ruble tothe foreign reserve currency at an exchange rate that makesSoviet exports competitive, and pledge to exchange the newruble for the reserve currency at that rate.   The most logical reserve currency for the new board wouldbe the U.S. dollar since that is the preferred currency inthe Soviet Union. To obtain the dollar reserves necessary forthe currency board, the Soviet government could begin byconverting its official stock of gold and foreign currencyreserves into dollars. That would generate about $20 billion.The Soviets could raise at least another $20 billion throughstandby facilities with Western governments, theInternational Monetary fund, the European Bank forReconstruction and Development and other multinationalorganizations.   To assist in establishing credibility and to assure Sovietcitizens that the currency board's assets were safe, theboard should be incorporated and based in a safe-havencountry, such as Switzerland. The majority of the board'sdirectors should be foreign nationals, designated by privateinstitutions in their home countries.   The Soviet Union would have a convertible currency withinmonths. The British introduced a convertible ruble just 11weeks after Keynes proposed it.   If the government in Moscow fails to repair the ruble, theSoviet republics will follow through on their threats to fillthe void by issuing their own currencies. Republics thatinstall currency boards will have the same experience as thenorth Russian government: Their rubles will quickly driveSoviet rubles out of circulation, further humiliating anddiscrediting Moscow.   ---   Mr. Hanke is a professor of economics at Johns HopkinsUniversity in Baltimore. Kurt Schuller, a fellow at GeorgeMason University, assisted in the preparation of thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>