<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900702-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>900702-0107.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Soviet Communist Party Begins Congress   ---   Gorbachev Is Likely   To Get Hostile Reception   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   MOSCOW -- The Politburo of the Soviet Communist Party usedto meet regularly on Thursdays to decide such diverse mattersas the invasion of Afghanistan and investment for thenation's machinery industry. These days, when the Politburomeets at all, it concentrates on party affairs.   Staff at the party's Central Committee headquarters, longaccustomed to giving instructions that were immediatelyobeyed, are far fewer in number and wield far less clout thanbefore. &quot;The situation has changed radically from two, threeor five years ago,&quot; says one official. &quot;People once viewed usas gods. Now they listen to us only if we have something newand interesting to propose.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Such are the fruits of Mikhail Gorbachev's two-yearstruggle to bring democracy to the Soviet Union. Slowly butsurely, the Soviet leader has moved to transfer politicalpower from the discredited Communist Party to a morelegitimate system of elected government. All the while, theparty has watched and -- at least publicly -- applauded.   No longer. When the 28th Communist Party Congress openstoday in Moscow, Mr. Gorbachev is likely to face a hostileaudience. At that meeting, the highest body of party powermust decide whether to back his efforts to relegate the partyto a back seat, turning it into an organization that adviseson policy but neither dictates nor implements it.   But in the weeks leading up to the meeting, particularlyat a conference of Russian Communists last month, hard-linershave mounted a rear-guard action to preserve party power. Forthe first time, they have openly criticized Mr. Gorbachev'sentire perestroika program, accusing him of selling out themilitary, losing Eastern Europe to the capitalists anddriving the Soviet economy to the brink of collapse. YegorLigachev, a conservative figurehead in the Politburo, haseven called for Mr. Gorbachev to resign as party leader.   Such bitter attacks have sent a shiver through the nation,forcing some of Mr. Gorbachev's aides to give soothingreassurances. &quot;The Congress won't settle the fate ofperestroika -- it will go on -- but the fate of the partyitself,&quot; Alexander Yakovlev, a Politburo member and Gorbachevconfidant told Pravda last week.   But as Mr. Gorbachev himself concedes, the party is stilla powerful force to be reckoned with. He has created thebeginnings of a democratic system, including a feistyparliament and a new-style presidency, but the partyapparatus continues to hold many of the levers of power. Mr.Gorbachev conceded as much when he decided not to give up hispost as party leader to concentrate on the presidency.   The Congress seems sure to be a feast of conservatism;only an estimated 2% of delegates are radicals committed tofaster reforms. So far, the best guess is that Mr. Gorbachevwill cling to the middle ground, aligning himself withmoderate conservatives even if it means compromising on someof his political reforms. But, frets Boris Bolotin, aresearcher at a Moscow think-tank, &quot;Gorbachev'smaneuverability is at an end.&quot;   The problem with trying to strike compromises with thehard-liners is that it risks setting off defections byliberals who are demanding a major overhaul of the partyitself. It could also seriously affect political stability,leaving the Soviet Union with a messy system of government inwhich the Communist Party and new democratic bodies strugglefor control.   Signs of that struggle already abound. In Moscow,Leningrad and elsewhere, newly elected city councils arefighting party cadres for control of newspapers andbuildings. Radicals and conservatives throughout the nationare at loggerheads over ousting party offices from factories,farms, the KGB and the military.   &quot;This is a very difficult period, full of contradictions,&quot;says Lev Voznesensky, a senior government official. Becauseof the lack of a clear divide between the role of party andstate bodies, &quot;there is already a vacuum of power and it willbe terrible if it isn't filled quickly.&quot;   A look at two key areas of decision-making, economicpolicy and foreign policy, shows why the Communist Partyhardliners are seeing red -- and why Mr. Gorbachev stillcan't free himself from the party. Party influence hasundoubtedly diminished. But the state power structuressupposed to take over its functions aren't complete. As aresult, the system of government has become murky at a timewhen clear, tough decisions are needed more than ever.   For years, major questions of economic policy were theparty's prerogative. Once its leaders made a decision, theword was passed down through several departments of theCentral Committee that oversaw whole branches of the economy,from machine-building to agriculture. Party officials inevery factory and farm and the party-run media then launchedpropaganda campaigns to bring the message to the workers.   Mr. Gorbachev, seeking to improve economic efficiency, setout to change this command system. But taking the party outof economic management has been a slow process. Although hequickly closed the Central Committee's economic departments,party influence lingers on.   When the Soviet leader introduced detailed plans forperestroika, or economic restructuring, in June 1987, he didso in the traditional way, at a Central Committee plenarymeeting. When the Soviet parliament recently passed a law onownership that permits some private property, it first neededformal approval from party ideologues. Economists say localparty bureaucrats continue to boss farmers around.   But a decisive moment came this spring, after parliamentelected Mr. Gorbachev as president of the U.S.S.R. Using hismost radical language to date, he announced his intention toturn the Soviet Union into a &quot;market economy.&quot;   For the first time, the party wasn't consulted, eventhough switching to a market economy is an ideologicalbombshell. Instead, bureaucrats and economists around PrimeMinister Nikolai Ryzhkov submitted plans to the PresidentialCouncil, a newly created body of advisers hand-picked by Mr.Gorbachev.   The council's reception was cool. &quot;Most of the people wereagainst the program,&quot; says Oleg Bogomolov one of severalleading economists invited to participate at the session. &quot;Itdidn't represent a serious attempt to create a market. Itsmain point was to curb demand.&quot;   The government reworked its plans and presented them againto the Presidential Council. This time, no independenteconomists were invited, and the program was approved. Butall hell broke loose when Mr. Ryzhkov unveiled it inparliament. The program included steep price rises for breadand other basic goods, sparking panic-buying. Parliamentrejected the proposals and, after heavy lobbying by Mr.Ryzhkov's aides to limit the political damage, ordered thegovernment to come up with a new version.   Party officials are still seething, and their hostilitymay have contributed to the public's outraged reaction to theprogram. Some party people, notably Mr. Ligachev, openlyquestion the need for a market economy. But even those whosupport the idea say many of the government's problems couldhave been avoided if the party had been involved.   &quot;I'm not sure that if we had discussed it in the CentralCommittee we would have come up with anything better,&quot; saysone senior party official deeply critical of the program'sdetails. &quot;But maybe it would have prevented them from makingsuch deep political mistakes.&quot;   Even some liberal economists believe it was a mistake tobypass the party. &quot;There was a need to explain the reform topeople,&quot; says economist Otto Latsis, deputy editor of theparty's theoretical journal, Kommunist. &quot;Only the party is ina position to do that. So far, it is the only consolidatingforce in society.&quot;   In foreign policy, an area where Mr. Gorbachev has madethe biggest changes, public disputes have been fewer. But thedecision-making process at times has become convoluted as thefunctions of party and government officials have blurred.   It used to be simple. Only a handful of people in the topparty leadership made the decision in 1979 to send Soviettroops into Afghanistan. Although the Defense and ForeignAffairs ministries were consulted on this and other keydecisions, their input was marginal and any objections wereoverridden or ignored, officials say.   Under Mr. Gorbachev's foreign minister, EduardShevardnadze, the foreign policy process has changed beyondrecognition. Mr. Shevardnadze has turned his ministry from abody that implemented orders into one that formulates policy.Meanwhile, the Central Committee's international departmentis now stripped of much of its staff and most functions. &quot;Theatmosphere there is one of imperial decline,&quot; jokes AndreiKortunov, an analyst at Moscow's U.S.A. and Canada Institute,who says his friends in the international department nowspend their time writing articles and traveling abroad.   Still, the Central Committee department retains someinfluence, particularly since Alexander Yakovlev, a Gorbachevconfidant, was placed in charge of it in 1988. Mr. Yakovlevand Mr. Shevardnadze see eye to eye on most important issues.Together with Mr. Gorbachev, the three men were instrumentalin deciding not to intervene in the anti-Communistrevolutions in Eastern Europe last year.   But at a lower level, there are times when coordination isdifficult, and party bureaucrats still play important roles.   Arms control is one such area. According to officialsinvolved in the process, Soviet positions are thrashed out atinteragency meetings attended by experts from the ForeignMinistry, the Defense Ministry, the KGB, representatives ofmilitary industry and Central Committee staffers. Thesemeetings are chaired by Lev Zaikov, a Politburo member who isfar less liberal than Mr. Shevardnadze.   The result is occasional policy zigzags. This year, Mr.Shevardnadze appeared to make major concessions to the U.S.on limiting strategic nuclear weapons. But to the surprise ofthe West, Moscow's position then quickly hardened. ForeignMinistry officials say the change of heart resulted from areassessment of the Soviet position at meetings chaired byMr. Zaikov.   But in some areas the party has completely given ground,allowing the ministry a free hand. In the past, ambassadorsto East European nations were party people picked by theCentral Committee. This year, the Foreign Ministry replacedmany of the old guard with professional diplomats. But,taking into account the spirit of democracy, it firstsubmitted its list for approval to the Soviet parliament'sforeign affairs committee.   &quot;It was a ridiculous procedure,&quot; says Mr. Kortunov of theU.S.A. and Canada Insitute, who advises the parliamentcommittee and attended the session. &quot;There was no vote, nocross questioning. It was just a formal chat.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>