<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900409-0124</DOCNO><DOCID>900409-0124.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   When `Corporate' and `Culture' Clash   ----   By Lionel Tiger</HL><DATE>04/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   The social sciences, including my discipline,anthropology, have made it clear that any ambitious humanenterprise must take into account cultural variations amonggroups. But the concept of cultural difference has beenover-applied and misapplied, particularly in the form of thenotion of &quot;corporate culture.&quot;   Too often, this concept has been an excuse forinefficiency and managerial stupidity. When Ford had 22levels of management and Toyota five, the difference was notin corporate culture but in sheer competence. Is theexistence of the executive dining room upstairs from thestaff canteen also corporate culture? No -- it is simply anunintelligent personnel practice and a sign of inappropriateprivilege that costs companies money in employee morale andis likely to encourage executive complacency.</LP><TEXT>   Some background: Early in the history of anthropologythere were two complementary goals. One was to try tounderstand &quot;human nature&quot; by studying the fossil record ofearly humans and our physical evolution. The other was todocument and understand the enormous range and variety ofhuman social arrangements.   In recent times the two goals have become largelyseparated. The main energy of the discipline has beenconcentrated on studying cultural variation and thephenomenon of culture itself. Cultural relativity has beenelevated to a certainty -- virtually every social pattern istaken to be of equal value, standing and naturalness to anyother. Even gender has been defined as a social construct,and fierce antipathy greets anyone who asserts that somemeasure of sex-related behavior has biological roots.   Enter corporate culture. Of course, each business or otherhuman group may enjoy what William Whyte in &quot;The OrganizationMan&quot; called &quot;the unique spirit&quot; of the organization. Membersof robust organizations share a sense that their group isspecial and that a definite loyalty and spark unite people.Such unique spirit makes groups fun, and offers people aworkplace with which they can identify and from which theycan draw both personal security and occupational challenge.   The problem that concerns me does not arise from thenatural feelings of community that decent, sensible peopledevelop when they work toward a common goal. It emerges whenpeople confuse these healthy feelings with the managerial andtechnical means employed to achieve that common goal. Ford's22 layers of management were supported by a series ofentrenched practices that were not only ways of doing workbut also signs of affiliation to the group: &quot;This is how wedo it at Ford.&quot; Or British Motors. Or U.S. Steel. Or GeneralMotors. Or any other organization that has had to change itsM.O. drastically to compete in a marketplace unforgiving offat, slack and imprecision in linking resources toproduction.   Simply put, undue confidence and complacency can be subtlybut consequentially supported by the agreeable notion ofcorporate culture. It can inhibit the concrete stepsnecessary to compete -- especially to compete with producerswho think their process through afresh and who do not confuseloyalty to an organization with loyalty to its particularpractices and traditions.   This is particularly compelling in manufacturing, becausea car is a car is a car; there are relatively few culturallyexpressive ways of doing the actual work involved in makingone. Cultural relativism does not apply. Differentsocio-productive patterns are not equally likely to yieldgood cars at prices that suit the market. While it is a humancharacteristic to try to keep things the same, technology isimmune to sentimental familiarity.   Of course, strong values about internal moral order andcommunity relations do characterize many successfulenterprises. I recently had considerable contact with theToronto-based Four Seasons Hotels company while doingresearch for a book. It was clear that this enterprise -- aconsistently innovative luxury hotel group -- functionseffectively because it treats its work as an expression ofboth its social and financial responsibility. For example, itis building a hotel in Nevis in the Caribbean, and afterHurricane Hugo hit it organized a relief shipment that wasthe first on the scene from any source, including government.   All employees eventually hired, even dishwashers, areinterviewed some four times, finally by the general managerof the hotel in which they will work. This system is designednot only to find out about the potential employees but alsoto let them know that the organization is concerned aboutthem personally. This surely contributes to a labor turnoverrate less than half the industry average. No one employedfive years or more can be dismissed without review by IsadoreSharp, the chairman and CEO.   My discussions with senior executives about the futurerevealed that their predominating concern was less about thecompany's external business environment -- will peoplecontinue to sleep in their expensive rooms? -- than it wasabout becoming complacent and thoughtlessly sanctimoniousabout the company's current M.O. -- would its corporateculture overwhelm its corporate success?   The possibility that this would happen was reduced in thelate 1980s. As Mr. Sharp has said: &quot;I sat down with everysenior person in the company. `This is what we stand for. Ifyou are not happy with it, this is the time to say so.' I hadto fire people right at the top.&quot; Now, company policies onlarge initiatives and the tiny details on which good hotelsdepend can be efficiently hammered out at weekly meetings ofsenior managers at which no holds are barred, but duringwhich people know that they conclusively share a centralcommitment to the company and its values. Corporate cultureis an attitude, not a structure. Evidently, the result works.   ---   Mr. Tiger is a professor of anthropology at RutgersUniversity. His most recent book is &quot;The Manufacture of Evil:Ethics, Evolution and the Industrial System&quot; (Harper andamp; Row,1988).</TEXT></DOC>