<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900518-0123</DOCNO><DOCID>900518-0123.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Leave the Army Out of Colombian Anti-Drug Operations   ----   By Maria Jimena Duzan</HL><DATE>05/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><LP>   BOGOTA -- Colombia's drug-related violence continuesunabated, and neither police, politicians nor civilians areimmune. Six children were among the 27 people killed lastweekend in a series of car bombings that took place whilecrowds were shopping for Mother's Day presents in Bogota,Cali and Medellin. In an effort to stop this madness, theU.S. sent military aid here to help in the war against thedrug lords. The problem is, those receiving the lion's shareof the aid may be the least able to fight the battleefficiently.   In the aftermath of the assassination of Luis CarlosGalan, the Liberal presidential candidate killed by the druglords last September, the Bush administration decided to give$65 million to the Colombian army to fight the drug war. Butthe equipment that arrived was considered &quot;not appropriatefor drug wars&quot; by Colombian police chief Gen. Miguel GomezPadilla. Indeed, the jeeps that arrived along with coloredbulletproof vests and eight helicopters -- one was sent fromPeru because it needed repairs -- were better suited tocounterinsurgency operations. Gen. Gomez Padilla reacted withjealousy. &quot;The drug war is a police matter,&quot; he said.</LP><TEXT>   But there was more to this than professional jeaolousy.What was happening didn't make sense for many Colombians.True, at one time corruption in the Colombian police forceshad reached the highest ranks. Gen. Guillermo Medina, formerchief of police, was fired by President Virgilio Barco a yearago because it was alleged that he was being paid off by thedrug mafia after huge bank accounts were linked directly tohim.   But Gen. Gomez Padilla, along with the chief of theFederal Police, Gen. Miguel Alfredo Maza Marquez, helped topurge corruption in the police in the past year. They havechanged almost all the high-ranking officers from thenorthern part of Colombia who were under suspicion of beingpaid off by the mafia.   They were so aware of the corruption that they institutedthe &quot;Elite Corps,&quot; a special police unit that hassuccessfully pursued narco-paramilitary squads at greatpersonal sacrifice. This unit has made many arrests andseized record amounts of cocaine, including a 19-ton seizuretwo weeks ago. During these operations, and as a result ofsubsequent assassinations, 70 Elite Corps members have beenkilled. In addition, the narcos tried to kill Gen. Maza twiceafter he went into middle Magdalena, a region in which themost powerful narco-paramilitary squads were based, sponsoredby the late Gonzalo Rodriguez &quot;The Mexican&quot; Gacha, andtrained by British and Israeli mercenaries.   The federal and local police were doing well. So what wasthe point of getting the army involved in a fight in which itwas not interested?   &quot;If we engaged the military in this war they would have toprove they are not corrupt,&quot; a government official who workswith the president once told me. But what if they decide notto prove anything? What would happen then? &quot;They will befired,&quot; the official answered.   So far, there have been no indictments of army officialson drug-trafficking charges. But recently, President Barcosilently moved to dismiss from office four generals ongrounds that they were not tough enough against drug dealers.   The subject of military corruption is a difficult matterfor any Colombian president. For ages, the army has madebureaucratic advances as it moved to control the publicorder. It even has autonomy over its own spending. Thepolice, on the other hand, are far more subject to legalconstraints.   When rumors were first heard that the military was goingto join the fray in the drug war, some Colombian generalssaid they were reluctant to participate because they wereafraid of becoming corrupt and because it would hinder theonly war they have been interested in for 30 years: the waragainst several different bands of Marxist guerrillas.   But what they didn't say was that in order to maintaintheir battle against guerrillas, some members of the militaryaccepted money from the drug bosses, who were willing tosponsor anti-insurgency efforts. In fact, last May, a colonelbased in the middle Magdalena was suddenly fired afterinformation that linked him with narco-paramilitary groupswas released to the daily newspaper for which I work, ElEspectador.   Of course, some of the guerrilla movements have financedtheir operations with drug trafficking as well. But fewgenerals publicly acknowledge that more recently there is analliance between the narcos and some big landowners. Fewerstill will admit that in some cases the army has become apart of this relationship.   During the past 10 years the drug mafia has bought atremendous amount of land, particularly in those regionswhere there is a strong guerrilla presence. Today, drugcriminals own about 2.5 million acres of Colombia's 84million acres of farm land. And their economic model,although imposed by violent and bloody means, has liftedimportant agricultural regions out of an economic depression.   For many big landowners, the arrival of drug bosseschanged their luck. According to one such landowner, whoapproached me after a 1989 seminar in Bogota: &quot;Since thenarcos bought some farms just next to mine, our problem withthe guerrillas is over. We have been able to get back to ourfarms and the development of the region is progressing.&quot;Thus, the farmers, the newly landed narco farmers and thearmy find themselves curiously aligned against theguerrillas, who threaten all their interests.   Certainly in today's Colombia, no institution iscompletely clean. But these compromises with the army merelyaccentuate the need to recognize Gen. Maza's success inrooting out corruption and dismantling the narco-militarysquads that threaten Colombia's future.   Nevertheless, the Colombian army has better connections inWashington than the police. Therefore, it will receive moremoney than the police to fight the drug war in the next year.The declaration of Cartagena Summit says that although thedrug war is regarded as a police matter, the problem isgetting so big that each country according to itsconstitution could involve its army in the fight againstdrugs. But the effect of this in Colombia is the progressivemilitarization of the drug problem. Meanwhile, thenarco-violence has increased dramatically and theanti-corruption campaign that successfully was being led bythe police has not yet become a reality within the army.   Recently, Colombians have openly criticized the army'sinvolvement in the drug battle as well as the larger issue ofcorruption. Bogota's El Tiempo newspaper editorialized infavor of replacing the current defense minister (an armyofficer) with a civilian. And the leading presidentialcandidate, the Liberal Party's Cesar Gaviria, announced lastweek: &quot;We have to govern with a new armed forces.&quot; At such atime, one wonders why the U.S. would choose to involveColombia's military in a fight it should not join. Thismedicine could be worse than the disease.   ---   Ms. Duzan is a reporter for the Bogota-based newspaper, ElEspectador.</TEXT></DOC>