<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910930-0132</DOCNO><DOCID>910930-0132.</DOCID><HL>   BCCI's Latin Tentacles   ----   By David Asman</HL><DATE>09/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   BCCI</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)</NS><RE>ARKANSAS (AR)ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)PANAMA (CZ)EUROPE (EU)FLORIDA (FL)GUATEMALA (GT)LUXEMBOURG (LU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PERU (PE)PARAGUAY (PY)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)UNITED STATES (US)URUGUAY (UY)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   Most international bank managers looked for ways to reducetheir Latin American exposure in the 1980s. Not so theofficers of the infamous Bank of Credit and CommerceInternational. Latin America in the 1980s proved to be asmorgasbord of opportunities for a corrupt bankinginstitution with the influence and connections of BCCI. Fromlaundering of drug money, brokering questionable debt swapsand arms sales, and providing false letters of credit toaccepting central bank reserves from corrupt officials,BCCI's Latin American operations provided the bank withaccess to billions of dollars.   As U.S lawmakers contemplate action to curb the activitiesof corrupt banking institutions, they should take a closerlook at how BCCI operated within Latin America, one of themost heavily regulated areas of the world. BCCI managed tobecome entrenched in Latin America in spite of a thicket ofrules and regulations through which only the well-connectedcould navigate. Once BCCI established its blue-chip contactsin business and politics, rules were ignored.</LP><TEXT>   BCCI's gateway to Latin America for much of the '80s wasManuel Noriega's Panama. On April 22, 1980, BCCI founder AghaHasan Abedi spoke at the ceremonies to inaugurate the bank'sfirst Panamanian branch: &quot;Today, we inaugurate one morebranch of BCCI . . . that will be the door of entry to allLatin America.&quot; From his Panamanian office, BCCI officerAmjad Awan -- Gen. Noriega's personal banker -- attractedaccounts from the high and mighty of Latin America. Cocainebarons, business leaders and presidential emissaries wouldmeet with Mr. Awan and his associates, who were only toohappy to park funds discreetly in BCCI vaults.   When it became clear that Gen. Noriega was on a collisioncourse with the U.S., BCCI officials began looking for a moresecure haven in Latin America. A July 1987 memo by BCCIofficer Alberto Calvo typifies the worries of BCCI customers-- in this case the government of Peru. &quot;In the course of theconversation,&quot; Mr. Calvo writes, &quot;Mr. Carbonetto {economicadviser to former President Alan Garcia} expressed theworries of the President of the Republic about Panama'spolitical situation, because of placements that the{Peruvian} government has in that country.&quot;   By the time that memo was written, BCCI may have alreadyembarked on a plan grander than that of merely replacing itsPanamanian stronghold. Senate BCCI investigator Jack Blum hassuggested that BCCI may have been trying to create acompletely phantom banking institution in South America: &quot;Theidea of a place where there was no bank regulation at all hasappealed to international crooks and con men for some time,&quot;said Mr. Blum at Senate hearings in August. &quot;I have talked topeople from Argentina who maintain that that was a particularproject of {BCCI front man Ghaith} Pharaon's, that he wantedan international bank zone between Paraguay and Argentina.&quot;   Indeed, beginning in the mid-'80s, Mr. Pharaon establishedmyriad contacts with presidents, financial ministers, centralbank officials and businessmen in Chile, Uruguay, Paraguayand Argentina. He developed several showy businessinterestsHyatt hotels in Santiago and Buenos Aires, jojobaplantations and financial consulting firms. He madeacquaintances with top government and business leaders in theregion, applied for citizenship in Argentina and reportedlypurchased a passport from former Paraguyan strongman AlfredoStroessner.   Whether these moves were part of Mr. Pharaon's personalagenda or were taken on behalf of the bank, BCCI was veryinterested in an Argentine operation. It's first point ofentry in the Argentine financial market was the purchase ofan Argentine bank called FinAmerica. A 1984 memo from BCCIofficer Alberto Calvo to his superiors in London on theproposed FinAmerica acquisition describes methods of entryvery similar to those used in the U.S. &quot;I think we shouldhave a very low profile,&quot; wrote Mr. Calvo, &quot;and {a} veryprofessional Board of Directors. People very much respectedby the business community but who are not part of it; peoplewith national and international exposure and people who inspite of being very close to the political establishment, arenot by themselves political figures.&quot;   Through its FinAmerica subsidiary, BCCI eventually becamedirectly involved in important debt swap deals in Argentina.According to Jesus Rodriguez, a deputy from the currentopposition Radical Party, the value of the Argentine debtsold at public auction during President Raul Alfonsin's1983-1989 term totaled $1.04 billion, of which BCCI purchased$44.7 million, or 4.3%. Debt conversions (in which debt ispurchased and traded for local investments) amounted to $1.34billion, of which BCCI acted as an agent in three projectsworth $58.2 million.   Mr. Rodriguez and other investigators are looking intothese and other deals -- including the roughly $7 billion indebt swaps that have taken place since Carlos Menem becamepresident in 1989 -- to see whether Mr. Pharaon's centralbank contacts were used to provide BCCI with favorable termson debt swaps.   Guatemalan officials have been investigating anotherfinancial instrument prefered by BCCI's Latin officers: falseletters of credit. Jack Blum mentioned this in his AugustSenate testimony: &quot;BCCI had a very strange letter of creditbusiness. The letters of credit only went from one BCCI bankto another BCCI bank. Instead of charging a half-point, whichis the normal bank rate for letters of credit, they werecharging 12 points. The letters of credit appeared to be{used} to falsify documents to aid in smuggling and falsevaluation of goods for customs.&quot;   Guatemalan Attorney General Acisclo Valladares isspearheading an investigation into BCCI's use of theseinstruments to broker ficticious and undertaxed coffee salesto the U.S. and in the purchase of three helicopters fromJordan at highly inflated prices. Implicated, but not yetindicted, are a brother of former President Vinicio Cerezo,the onetime chief of Mr. Cerezo's presidential guard and thecurrent army chief of staff. In Guatemala, going after apowerful group like this takes guts. The attorney-generalrisks stimulating the first BCCI-induced coup d'etat.   Of all the local BCCI investigations, none has captivateda Latin audience more than the one going on in Peru. In July,Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morganthau charged, aspart of a more general indictment of BCCI's founders, thattwo Peruvian central bankers allegedly took $3 million inbribes in exchange for placing $270 million of the country'scash reserves in BCCI's Panamanian branch. That announcementwas the result of months of cooperation between Mr.Morganthau's office and an investigative committee set up bythe Peruvian Congress.   So far the Peruvians have been unable to locate thecentral bank officials mentioned in Mr. Morganthau'sindictment, and the investigation by the Peruvian legislatureas to the involvement of former President Alan Garcia in thatand other BCCI transactions continues. However, Peruvianprosecuters last week charged former Central Bank GeneralManager Brian Jansen with having bribed Peruvian officialswhen he later worked for BCCI. Peruvian investigators arealso finding a more general pattern of cooperation betweenBCCI and Peru during the Garcia administration, includingBCCI's attempts to broker the sale of Mirage fighter jets.   There is a U.S. side to the Peru story as well. Itinvolves efforts by investigators here to track Alan Garcia'salleged BCCI connections and efforts by his aides in the U.S.to discredit those investigations.   Two investigative firms -- Kroll Associates, and a one-manoutfit in Miami called Larc Investigative Services -- werehired by the Peruvian Congress last spring to check into Mr.Garcia's assets and his possible involvement with BCCI.Against the advice of the two firms, the Peruvianinvestigators released preliminary reports in May suggestingthat bank accounts and assets totaling some $50 million mayhave belonged to Mr. Garcia and his wife.   Mr. Garcia fired back by filing misconduct charges againstLarc with the Florida state licensing authority. Mr. Garcia'slawyer produced letters from the banks -- including BCCIbranches -- that either denied such accounts existed or saidthe accounts could not be traced. Florida officials thensubpoenaed Larc's files, which were supposed to have remainedsealed until charges were entered against the firm by thestate on June 28.   On June 24, several days before the report on Larc was dueto be released to the public, I received a call from VictorTirado, a former press secretary for Alan Garcia. &quot;Well, Iguess you heard that (Larc owner) Ralph Garcia's beendiscredited,&quot; he began. Mr. Tirado went on to providedetailed information from a report that was supposedly underthe lock and key of the Florida state division of licensing.However Alan Garcia managed to acquire the Larc documents,it's clear that the ex-president of Peru moves withininfluential circles in this country almost as easily as hedoes in his own. In fact, the lawyer working on his behalf inthe U.S., Jerome Levinson, once worked for BCCI investigatorJack Blum.   The thread that ties the Peruvian investigations togetherwith BCCI-related investigations in other countries is thatin virtually every case, rules and regulations meant toprevent corruption were bypassed through key social andpolitical connections. This lack of accountability can easilybreak down what little faith people had in the system. And incountries like Peru, this can have tragic consequences,strengthening the appeal of those who seek justice outsidethe system -- like the Maoist Shining Path, whose style ofjustice is murderous but swift.   A no-holds-barred investigation of BCCI in each of thecountries affected is far more important in this regard thanthe creation of a new set of laws. In fact, Latin America'smultitude of laws and regulations can act as a screen behindwhich accountability for direct action is well concealed.Latin economists such as Peru's Hernando de Soto, Guatemala'sManuel Ayau and Argentina's Eduardo Helguera have detailedthe degree to which their countries' problems of corruptionand underdevelopment stem from gross over-regulation combinedwith the protection of an elite for whom the rules do notapply. The BCCI story in Latin America strengthens thatargument. And it's no less true in Latin America than it isin the rest of the world.   ---   Mr. Asman edits the Journal's Americas column.</TEXT></DOC>