<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920115-0096</DOCNO><DOCID>920115-0096.</DOCID><HL>   This Cease-Fire   In Yugoslavia   Has a Better Shot   ----   By Mark Helprin</HL><DATE>01/15/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><NS>UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><RE>EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)GERMANY (GE)UKRAINE (UKR)COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (UR)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   The fate of Yugoslavia has always been determined fromwithout. Sitting astride crossroads and upon imperialborders, its nationalities have adhered to anything andeverything but one another. Even the exceptional period ofits unity resulted from the Treaty of Versailles, Germanoccupation, and four decades of lying in wait for a Sovietinvasion.   When the Soviet empire collapsed, so did the inhibitionsof the Yugoslav republics, and the country became acollection of small states in search of protective patronsand defensive security. Though TV Belgrade has reported onvolunteers for Serbia forming up in Moscow, and the Italiantelevision station RAI 1 on rumors that former federal airforce planes, absent their Slovenian and Croat pilots, areflown by Russians, Serbia is alone in the game, its potentialally distant and distracted.</LP><TEXT>   The Serbs feel beleaguered, which may explain their aim toextend their control to wherever Serbs are even 10% of thepopulation. Though the Croats share the same super defensivetendency, and each party has memories of being massacred bythe other, this conduct is outrageous nonetheless. Both aredriven by their own extremists to revert at all costs toprior hostilities despite notable success at integration.   For example, the media under Yugoslav President SlobodanMilosevic, a Serb, refer not to Croatia or Croats but only tothe fascist Croatian Party Ustase, which took 9% of the votelast year. In his direction of the dominant political party,the secret police and the military, Mr. Milosevic has spawnedthe war by mating the corpse of the communist apparatus withthe country's deathless ethnic divisions.   The question &quot;Will the current ceasefire hold?&quot; leads notto the United Nations but, in a roundabout way, to Russia andGermany. Acceptance of previous ceasefires was merely a wayto mollify the European Community, which has the economicpower to shut down the war. At the same time, the Croatshoped to consolidate their failing defense and the Serbs toextend their very unimpressive gains. Now, however, bothsides have compelling reasons to stop the combat.   The Croats have lost a good deal of territory and stand tolose more. They need to shore up their defenses, and withGerman recognition they may be able to obtain the heavyweapons they lack and to rebuild their economy. Afterterrible destruction, they cannot afford more. Whereas theyhave every reason to resume the war once conditions havechanged, they have every reason to stop it now.   Conversely, the Serbs cannot ignore German recognition.Although one faction wants to make gains before Croatiabenefits, another is wary of the punitive power of the EC,the source of more than 50% of Yugoslavia's trade and (nowthat the former Soviet Union is prostrate) the light of itseconomic future.   American officials are justifiably disturbed by Germany'snew assertiveness in the European balance of power. No onewith even a shade of historical memory can view Germanresurgence without trepidation. What if, eventually, Germanyextends its protection to the Ukraine, which, in its rivalrywith Russia, will need a strong ally? How might Russia react?One cannot but note that Germany has on several occasionsvisited both Croatia and the Ukraine.   Nonetheless, in isolation, the German move is correct iflate. But more important than recognition of Croatia andSlovenia is the war weariness of the Serbs, which leads,indirectly, to Russia. That the Serbs have a high desertionrate, that only 17% of those called responded to a recentdraft, that the mothers of Obrenovac took over their town andforced the army to rescind a prolongation of service, is astrong indication that the former communists in the armyseriously lack support.   This is confirmed by the course of the war itself. Tofight the Soviets, Tito adopted a strategy of &quot;Total NationalDefense&quot; in which heavy armor would meet a Soviet invasion onthe plain near the Hungarian border while the rest of thecountry mobilized for guerrilla war in the mountains. Thebattering ram, with modern jet fighters, tanks, missiles,etc. would stun the Soviets, but once the Soviets entered thecountry they would forever be harassed by a mist ofomnipresent defenders armed in what turned out to be theAfghanistan style.   The Serbs inherited the battering ram and the Croats themist. Although in Tito's defensive strategy the Soviets werepresumed to suffer unbearably until they withdrew, they wereexpected to have mobility from border to border. Why then,with superhighways, complete control of the air, partisans inCroatian territory, command of the Adriatic, and the heavymilitary apparatus fully in their hands, did the Serbs takemonths to capture Vukovar, 50 miles from their lines? Why didthey bother to attack Dubrovnik, which although militarilyinconsequential, was a form of public relations suicide? Why,after half a year, do the Serbs not have mobility from borderto border?   The answer is the same one that explains the immensedestruction inflicted on the Croats. Every target had to bereduced almost to dust before the infantry went in. It wasdone from afar, with heavy weapons, because the soldiers werenot sufficiently motivated to sacrifice their lives in movingforward. This is the great force that has pushed Serbia'sgovernment in the direction of peace.   Though the current cease-fire is more likely to hold thannot, it may be broken by some extremist action that appealsto those raw ethnic loyalties that never die, or by factionaltriumphs that might lead to heroic decisions withoutreference to cost. Certainly the dynamic of the truce isimperfect, in that respite will allow the Croats time toorganize a riposte, the mere consideration of which mayrestore to the Serbs their historical willingness to take tothe field almost to the last man.   ---   Mr. Helprin, a novelist, is a contributing editor of theJournal.</TEXT></DOC>