<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900917-0131</DOCNO><DOCID>900917-0131.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   South Africa's `Informals' Are Stirring   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>09/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><CO>   AFRIC</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   South Africa does not offer much encouragement to theworld's natural optimists. Violence rages in the blacktownships, aggravated by overcrowding that results from aninflux of blacks from rural areas and such destituteneighboring countries as Zambia and Mozambique. The economyis in recession; production in the second quarter declined atan annual rate of 1%. Communists, with nothing to offer otherthan a rapid trip to economic disaster, flaunt their newfreedoms.   President F.W. de Klerk has moved in the directiondemanded by the anti-apartheid activists of Europe andAmerica, but has received little recognition for his courage.Indeed, with South Africa rapidly becoming a bloodybattleground (500 violent deaths in August alone) its foreigncritics have become uncharacteristically silent. They nowprefer to pretend that it doesn't exist, which means that theeconomic sanctions they demanded remain in place, with littlepromise that positive measures to dismantle apartheid will berewarded.</LP><TEXT>   It takes some serious searching to find any bright spotsin all of this. But South Africans of all races havedeveloped a certain resiliency out of their many tensions andconflicts and maintain something of a frontier spirit. EliasLinks, consul-general in Zurich and one of his associates,finance counselor Bruce Cameron, have been trying to talk upSouth Africa's prospects with Western bankers. Oneachievement has been to persuade the World Bank to at leastresume research on South Africa's needs, even if there are noimmediate prospects for real lending.   One little light of hope glimmers when Mr. Links, who is ablack and a former university economics professor, uses theexpression &quot;informal sector&quot; in referring to growinggrass-roots enterprise among South African blacks. Yesindeed, he says, he has read the writings of Hernando deSoto, the Peruvian author who coined that expression.Moreover, Mr. De Soto's ideas are making some impression onthe South African government. Along with dismantlingapartheid, the government is weakening as well barrierspreventing blacks from becoming entrepreneurs.   Mr. Links cites the case of black-owned and operatedbuses. As with many nations of its type, South Africa hasdiscouraged competition against state transportation systemsfrom private carriers. But restrictions have been eased andservice by small, privately-owned buses has been thriving.Toyota -- not a company to miss a bet -- is supplying a busspecially designed for economical transport. Black-operatedrepair shops and maintenance facilities are growing up aroundservice.   That is exactly the sort of thing Hernando de Soto hasbeen promoting for a decade as a prescription for bringingreal capitalism to countries where private capitalism hasbeen largely reserved for protected elites. His book, &quot;TheOther Path,&quot; (meaning a path other the one promotedthroughout the Third World by Socialist revolutionaries) hasreceived acclaim throughout the world. In a speech to the IMFa year ago, President George Bush said that &quot;De Soto'sgreatest contribution has been to point out what, inretrospect, may seem obvious: People everywhere want the samethings. And when left alone by government, people everywhereorganize their lives in remarkably similar ways.&quot;   One of the often-overlooked truths about postwar SouthAfrica is the economic engineering that accompaniesPretoria's social engineering. The progenitors of the rulingNationalist Party, such men as D.F. Malan and H.F. Vervoerd,had far more in common with the early Bolsheviks of Russiathan with American capitalism. They were paternalists,envisioning -- perhaps sincerely -- a social system in whichwhites, blacks, coloreds and Asians could live happily, butseparately.   An overlay of capitalism, mainly in the form of privategold mining enterprises and foreign-owned manufacturing,covered up and helped finance a large and intrusive publicsector. It managed the lives of non-whites with fullconfidence that Pretoria knew what was best for them. Thenon-whites lived better, with better housing and hygienicstandards, than blacks anywhere else in Africa, but withlittle freedom to develop along lines of their own choosing.   Nonetheless, as Mr. Links points out, many blacks thinkthat South Africa is a &quot;capitalist&quot; state and that apartheidis one result. They have been encouraged in that view by thelikes of Joe Slovo, the white general secretary of the SouthAfrican Communist Party. Mr. Slovo and his followers dominatethe militant wing of the African National Congress, and showno signs that they are prepared to deviate from theirefforts, through the use of violence, to make South Africa aCommunist state.   Some other ANC members, including quite possibly NelsonMandela, may be having some second thoughts about thedirection the militants are heading. But, as so oftenhappens, the militants have made themselves feared by anyonewho might prefer a moderate course. Violent death can comevery suddenly, and has often done so, to moderates.Resistance from the militants deters Mr. Mandela from makingpeace with Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha movement. It iscomposed mainly of Zulus, South Africa's largest black tribalnation. ANC-Inkatha strife accounts for much of the country'sbloodshed.   The tragedy is that Mr. Buthelezi is market-oriented andunderstands the importance of empowering all Africans withfundamental economic rights, to own property and operatebusinesses free of excessive government restriction. As theSoviet Union is discovering, economic empowerment is just asimportant as a means of energizing an economy as the grantingof political rights.   Yet another tragedy is that economic sanctions --especially those applied by the U.S. -- have largely removedfrom South Africa the kinds of influences that would be mosthelpful in encouraging the &quot;informal sector&quot; to seek truelegal status and develop from the ground up. Americanbusinessmen, having been raised in a system where privatebusinesses start small and grow, understand the process well.Their prevailing egalitarianism helped break down colorbarriers in their plants. But because of pressures applied totheir parent companies in the U.S. -- often by groups thatwere more concerned about their own domestic political goalsthan about the future of South Africa's blacks -- most haveleft.   Whether economic empowerment will damp the flames ofviolence is a crucial issue. Mr. Links thinks it will helpand, as a South African black, he is better qualified tojudge than an outsider. Obviously, an &quot;informal sector&quot;operating in a legal void cannot be transformed intoentrepreneurial economy in short order. But awareness of thatpotential is a start, and gives some light to an otherwisegloomy outlook.</TEXT></DOC>