<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900427-0013</DOCNO><DOCID>900427-0013.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Georgia Judgeship Elections Held Racist   ----   By Martha Brannigan and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   KRI</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Georgia's process for electing superior court judges wascalled racist by the U.S. Justice Department.   The far-reaching decision by the department's civil rightsdivision could thrust Georgia's courts into turmoil,according to both sides in a lawsuit. The ruling covers 58 ofthe state's 135 superior court judgeships in 30 of 45judicial circuits.</LP><TEXT>   Unless the matter is dealt with through a speciallegislative session changing election laws or is resolvedthrough settlement or a legal challenge, no elections forthose posts can be held and the judgeships would cease toexist when the judges' current terms expire at the end of1990 and 1992.   &quot;It's a landmark, historic decision,&quot; said Tyrone Brooks,a Georgia state legislator and lead plaintiff in a federalsuit filed against the state in Brunswick, Ga., in 1988 withthe aid of the American Civil Liberities Union. &quot;The judicialbranch is in for a change.&quot;   Michael J. Bowers, Georgia's attorney general, called theruling &quot;a setback.&quot; He said he will keep trying to settle thecase while continuing a legal fight.   In a letter, John R. Dunne, the new assistant attorneygeneral for the civil rights division, told Mr. Bowers thatthe state's manner of electing judges was designeddeliberately to discriminate against blacks. In his firstmajor decision since taking office April 2, Mr. Dunne saidblack voting power is diluted by Georgia's combined use ofat-large circuit elections and a requirement that judicialcandidates win by a majority.   In at-large districts, which generally cover a widegeographic area, voters select more than one judge for theregion. Such elections can dilute a voting group's power ifthat group is a minority within the circuit. In contrast,single-judge districts give neighborhoods sole power toselect the judge for that district.   The ruling doesn't address remedies for the problem. Onlyfive of the state's 135 judges are black. No black has everdefeated a white incumbent judge, the ruling said.   Under Section Five of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, 18states with a history of voting-rights violations --including Georgia -- must submit changes in laws governingelections to the civil rights division for prior approval toensure that the changes do not discriminate. The JusticeDepartment previously raised objections to the methods ofelecting judges in Louisiana, Mississippi and North Carolina.   The suit charged that Georgia didn't obtain thedepartment's clearance on certain judicial posts and attackedthe manner of electing judges. A special three-judge federaldistrict court panel in Brunswick ruled last December thatthe state had to submit information on the judges to theagency.   Mr. Bowers could seek a hearing before the U.S. DistrictCourt in Washington, D.C., or seek review of the Brunswickcourt's decision by the U.S. Supreme Court.   ---   AMERICA'S CUP victory by San Diego is upheld by New York'shighest court.   The decision is the final word in the contentious disputebetween the San Diego Yacht Club and the Mercury Bay BoatingClub of New Zealand. The New Zealand challenger had claimedthat San Diego violated the spirit of the 132-year-oldinternational contest by using a catamaran to defeat NewZealand's 90-foot monohull in 1988. Mercury Bay claimed thatthe rules required San Diego to use a boat similar in size tothe challenger's.   The New York Court of Appeals in Albany ruled that whileSan Diego's use of the catamaran might not have been fair, itwasn't illegal. In a 5-2 decision, the judges said the courtsaren't the proper forum for determining the fairness of asport.   &quot;The question of whether particular conduct is `sporting'or `fair' in the context of a particular sporting event . . .is wholly distinct from the question of whether it is legal,&quot;wrote Judge Fritz Alexander II in the majority opinion.&quot;Questions of sportsmanship and `fairness' with respect tosporting contests depend largely upon the rules of theparticular sport and the expertise of those knowledgeable inthat sport; they are not questions suitable for judicialresolution.&quot;   The court said that nowhere in the rules governing thecontest is the defending yacht club required to race a vesselsimilar to the challenger's entry. The America's Cup isgoverned by New York state law because it was formed by theNew York Yacht Club.   Andrew Johns, an attorney for the New Zealand club inAuckland, said Mercury Bay accepts the court's decision asfinal and is preparing for the next race, expected to be in1992. &quot;It's all systems go. We're back to an on-the-watercampaign,&quot; he said. But he added that the court'sinterpretation of the rules gives an unfair advantage to thedefender. &quot;What the majority has said is `anything goes.'There is no restriction on the defender on length or any ofthe other factors that the challenger must give notice of,&quot;Mr. Johns said.   Harold R. Tyler Jr., an attorney for the San Diego club,said Mercury Bay's own interpretation of the rules would haveput the defender at a disadvantage. Because the race has tobe held 10 months after the challenge is made, the San Diegoclub wouldn't have had enough time to construct a 90-footmonohull to match New Zealand's entry, he said.   &quot;Fairness is a slippery concept,&quot; Mr. Tyler said. &quot;It'ssort of like beauty -- it's all in the eye of the beholder.&quot;   Both Mr. Tyler and Mr. Johns said that an agreementreached by many yacht clubs in 1988 will probably preventsimilar disputes from occurring again. The lawyers said thecase may also lead to changes clarifying the rules of thecompetition.   ---   BOESKY'S TAX RETURNS won't be made available forMulheren's defense.   A federal judge ruled that lawyers for John Mulheren arenot entitled to receive copies of Mr. Boesky's tax returnsand the financial and bank statements of Ivan Boesky and hisfamily.   At the urging of lawyers for Mr. Boesky and prosecutors inthe U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan, U.S. District JudgeMiriam Cedarbaum rejected a subpoena submitted by lawyers forMr. Mulheren seeking the documents. Mr. Mulheren, once one ofthe nation's most powerful arbitragers, is scheduled to go ontrial on May 14. A federal grand jury indicted Mr. Mulherenlast June on 42 counts of securities fraud, mail fraud,conspiracy and record-keeping violations.   Mr. Mulheren was accused of &quot;parking&quot; stock with Mr.Boesky, the convicted former takeover speculator. Parkingoccurs when an investor sells securities with theunderstanding that they will be repurchased, usually at aprearranged time and price. The government said Mr. Mulherenused the tactic to conceal the true ownership of the parkedsecurities. Mr. Mulheren has pleaded innocent to the charges.   Thomas Puccio, the New York attorney who is representingMr. Mulheren, said he was seeking Mr. Boesky's personalincome tax returns for the years 1983 through 1987 and hisbank and other financial records for 1985 through the presentto show that Mr. Boesky wasn't left broke, as his lawyerssuggested, after he agreed to pay $100 million in fines tosettle insider trading charges against him in 1987.   Mr. Puccio said that Mr. Boesky got a &quot;sweetheart deal&quot;from the government and had &quot;many millions more than he toldthe government.&quot; Mr. Puccio said that as a witness againstMr. Mulheren, Mr. Boesky will be &quot;biased in favor of thegovernment&quot; because the &quot;government allowed Mr. Boesky tohold on to many millions of dollars&quot; after he paid the fine.   Mr. Puccio's argument in court yesterday presages what islikely to be the mainstay of the defense in the case againstMr. Mulheren. Mr. Puccio will try to impeach the credibilityof Mr. Boesky, the government's main witness in the case, byattacking his finances and asserting that he lied about hisdealings with Mr. Mulheren, among others, to reduce hisprison term. Mr. Boesky recently completed a three-yearprison sentence.   Assistant U.S. attorney Scott Gilbert and Charles Davidow,a lawyer for Mr. Boesky, argued that Mr. Puccio is trying toembark on a &quot;fishing expedition,&quot; and that the government's1986 plea bargain agreement with Mr. Boesky did not requirethat he give up all of his money.   &quot;I really am not satisfied that this subpoena is notfishing and is material&quot; to the case against Mr. Mulheren,Judge Cedarbaum said. Mr. Puccio said he would submit anothersubpoena requesting more specific information about Mr.Boesky's finances.   ---   KENTUCKY NEWSPAPER loses key appeals court ruling in libelcase.   In a unanimous decision, the Kentucky Supreme Courtordered that a new trial be held in a libel case against theLexington Herald-Leader by a former University of Pittsburghassistant basketball coach.   The ex-coach, Reggie Warford, sued the Knight-Ridder Inc.newspaper over a two-part series published in 1985 oncorruption in college basketball. The Pulitzer Prize-winningarticles alleged that Mr. Warford violated recruiting rulesby offering money to a Kentucky high school basketball star.   The trial judge dismissed the case at the conclusion ofthe evidence on the grounds that Mr. Warford was a publicfigure and had failed to meet the public-figure standard ofproving reckless disregard for the truth.   The state supreme court, however, disagreed on bothcounts. It said Mr. Warford &quot;did not assume the risk ofpublic scrutiny&quot; as a coach and therefore was not a publicfigure and did not have to comply with the stringentreckless-disregard standard. In addition, the court ruled,there was sufficient evidence presented in the case to allowa jury to find reckless disregard.   The suit stemmed not from the actual publication of thearticles but from their reprint in a special tabloid thenewpaper distributed nationwide to colleges and the press.Mr. Warford, who lost his job in 1986 after the hiring of anew head coach, claims that the reprinted articles preventedhim finding other coaching positions.   The Herald-Leader says it will seek a review of theappeals court decision by the U.S. Supreme Court.   &quot;Beyond our own institutional interest, we're concernedabout {the decision's} effect on free speech and free pressin Kentucky,&quot; said John S. Carroll, the paper's editor.   ---   Laurie P. Cohen contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>