<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911217-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>911217-0089.</DOCID><HL>   Business World:   The Anxious Go Comparison Shopping for a Candidate   ----   By Tim W. Ferguson</HL><DATE>12/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A21</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><RE>ARKANSAS (AR)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   A lot of executives are itching to apply management toU.S. domestic policy, which they see as adrift and stymied bypartisan divisions. Costs of doing business are rising, andwork-force performance is declining. A presidential candidatelike Bill Clinton, benign in his rhetoric and JFKlike in hisvigor, can make hay for Democrats out of this environment.   Or so it seemed this month when Mr. Clinton swept throughsome business ranks in Southern California while making thecustomary fund-raising pit stops in the parlors of theHollywood left. The Arkansas governor had breakfast with 60curious capitalists in Orange County. They were assembled byRoger W. Johnson, CEO of Western Digital Corp., and KathrynThompson, a developer. She says 500 asked to come.</LP><TEXT>   Both sponsors are normally in the Republican camp and saythey are backing Mr. Clinton only in the Democratic racethusfar. They are sending a message to President Bush not to besmug.   All well and good. But in adding to the growing luster ofthe Clinton campaign, which is touted as the alternative toMario Cuomo, what is business in for? The governor's recordin the South's most stubbornly one-party state is anideological mask.   Mr. Johnson is impressed that President Clinton wouldrelax the regulatory definition of nonperforming loans sothat borrowers current on their payments wouldn't have theircredit pinched solely because the assets securing a note haddeclined in value. That's more than he's heard from the GOP,says Mr. Johnson, whose computer-parts company, like Ms.Thompson's building firm, has had its fill of banks.   He also likes Mr. Clinton's ideas for retooling U.S.industry in the wake of the Cold War, to deploymilitary-aerospace resources into civilian technologies. Alight version of industrial policy, managed privately butwith central steering, appeals to Mr. Johnson.   Mr. Clinton scores further points by promising to expandthe medical safety net by reducing patient bills tointernational norms instead of necessarily putting up newpublic money. In his announcement speech, the Arkansan saidhe would &quot;take on the big insurance companies and health-carebureaucracies and get some real cost control into thesystem.&quot; How he would accomplish this from Washington, hehasn't said yet. He certainly hasn't suggested vouchers orcredits that could enlist millions of individual consumers inthe cause of price shopping.   And last but never least come schools, the Clinton claimto fame. For the past nine years, the governor has followedthe reformers' script in altering Arkansas classrooms,raising taxes repeatedly in the process with popular OK. Heacquired a badge of courage for initially antagonizingteacher unionists by including a requirement for competencytesting (the condition was a farce; few failed). Eventuallyhe won over the union with big salary increases. But he alsohas moved to devolve decision-making, and by various measures(dropout rates, college entries, advancedcourse enrollments)the state is gaining.   That's what a businessman likes to see. In addition toincreases in sales, personal-income and gasoline taxes, Mr.Clinton won a higher corporate-tax rate (which is full ofloopholes) by earmarking the funds for vocational classes.Mr. Johnson, who says he is against &quot;the extremes of `no newtaxes,' ever,&quot; likes this hopeful's ideas for job-training orapprenticeship programs in the U.S.   Mr. Clinton has been keen on child-health programs. (Hiswife, Hillary, a fellow lawyer who has palpably influencedhis positions over a sometimes rocky marriage, is a boardmember of the Children's Defense Fund.) But at later ages,the governor would expect something back from the citizenry.For years, he has been urging authorities to instill &quot;valuesand discipline and direction&quot; in the people. This includesasking effort in return for welfarenow a widely acceptedconcept -- and a form of national service, possibly as&quot;literary instructors,&quot; in return for student aid.   Arkansas school districts are to teach parentsresponsibility and fine them when they shirk. The state putsdrug offenders in what are billed as &quot;boot camps.&quot; Mr.Clinton is riding nationwide rights-with-responsibilitysentiment among liberals and some conservatives, who seerequired, universal social contributions -- even if noteconomically sensible -- as an antidote to a perceivedbreakdown of community across America.   Asked whether that spirit runs counter to the legendaryindividualism of his own electronics industry, Mr. Johnsonreplies that such lore is largely false, that the giants ofthe business have long relied more on inspiring groupperformance than on milking &quot;wild-eyed&quot; genius.   Like other globalists, Mr. Johnson is reassured by Mr.Clinton's expressed support of free trade and resolve to dealwith competitive disadvantages of the U.S. at home, ratherthan by emphasizing curbs on foreign imports and investmentor outsourcing of labor. However, if the Arkansan has ideasfor reducing the vast drain of resources into unproductivelegal costs of torts and regulation, he hasn't articulatedthem. Much of a president's influence here comes throughselections to the courts. Can one imagine a judicial nomineewith much economic sense being cleared by Mr. Clinton'sbacker Norman Lear?   Indeed, that is a reminder that whatever the strengths ofa Democrat for president -- and this one is a well-readfellow who climbed from material want -- he'd carry thebaggage of a basically socialist party. Mr. Johnson insiststhat a strong figure (he mentions Ronald Reagan) can instilla culture of his own, but even the Reagan presidency, andevery other since FDR, actually shows the opposite. Thepalace guard at the White House has leverage, but over timethe federal government is too vast for even an intelligent,disciplined core group to master. With Mr. Clinton -- as withJimmy Carter before himthe party regulars would prevail.   Moreover, the Arkansan himself has roots on the left andis a government activist. His hero was Sen. J. WilliamFulbright, and his baptism in big-time politics was runningGeorge McGovern's 1972 presidential bid in Texas. Thatneedn't define one's mature philosophy -- several soldiers inBarry Goldwater's fall 1964 campaign didn't remain movementconservativesbut it can point to basic instincts.   Mr. Clinton fashions his 1992 bid as an appeal to restorethe middle class, and unlike some of his rivals, he hassounded this theme since long before yesterday. He hasembraced centrism, which hasn't been easy for a nationalDemocrat, and his cando credo appeals at a time whenpolitical elites seem oblivious to troubles on the homefront. But if business believes, as it so often says, thatTax andamp; Spend and Regulate andamp; Litigate are the combined curseson the American economy, it had better not go dreaming ofCamelot.</TEXT></DOC>