<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900509-0097</DOCNO><DOCID>900509-0097.</DOCID><HL>   Grassroots to Bush: `No More Taxes'   ----   By Patrick B. McGuigan</HL><DATE>05/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><LP>   When the White House this week announced it would set &quot;nopreconditions&quot; on deficit-cutting talks, it opened the doorto reversing its position on George Bush's campaign promiseof no new taxes. But if Washington is beginning to crack onthis central issue, the states are standing firm.   A dozen or more state governments could face meaningfultax-reduction or limitation initiatives this fall. America'sgrass roots are talking, and their words don't include&quot;revenue enhancement&quot; or other euphemisms for tax increases.A look at some state initiatives and petitions in the fieldshows that this year will see a new surge in ballotpropositions aiming to reduce taxes and state spending.</LP><TEXT>   -- Colorado: Last fall, activists under Douglas Bruce werethe first in the country to gain a spot on the Novemberballot for a tax-reduction initiative. The new measurecombines meaningful limitations on taxation with phased-inrelief in some categories. Backers of the initiative arelikely to survive legal challenges. If they do, theirNovember match will be one of the most important in thenation.   -- Massachusetts: Citizens for Limited Taxation is backwith a sophisticated initiative that will subject to astatewide popular vote all tax increases enacted in theLegislature in the 1989-90 cycle. At a time when Republicansare outregistering Democrats two-to-one, this latestinitiative could represent the first opportunity for votersto reject directly the high-tax, high-spending policies ofthe departing Dukakis administration.   Under the commonwealth's indirect provisions for theprocess, the Bay State initiative faced legislative scrutinyin late April. Then the Democrat-dominated Legislaturerejected the tax-slashing proposal. If backers can garner afew thousand new valid names on petitions, the initiativewill go to the people this fall.   -- California: Joel Fox of the Howard Jarvis TaxpayersAssociation announced a new initiative drive in lateDecember, aiming for this November's ballot. Called the&quot;Taxpayers Right to Vote Act of 1990,&quot; it gives voters moredirect control over both general and special taxes at thestate and local levels.   The measure attacks future government revenues, spendingand services. Mr. Fox maintains the initiative is designedmerely to reinvigorate tax limits passed but gutted throughjudicial interpretation. As a result of a blend of paidcirculators, direct mail and volunteer activists, a statewidepopular vote is virtually certain.   -- Illinois: The National Taxpayers United of Illinois meta May 4 deadline for submission to state officials of atleast 251,595 valid signatures on a new initiative. Theinitiative would require all tax hikes to go through aspecial legislative committee, and mandate legislative supermajorities of 60% for future tax increases in the high-taxstate. In fact, the group was able to turn in 470,292signatures, subject to verification. The group has made astrong start.   Win or lose, the initiative made a difference: Afterconservative Republican Steve Baer -- who emphasized hisstrong support for the initiative -- garnered one-third ofthe vote in the March 20 gubernatorial primary, GOP nomineeJim Edgar endorsed the NTUI measure in early April.   Democratic nominee Neil Hartigan also announced supportfor the initiative, and for a month the two gubernatorialnominees have tried to outdo one another in rejecting thehigh-tax policies of retiring Governor Jim Thompson.   All 28 Republicans in the state Senate have introduced anidentical proposal in the Legislature, assuring theinitiative drive continued life even if it does not survivethe state's byzantine initiative provisions.   -- Oklahoma: Legislators last month enacted staggering taxincreases for education. The controversial increases in statesales, income and corporate taxes came after five Democraticsenators switched from opposition to support of a crucial&quot;emergency&quot; clause putting the hikes into effect immediately,and avoiding a popular referendum drive.   The switches came after thousands of teachers leftclassrooms on April 16 and flooded the state capital to back&quot;education reform&quot; -- although what finally passed did notinclude mandated consolidation of rural districts, parentalchoice or other reforms. The package results in pay raisesfor teachers over a five-year period, with some increases infunding for specific programs. Liberal Republican GovernorHenry Bellmon backed the tax hikes, and so did Steve Lewis,Democratic speaker of the House. Mr. Lewis was rewardedwithin days with an endorsement from the National EducationAssociation affiliate.   But the tides could shift. All the GOPers and several ofthe Democrats running to replace Gov. Bellmon this falloppose the increases. Grassroots forces immediately coalescedaround Dan Brown, an Oklahoma City stockbroker, and plans fora tax-limitation initiative began. Through early this month,thousands of calls to Mr. Brown's office indicated widespreadpopular fury at the hikes, and a willingness to go into thefield with initiative petitions. It is not clear whether thetax-cut activists would go for a simple repeal of the newlevies or seek tax-limitation provisions. Even a successfuldrive may not garner a popular vote until 1991 -- and ahostile governor could delay any vote until 1992.   -- Michigan: At least two related initiatives are aimingfor the ballot. Individuals and groups that helped defeat twotax-hike proposals in November could prove potent in drivesto cap or limit taxation.   A statutory initiative to the Legislature -- whosesupporters are expected to submit their goal of 240,000 namesthis month -- would roll back property tax assessments by upto 20%. Under this rare form of initiative, legislators get achance to consider the proposal as a simple law without thethreat of gubernatorial veto. The tax cut plan might stillfind its way to a statewide popular vote.   Another initiative petition to limit taxes faces a Julypetitioning deadline if supporters want to garner a spot onthis year's ballot.   -- Oregon: Portland activists close to the late RayPhillips, a Jarvis-like figure in the state, are back with aproposal to cut property taxes in half over a five-yearperiod. The initiative supporters will probably submitsufficient valid names later this month, assuring them a spoton what will likely be a statewide November ballot alreadycrowded with environmental and other initiatives.   As the spring ends, a variety of other tax reduction orlimitation ballot propositions have fair prospects ofsecuring ballot spots and passing in November. South Dakotahas a mixed program. One measure slated would roll back sometaxes, but a second would allow a state income tax. Activistsplan to support the first and oppose the second.   In Nevada, voters will ponder a constitutional measurebanning imposition of a state income tax. The initiativepassed in 1988, but must be considered a second time underthe state's provisions. In Montana, a drive to limit spendingseems to be emerging. Nebraska's Taxpayers Survival Committeeinitiative filed a tax reduction initiative with the stategovernment last July. Bill Heusiler, a tax-cut veteran inArizona, is joined by supporters in contemplating a majorproperty-tax reduction effort. A taxcut effort might stillemerge in North Dakota. In all four states, tax reducers facemid-summer deadlines to gather sufficient valid names.   An initiative limiting new property taxes is possible inFlorida. In that state, the petition circulation processmight draw out matters into the 1992 election. Utahans, whohave rejected recent aggressive tax reduction efforts, mightlook more favorably on a possible initiative to cut taxes onfood sales.   The question for 1990 is whether the electorate in some ormost of the states is ready to move beyond opposition to taxhikes to actual approval of tax reductions and meaningfulspending limitations.   Leaders in the various initiative drives are, of course,hoping this year will see the return of the tax revolt thatpeaked a decade ago. In any case, Americans this season maybe preparing to send a message to Washington. Come November,George Bush may find that voters paid closer attention to hiscampaign promises than he thought. Don't be surprised ifAmericans tell the president, &quot;Read our lips . . .&quot;   ---   Mr. McGuigan is editor of the Family, Law andamp; DemocracyReport, published by the Free Congress Foundation inWashington, D.C.</TEXT></DOC>