<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910911-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>910911-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Oil Spill Trial Yields $2.5 Million Award   ----   By Arthur S. Hayes and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   BKLMY BP SNC XON</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)ENERGY (ENE)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>EASTERN U.S. BANKS (BAE)MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)ALL REGIONAL BANKS (BAR)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)PIPELINE OPERATORS (PIP)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>ALASKA (AK)CONNECTICUT (CT)EUROPE (EU)FLORIDA (FL)ISRAEL (ISR)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   In the first major Alaskan oil spill case to go to trial,a jury awarded 16 fishermen more than $2.5 million in damagesand set up a payout formula that could yield millions more toother plaintiffs who suffered damages as a result of a 1987oil spill.   Attorneys for the plaintiffs contend that the verdictbodes well for more than 5,000 plaintiffs with suits pendingagainst Exxon Corp., as a result of the Valdez oil spill inMarch 1989.</LP><TEXT>   The federal jury in Anchorage reached its decision lateMonday afternoon after a three-week trial and a week ofdeliberations over the fishermen's loss of income as a resultof 85,000 gallons of oil that leaked into Cook Inlet Bay whenthe tanker Glacier Bay ran aground in July 1987. The spillwas the largest in Alaska prior to the Exxon Valdez mishap inPrince William Sound, in which 11 million gallons of oil werespilled.   More than 800 fishermen and fish processors filed suit infederal court, claiming the Glacier Bay spill prevented themfrom taking advantage of a record salmon run and drove downthe price of fish because of buyers' fears of getting taintedsalmon. The plaintiffs asked for more than $104.8 millionfrom Trinidad Corp., the shipper; its insurer, West ofEngland; British Petroleum PLC, which had hired Trinidad; andthe Trans-Alaskan Pipeline Liability Fund, which is funded byoil companies using the pipeline and which compensates thoseharmed by oil spills.   According to Bill Engaldson, an attorney for TrinidadShipping and West of England, the key defendants, the defenseargued that the fishermen earned only 1% less than inprevious years and that the price of the salmon droppedbecause of the unusually large number of salmon, not the oilspill.   When the case went to trial last month, only 125plaintiffs remained. The rest had reached out-of-courtsettlements. The jury was asked to decide compensation in 16test cases.   Gerard Nolting, an attorney for the plaintiffs, said the109 other plaintiffs will be paid based on the averagepayments to the 16 plaintiffs. Mr. Nolting estimated that thetotal amount paid to the others will exceed $15 million.   Mr. Engaldson, however, said the damages to the remainingplaintiffs should amount to only about $4 million. He saidhis clients will appeal the verdict.   The defendants face a second trial phase in which a jurywill decide which defendants are liable for the damages foreconomic losses and which should pay additional punitivedamages as punishment for failing to settle the claimsquickly.   George Dunn, general counsel for British Petroleum inCleveland, said he believes his company's role &quot;does notwarrant&quot; that it pay damages for economic losses. He said hiscompany is not a defendant in the punitive damages phase ofthe trial. Phone calls to the attorney for the Trans-Alaskanfund were not returned.   Mr. Nolting, the plaintiffs' attorney, said the verdict&quot;sends a message to Exxon&quot; that Alaska juries will be toughon companies involved in environmental disasters. His lawfirm, Faegre andamp; Benson in Minneapolis, represents about 1,000plaintiffs in that case.   Exxon, which is facing hundreds of millions of dollars indamage claims from that spill, has already paid out more than$300 million on its own to fishermen and others, and faces afederal criminal trial in Anchorage scheduled to begin nextmonth.   An Exxon spokesman said the company would not comment onMr. Nolting's prediction. But Mr. Dunn said the Glacier Bayverdict should have little bearing on the Valdez civiltrials.   &quot;We don't see this case as being particularly relevent tothe Exxon case,&quot; Mr. Dunn said. &quot;The cases have differentfish seasons, different accident sites and differentcircumstances.&quot;   ---   LIMITS PUT on judicial candidates' right to expresspolitical views.   A ruling by a federal appeals court in Philadelphiareversed a lower court decision that struck down aPennsylvania judicial ethics rule barring judicial candidatesfrom telling voters about their legal and political views.   But while the decision by the Third Circuit Court ofAppeals restored the state rule, it also said that the ruleshould be narrowly interpreted to give judicial candidatesmore freedom to tell voters about themselves.   The decision was a partial victory for Samuel C. Stretton,a lawyer and a candidate for the Court of Common Pleas inChester County, Pa. Mr. Stretton, a Democrat running in aRepublican-controlled county, sued last March challenging thecode's prohibition against judicial candidates discussing&quot;disputed legal or political issues.&quot;   The provision is intended to prevent candidates fromcommitting themselves on issues they might have to rule on asjudges. The Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court ofPennsylvania and the state's Judicial Inquiry and ReviewBoard, argued that the law was valid, but Mr. Strettoncountered that the language was so vague that it effectivelybarred him from discussing valid issues such as criminalsentencing, victims rights and the need for better judges andmore minority staffers in Pennsylvania's courts.   A federal judge in Philadelphia agreed last April andstruck down the prohibition. But the appellate judgesdeclared the canon legally sound, so long as it is narrowlyconstrued. Under their reading of the code, none of thecampaign topics Mr. Stretton wished to discuss would bebarred. He is only prohibited from raising issues he mighthave to decide as a judge.   Pennsylvania's law is patterned after a model code ofjudicial conduct drafted by the American Bar Association in1972 and adopted to varying degrees by the 29 states thatelect trial judges. Mr. Stretton and his lawyer, SamuelKlein, of the Philadelphia law firm Kohn, Savett, Klein andamp;Graf, said they wanted the code struck down. The ruling willhelp guide Pennsylvania's disciplinary review boards and thestate's supreme court, but it is not binding, they said.   Even so, said Mr. Klein, the decision should help persuadeother states that the public has a right to learn aboutjudicial candidates' views and knowledge of the law.   ---   GAMBLING DEBT put on Mastercharge can't be collected,appeals court rules.   Most states, not including Nevada and New Jersey, havelaws declaring gambling debts uncollectable, but regulargamblers who are screened by casinos for a line of credittypically pay up in order to gamble again.   The case before the Appeals Court for the Commonwealth ofMassachusetts was unusual, however, because Richard Kommiteffectively obtained gambling credit from his bank by runningup $5,500 in advances in 1987 using his Mastercharge on anautomatic teller machine located in the gambling pits of anAtlantic City casino.   Mr. Kommit fought the subsequent collection action byConnecticut National Bank, a subsidiary of Shawmut NationalCorp.   Two lower courts ruled that Mr. Kommit, of Brookline,Mass., had to pay his bill, but the state appeals court ruledthat under the laws of Massachusetts and Connecticut, &quot;acontract to pay money knowingly lent for gambling is void.&quot;   Mr. Kommit's Boston attorney, Neal M. Brown, said the factthat the machine was located in the gambling area and issuedchits for chips rather than cash proved the bank knew orshould have known that advances were being lent for gambling.   &quot;The banks, unfortunately, are the ones who get whackedfor this -- not the casino,&quot; says Mr. Brown. &quot;If they put themachine in a public place like the lobby and it dispensedcash, that would probably pass muster,&quot; and allow bankers todeny they knew advances were for gambling.   Shawmut, of Hartford, Conn., said it is considering anappeal. It said it has sold its credit card business.   ---   GUILTY PLEA entered in scheme that defrauded immigrants.   In federal court in Manhattan, Eugene R. Karczewski ofBrooklyn admitted to five counts of conspiracy, fraud andother charges in connection with the scheme, which ran fromDecember 1987 to January 1991. Mr. Karczewski admitted thathe solicited $34 million in investments in his company,Stockbridge Funding Corp. of New York, from about 1,000investors, who prosecutors said were &quot;financiallyunsophisticated Polish and Eastern European immigrants andaliens.&quot;   Prosecutors said the investments were used to pay backprevious investors and &quot;to maintain the illusion thatStockbridge was prosperous and its investments sound.&quot;Instead, prosecutors said, the company was insolvent bySeptember 1990.   In his guilty plea before U.S. District Judge John S.Martin, Mr. Karczewski admitted that he had misled investorsabout the safety of their investments. He also pleaded guiltyto fraudulently obtaining a $1 million credit line from BankLeumi.   In April, the Securities and Exchange Commission brought acivil suit against Mr. Karczewski and his son, Eugene F.Karczewski, in connection with the scheme. Marvin B. Segal,the elder Mr. Karczewski's attorney, said his client hasagreed to settle the SEC suit. Mr. Segal said his client hasno money to pay investors.   Criminal charges in the case also have been filed againstthe younger Karczewski, who couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   CRAVATH IS APPROVED to represent Drexel Burnham LambertInc.   U.S. District Judge Milton Pollack ruled that the law firmcan represent Drexel in possible fraud suits against MichaelMilken and others. As provided in the settlement of theDrexel bankruptcy case, the New York law firm Cravath, Swaineandamp; Moore will team up with Milberg Weiss Bershad Specthrie andamp;Lerach to pursue the claims.   Cravath, hired on a contingency-fee basis to representthrift regulators, was on the other side of the table fromDrexel in the bankruptcy case; Milberg Weiss representedother securities litigants. As part of the settlement, Drexelagreed to aid Cravath and Milberg Weiss in going afterpossible claims, which would be divvied up by Drexel'screditors and by investors and thrifts allegedly defrauded.Weil, Gotshal andamp; Manges will continue as Drexel's generalcounsel.   A new suit against Mr. Milken on behalf of Drexel isexpected to be filed soon.   ---   NOTED: Buchanan Ingersoll, a Pittsburgh law firm, addedfive attorneys and announced that it will open a Tampa, Fla.,office as part an expansion of its health care law practice.J. Jerome Mansmann, formerly a partner in the Pittsburgh lawfirm Mansmann Cindrich andamp; Titus, will become co-chairman ofBuchanan Ingersoll's health care group. Melanie DiPietro andRosemary L. Corsetti, also formerly Mansmann Cindrichpartners, will join as shareholders. Two other lawyers willjoin the 200-lawyer firm as associates.</TEXT></DOC>