<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910827-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>910827-0049.</DOCID><HL>   The Holdout:   Failure of Soviet Coup   Leaves Cuba Stalled,   Fidel Castro Isolated   ---   Food Is Scarce, Oil Imperiled   By Yeltsin Cutoff Threats;   Planning for the Worst   ---   Cattle for Work but Not Meat   ----   By Jose de Cordoba   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>CUBA (CU)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WEST INDIES (WIS)</RE><LP>   HAVANA, Cuba -- With the collapse of the Soviet coup, badtimes may quickly turn into the worst of times for FidelCastro, leaving Cuba more desperate than ever.   During Boris Yeltsin's election campaign for thepresidency of Russia last May, he would get some of hisbiggest cheers when he promised in speeches to cut off Cubaand other Soviet client states. Now Mr. Yeltsin's hand hasbeen vastly strengthened by events of the past week, whilesome of Cuba's most steadfast friends in the Kremlin areunder arrest.</LP><TEXT>   For many Soviets, Cuba and Cubans for some time have beenpariahs. Melba, a 25-year-old Cuban engineer who recentlyreturned home after five years of study in the Soviet Union,says Soviet students sometimes physically attacked theirCuban fellows. The students, she says, blamed aid to Cuba forthe Soviet Union's poverty. For them, Mr. Castro was justanother dictator.   Mr. Castro seems to have been caught off balance by thecoup -- and Cuba seems shell shocked now that it has failed.Havana waited for two days before coming out with anoncommittal statement expressing its &quot;concern.&quot; Since then,Mr. Castro still hasn't sent a public message to Mr.Gorbachev or to Mr. Yeltsin.   But George Bush, referring to Mr. Castro yesterday, saidthe Cuban leader &quot;must be sweating.&quot; And, speaking of Mr.Yeltsin, Mr. Bush said &quot;here's a man who in things likecutting off aid to Cuba . . . stand{s} with us on a lot ofthese questions.&quot;   Spanish Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez, who was in Moscowrecently, is said to have since told Mr. Castro that Mr.Yeltsin is determined to end the subsidized exchange ofSoviet crude oil for Cuban sugar. Cuba's trade with theSoviet Union is 75% of its total trade.   For more than a year, Cuba has been preparing for sucheventualities, instituting an austerity program called the&quot;special period in peacetime,&quot; that has replaced sometractors with oxen and rationed most foodstuffs. In reserveis an even more drastic &quot;zero option&quot; plan to be put intoeffect should Soviet crude-oil shipments actually be halted.Rumors abound in Havana that &quot;zero option&quot; would replacerationing with communal kitchens.   For some time Cuba has braced itself for the worst andprayed that the Soviet Union would not cut off its lifelineof subsidized oil. Last year, the Soviets, struggling to puttheir commerce on a hard-currency basis, cut the oil barteredfor Cuban sugar by 24%. This year, the Soviets say they areproviding roughly the same amount of crude as they did lastyear. But overall trade with Cuba fell by about 25% in thefirst six months of 1991, and Cuban trade with the formerEast bloc nations has essentially ceased.   Before last week's coup, Soviet officials had said thatsubstantial trade with Cuba would continue, else it wouldhave to spend hard currency to obtain needed sugar, nickel,and other products from non-Cuban sources. &quot;There are norevolutions in commerce, just evolutions,&quot; says Alexander N.Shajov, an international trade expert in Havana.   But that may not be true this time, under thesecircumstances. Reuters reports that Cuban state radio saysthe changes in the Soviet Union will have a &quot;clear impact onour country.&quot; Jorge Dominguez, a leading Cubanologist atHarvard, says he wouldn't be surprised if the Soviet leaderscome to the quick conclusion that Cuba is no friend and reactaccordingly -- perhaps by canceling the current tradeagreement. &quot;It brings the zero option much closer,&quot; says Mr.Dominguez. Jiri Valenta, director of the University ofMiami's Institute for Soviet and East European Studies saysflatly: &quot;There will be no aid to Cuba. It's a matter of daysor weeks.&quot;   In shabby San Lazaro Street, a few blocks from themagnificent steps of the University of Havana, suddenly theday of the &quot;zero option&quot; looms closer. No one has seen meathere in two months. So when word spreads before dawn one daythat meat and fish are to be had, a line of people, mostlyelderly women clutching worn cloth shopping bags, forms infront of a dimly lighted, empty bodega.   At 9 o'clock, an elderly man in a porkpie hat andguayabera shuffles out of the shop gripping a small paper bagfull of little fish. &quot;I've been waiting since four in themorning,&quot; says Mario, a retired construction worker, who likemost people here is reluctant to offer up his surname forpublication. A woman looking on as he pulls a fish from thebag comments: &quot;After you cut off the head and clean it, itwon't get you very far. Soon we will be eating dirt.&quot;   A block away, another line stretches round the corner.There people wait somberly for their ration of daily bread --one tough little yellow roll made from scarce imported Sovietwheat. Down the street is the long line for eggplant, thevegetable of the day, and still another line for milk.   Most times, Cuba is like &quot;Waiting for Godot,&quot; but with acast of 10 million spending their lives waiting. Rations havedwindled to five pounds of rice a month, five eggs a week anda quarter chicken per person every nine days. When the rationis used up or supplies run short, as often happens, peoplewait for up to two hours to get the carbohydrates supplied bycheap, dreadful pizzas. A lot of people also are in line toemigrate to the U.S., but it has stopped processing visitorsvisas, most likely to increase the pressure on Mr. Castro.   Above all, as Mr. Castro's revolution turns into astruggle for subsistence, Cubans wait desperately for achange in living conditions, but none seems forthcoming fromMr. Castro. &quot;A revolution like ours does not change its nameor ideas . . . ,&quot; Mr. Castro defiantly reiterated tothousands of Cubans last month in a discursive 2 1/2-hourspeech. &quot;Don't let them come and talk to us with stories ofcapitalism, a market economy and all that kind of madness.&quot;   Although people interviewed here ask how long things cango on as they are, the answer may well be for a long time.&quot;Everyone wants something to happen,&quot; says a psychologist,looking out from her booklined study at people queued up inyet another food line. &quot;But no one wants to do anything tomake it happen.&quot; Says Nelly, 41, a divorced doctor with twochildren: &quot;We are the sons and daughters of bad treatment. Weget used to anything.&quot;   Haunted by the fear of hunger, Cuban society continues tobe dominated by Mr. Castro -- and paralyzed by fear of hissecurity forces, which are thought to be everywhere. Theregime has been able to internalize repression. On everyblock, a Committee for the Defense of the Revolution takesnotes on the comings and goings of visitors. Except for a fewdissidents who feel they have little to lose, this remains acountry of anonymous people, afraid to speak their minds inpublic.   After 32 years in power, Mr. Castro remains a toweringfigure here, however out of touch he might be with the youngand with the swirl of change throughout the former communistworld. Almost 60% of the Cuban population was born after hecame to power in 1959. &quot;He's crazy,&quot; says a 30-year-oldplaywright, holding a finger to his head. &quot;He's senile,&quot; saysMelba, the Soviet-educated engineer.   But in the next breath, Melba says she would &quot;tremble&quot; ifMr. Castro were to enter the room. &quot;I still admire him,&quot; saysa 22-year-old colleague of hers. And despite the hardships,many older Cubans, particularly, retain a profound sense ofloyalty to the unbending leader.   Also working against change is the enervating passivityand dependence bred by the government. Even as they complainabout shortages, Cubans fear the unknown -- and the end of asystem that in many cases has turned the sons of peasantsinto doctors and provided education, health and, perhaps mostimportant of all, jobs if not work for everybody.   Still, the Cuban leadership is plainly worried thatcontinued economic deterioration may cause an explosion. Aposter at the Havana Libre Hotel is a montage of photographsof Cuban sights -- including a mountain, a mass rally and thesea. The legend at the bottom reads like a drum roll of theregime's worst fears: &quot;This won't fall. This won't tremble.This won't fade.&quot;   Recently the government urged Cubans, with mixed results,to join ominously named &quot;rapid-action detachments &quot; --revolutionary vigilantes who are supposed to convincemalcontents of the error of their ways.   &quot;They explained it wasn't a civil war, or anything likethat,&quot; says Alejandro, a young mechanic whose mother signedhim up. He says that as a battalion member, he is supposed todefend the Revolution if anyone criticizes it in public.Would he use violence? &quot;I plan to get lost,&quot; he says.   The special detachments nevertheless inspire fear.Elizardo Sanchez, who heads one of the small human-rightsgroups here, says that he has no doubt the detachments wouldbe a cover for security forces in quashing protests. Mr.Sanchez, whose group has just 32 members, warns that thelonger the crisis lingers, the more the possibility ofviolence. &quot;There is too much hate accumulated in the heart ofCuban society,&quot; he says.   A bread riot might detonate violence. Screaming argumentsare a constant in the food lines. Many families in Havana saythey are eating just once a day. And while schools and manyemployers serve lunch, some factories and offices are lettingpeople go early, so as not to have to serve a meal. A recipemaking the rounds in Havana is for a steak substitute made ofboiled and breaded grapefruit rind. &quot;We are not starving, butwe are not living, either,&quot; says a young theater director.   Manuel Davis, a senior foreign ministry official, says&quot;there is an obsession about food, there is tension aboutfood.&quot; But, he adds, unlike other hard-pressed Latin Americancountries, nobody is starving. &quot;Everybody in Cuba gets apiece of bread daily.&quot;   To multiply the loaves, the government has givenagriculture top priority. Since the beginning of theausterity period more than a year ago, tens of thousands ofCubans, ranging from officials to students, have volunteeredto work in the countryside for two-week periods. Plans areunder way to construct permanent new towns for 5,000 newlyminted farm workers to be brought in from the city. &quot;At aminimum, we should get some results in one or two years,&quot;says Mr. Davis.   But even those modest hopes are questionable. &quot;We areplanting less than before and harvesting less than before,&quot;says a foreman at a farm in San Antonio de los Banos, a townin Havana province. Because of hard times, permanent farmworkers are stealing more produce, so less gets delivered tothe city. And volunteerism has its limits.   Standing in the rich red clay dirt of a big state farm inGuira de Melena, Emilio Franchi, the deputy administrator,says he has had to use less pesticide than in other years.Since the farm can't buy more tractors, it plans to increaseits teams of oxen to 300 from 100. Despite the difficulties,says Mr. Franchi, the harvest of potatoes, bananas and otherfruits and vegetables has increased this year by 40%.   At a third farm, an administrator tells a joke about Cubanproduction. Fidel visits a farm where a fat sow catches hiseye. He decides the sow should give birth to 10 piglets.Unfortunately, the sow gives birth to just six piglets. Thefarm administrator can't bring himself to report the sow'smodest piglet production, so he reports the birth of eightpiglets to the municipal secretary of the local CommunistParty, who in turn raises the number. By the time the reportreaches Fidel, the sow's piglet production has beenexaggerated to 10. &quot;Fine,&quot; says Fidel. &quot;Four for the domesticmarket and six for export.&quot;   The administrator says the planned economy is planned tobe a disaster. Scarcities make the disaster worse. Forinstance, he says, there is no feed for producing poultry,only for egg production. That means Cuba must importchickens, using scarce hard currency to do so. And turning300,000 head of beef cattle into oxen, partly explains thelack of meat in the market, he says.   Oddly, Cuba is bending its socialist principles andbetting its scarce resources that a massive revival oftourism after a 31-year revolutionary hiatus will helprefloat the economy. In Varadero, the country's most famousbeach, cranes tower over half a dozen construction sites fornew or renovated hotels. So far, the most important projectis a joint venture by a Cuban state company and the GrupoSol, a Spanish hotel firm that is putting up $150 million, tobuild three hotels and a shopping center. The partnersalready operate one hotel. By 1995, Cuban officials say, Cubaplans to build some 30,000 hotel rooms and attract at least 1million tourists from Europe, Canada and Latin America, upfrom 340,000 last year.   But the tourism drive has created what Cubans cynicallycall &quot;green zones&quot; where &quot;dollar apartheid&quot; rules. InVaradero, it is virtually impossible to find a hotel thatwill accept Cuban pesos. In most restaurants, even humblebeach bars with thatched roofs, the only thing pesos will geta Cuban is a glass of water -- if the bartender is in a goodmood. The contrast between the efficient, clean and plentifulrestaurants open to tourists and the grimy and unappetizingfacilities available to Cubans, is galling. &quot;This is a greatcountry if you are a foreigner,&quot; says one unhappy youth, in abeach bar crowded with Cubans drinking water.   Along with tourism, and apparently tolerated by police,prostitution has made an impressive comeback. By the hoteldistrict in Havana, on the road to Varadero, and along thecity's winding seaside avenue and elegant embassy district,young women and older professionals flag down rented cars,offering sex for money or for entree to the &quot;green zone&quot; andits pleasures.   Back in the real world, Nelly, the doctor with two youngsons, used to think of herself as a revolutionary. She saysshe hasn't seen soap or deodorant for two months. So she usesan avocado preparation to wash her hair. Deodorant she makesfrom lemon juice and water. Sanitary napkins are improvisedfrom rags, &quot;like our slave grandmothers used.&quot;   She has bright memories of Palmolive soap. She dreams ofeating a Spanish ham, she worries constantly about runningout of food. She feels her youth has gone and doesn't wanther sons to live the life she has lived.   &quot;Who will get us out of this crisis?&quot; she asks.</TEXT></DOC>