<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900529-0110</DOCNO><DOCID>900529-0110.</DOCID><HL>   Some Soviet Names to Get to Know   ----   By S. Frederick Starr</HL><DATE>05/29/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   Mikhail Gorbachev and George Bush may not meet in manymore summits like the one taking place this week. As Mr.Gorbachev's approval rate in the Soviet Union drops below40%, demands that his administration resign have been voiced,most recently in the powerful Literary Gazette. Hispresidential term does not expire until 1995. But mountingpressures, especially after the Communist Party Congress inJuly, could force new elections before then. Should thishappen, who are Mr. Gorbachev's likely successors?   Some claim there are no alternatives to Mr. Gorbachev. Butthe times create leaders as much as leaders shape the times.The scene in Moscow resembles a cross-country race in which apack of contenders has formed inconspicuously behind thepace-setter. All of them are waiting for the right moment tomake their move.</LP><TEXT>   The Communists remain the only legal party, but manyothers are being founded. Scanning the horizon today, one canspeak of at least three groups, in addition to pro-Gorbachevreformers: party traditionalists who think Mr. Gorbachev hasgone too fast; radical democrats who think he has gone tooslow; and moderate conservatives who support basic change butwant it rooted in tradition. All but the last have producedviable champions.   The current standard-bearer for party traditionalists isPrime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov. Backed by the law-and-ordergroup &quot;Soiuz&quot; (Union), Mr. Ryzhkov recently defended aprogram of economic stabilization that has failed -- notably.He has also been hurt by allegations that he led the cover-upof the disaster at Chernobyl.   The other party traditionalist with wide support isLeningrad secretary Boris Gidaspov. An alumnus of themilitary-industrial complex, Mr. Gidaspov, as a colleague putit, &quot;missed the thaw.&quot; He gained fame by successfullyorganizing an anti-reform demonstration by workers. Butcolleagues in his own institute have recently rebuffed himfor an elective post in Moscow, a serious setback.   A lesser-known opponent of reform is metal-worker VeniaminYarin, whom Mr. Gorbachev named to his Presidential Council.Anti-democratic, anti-market and pro-military, Mr. Yarin hasthe backing of the &quot;Rossiia&quot; faction of Party troglodytes.But Mr. Yarin is still a marginal figure. Mr. Gorbachev seeshim as co-optable.   Sometimes mentioned among traditionalist standardbearersis novelist Valentin Rasputin. A fierce polemicist, Mr.Rasputin has garnered visibility by his service on Mr.Gorbachev's Presidential Council. He lacks practicalexperience, though, is narrowly ideological in outlook, andhas little appeal beyond the circles of nationalist truebelievers.   For all the talk of party reactionaries moving against Mr.Gorbachev, they are disorganized and lack popular support. Nowonder that some whisper darkly of a military coup. Suchrumors center around the popular Gen. Boris Gromov, formercommandant of Soviet forces in Afghanistan. But militarycoups are not in the Russian tradition and would find littlesupport even from party stalwarts.   Opposing these traditionalists are radical democrats, manystill party members but others already committed to aseparate path. Most are organized under the Inter-RegionalGroup of delegates to the Congress and the voters alliance&quot;Democratic Russia.&quot; They already control the Moscow andLeningrad city councils, as well as a quarter of all nationaldeputies. These radicals may constitute a European-typeSocial Democratic Party in embryo.   The current darling of this group is Gavriil Popov, thebushy-haired economist who presides over the Moscow CityCouncil. An editor, Mr. Popov has little administrativeexperience but a canny sense of the public's mood, witnesshis uncharacteristic defense of rationing. No milquetoast, heauthorized the recent May Day march that drove Mr. Gorbachevfrom the reviewing stand in Red Square.   Mr. Popov's friend Yuri Afanasyev is an archivist byprofession and another hero of the radical democrats. Partyregulars challenged him to lead the radicals out of theCommunist Party in July. Instead, he quit immediately. Forall his boldness, Mr. Afanasyev has yet to gain the nationalrecognition necessary to capture the top job in an electivesystem. Still another radical, Leningrad lawyer and Congressdeputy Anatolii Sobchak, has impressed millions of televisionviewers with his eloquent defense of civil rights. However,when Mr. Sobchak wavered and then decided to support Mr.Gorbachev's plea for new presidential powers, he slipped fromthe pack, at least temporarily.   Besides party stalwarts and radical reformers a thirdgroup exists -- moderate non-party reformers who affirmtraditional values. They may prove strongest of all. AChristian Democratic Party recently formed in Moscow, andseveral similar groups exist to promote democracy, a mixedeconomy and &quot;family values.&quot; Such proto-parties are strongboth in Russia and the non-Russian republics, but they haveyet to produce real national leaders.   The non-Russian republics are a seed bed for futureleaders. Marju Lauristin and Edgar Savisaar in Estonia,Anatolijs Gorbunovs in Latvia, and Ivan Drach in the Ukraineare among many talented new leaders who have come to thefore. None can be considered candidates for high office inMoscow, however, for the simple reason that all have stakedcareers on resisting the Kremlin's control. Odds are any newpresident will be an ethnic Russian.   Most of the emerging leaders in Russia were until recentlyoutsiders who came up not through party or governmental postsbut through the rapidly expanding &quot;third sector&quot; ofnongovernmental organizations. Untainted but inexperienced,these &quot;new people&quot; are probably not one but two steps frompower. This cannot be said of the charismatic radicaldemocrat Boris Yeltsin, who honed his managerial skills inthe Urals and his political skills as mayor of Moscow. Hepulls 85% of the votes in his hometown of Sverdlovsk.   A founder of the Inter-Regional Group, Mr. Yeltsinembraces a broad program. He speaks glowingly of Westerndemocracy and mixed economies but at the same time feelsRussia (as opposed to the Soviet Union) has lost its&quot;spiritual, national and economic independence.&quot; He defendsthe right of non-Russian republics to secede, yet championsthe cause of Russian colonists who have returned to Russiafrom homes in Soviet Central Asia and the Caucasus.   Mr. Yeltsin's backers are promoting him for the presidencyof the Russian Republic -- this week he pulled more votesthan any other candidate but not enough to secure him thatseat. If the empire falls apart this post will soar inimportance, which is why Mr. Yeltsin has already proposedthat the Russian Republic have its own foreign policy. Mr.Gorbachev recognizes that Mr. Yeltsin leads the packbreathing down his neck and frequently singles him out forabuse. Meanwhile, Mr. Yeltsin calmly tours the world, issuingpolicy statements from Tokyo and Madrid, Moscow andSverdlovsk.   Boris Yeltsin remains sui generis, an ardent democrat whohas appropriated many causes associated with other groups andfactions. For now, he is best positioned to fill a powervacuum at the top. But the entire Soviet Union has become alaboratory for leadership, and other equally powerfulcontenders will doubtless move up in the pack soon.   ---   Mr. Starr is president of Oberlin College and a specialistin Soviet affairs.</TEXT></DOC>