<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910111-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>910111-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Hidden Casualties:   Drug War's Emphasis   On Law Enforcement   Takes a Toll on Police   ---   The Fall of Officer Gamble   Shows What Can Happen;   Cities Change Strategies   ---   An Incident With a Hot Iron   ----   By Alex Kotlowitz   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   DAYTON, Ohio -- The drug raid at a public housingapartment here was fairly routine until police officer JohnGamble lost his cool. While interrogating a young mansuspected of dealing crack cocaine, Mr. Gamble grabbed a hotiron off the nightstand and repeatedly touched it to the bareskin of the handcuffed prisoner.   The incident last January enraged Dayton's blackcommunity. More than 200 black leaders met with cityofficials. Mr. Gamble, 29 years old, was widely denounced andat one point labeled a &quot;disturbed individual&quot; by RaleighTrammell, head of the local chapter of the Southern ChristianLeadership Conference. Community groups not only called forhis dismissal but unsuccessfully demanded the ouster of thecity manager and police chief as well.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;It had been a fire smoldering,&quot; says Willie Walker, theDayton Urban League president. The iron incident &quot;just pouredgasoline on it.&quot; Indeed, there is more to John Gamble's storythan an isolated case of police brutality. He was a footsoldier in what a certain group of critics believes is amisguided national drug policy. These critics are the verypeople asked to fight the war on drugs: the police.   The emphasis on beefed-up law enforcement at the expenseof treatment, prevention and education &quot;has done more harmthan good,&quot; contends Patrick Murphy, director of the U.S.Conference of Mayors' police policy board. Lee Brown, thepolice commissioner of New York City, says, &quot;We're beingforced to shoulder the greatest part of the drug problem, andwe can't do it by ourselves.&quot;   Many police chiefs worry about rising tensions in theinner cities. The sentiment among chiefs at a recentgathering, says Yale University drug historian David Musto,was, &quot;Yes, I'll carry out your orders, but if you knew moreyou wouldn't give out those orders.&quot;   Mr. Gamble's case shows how the war on drugs has pittedthe police against minority communities. Mr. Gamble too isblack. The events that embroiled him in this bitter brutalitycase illuminate some of the pitfalls of relying primarily onpolice work to fight drugs.   Since the mid-1980s, citizen complaints of policemisconduct have risen an estimated 22% in Chicago andWashington, D.C., 15% in Houston and 46% in St. Louis. Blackshave recently protested their treatment by law-enforcementauthorities in places as varied as Dallas, Kansas City, Mo.,and Teaneck, N.J. In Miami, Hispanic residents rioted afterthe acquittal of six narcotics officers accused of beating astreet drug dealer to death.   But the police, too, have been beleaguered. &quot;John Gamblewas a casualty of war,&quot; says Deloris Winslow, a Daytoncommunity activist. &quot;Burning that man was unacceptable, but Iunderstand why it happened.&quot;   Mr. Gamble's story begins in 1987 when he worked in one ofthe Dayton police's Neighborhood Security Details. Theseunits were designed to build bridges with the community, inpart to heal longstanding wounds between black residents andthe police. A high-school dropout, he had served in the Navyfor 4 1/2 years as a flight engineer before joining thepolice department in 1984. &quot;I loved it,&quot; he recalls. &quot;Youfeel good when you make a good arrest or even just find amissing juvenile. There's not another job like it in theworld.&quot;   Mr. Gamble, neatly dressed in his starched blue uniform,went door-to-door on the city's predominantly black westside, a community of single-family homes and low-rise housingprojects. He and a number of other officers worked withyouths at the Boys Club and Parkside Recreational Center. Healso coached a neighborhood basketball team, which won thestate Police Athletic League championships. He kept ascrapbook of the young players and intended to keep in touchwith them. &quot;When {the children} saw them without those badgesand pistols, it made the youngsters feel a lot more at ease,&quot;recalls Robert Moses, former Parkside director.   But then crack poured into Dayton. It was, says TyreeBroomfield, Dayton's police chief at the time, &quot;as if ahurricane had hit.&quot; In the first six months of 1987, crime inthis community of 178,000 jumped 14.2% from the previousyear.   Community leaders demanded that something be done, anddone quickly. The city, though, had few options. Improvingthe lot of the west side's poor was beyond the city'sfinancial means. There was only one drug treatment center forthe indigent. No comprehensive education program was inplace. So the burden fell to law enforcement. The police, inthe words of Chief Broomfield, resorted to &quot;occupyingneighborhoods,&quot; or what came to be known as sweeps, a tacticused in many cities. &quot;We had to show them that we were doingsomething,&quot; he says.   Across the country, law-enforcement agencies armedthemselves for war. In Washington, D.C., the National Guarddeployed helicopters, night vision and infrared radarequipment in joint operations with the police. Dallas policeacquired stun grenades. In San Diego, the department issuedsemi-automatic pistols to officers. Los Angeles police used amilitary-surplus armored vehicle to knock down doors of drughouses.   Virtually overnight, the Dayton police department sent Mr.Gamble and the other Neighborhood Security Detail officers tothe front lines of the drug wars. As was the case in othercities, most were young officers and most had little or noexperience fighting drugs. Mr. Gamble stopped goingdoor-to-door and working with kids. His new uniform consistedof jeans and a windbreaker. He and other officers packed intoa van and drove up on the crowds of dealers congregated onpublic-housing property. The officers chased down the youngkids who were selling small amounts of crack. Residents&quot;would come out clapping,&quot; recalls Mr. Gamble.   But the ovations didn't last, and the drug dealers beganfighting back. Mr. Gamble was attacked and badly beaten witha two-by-four while chasing one young man he suspected ofcarrying drugs. People began taunting the police. Childrenoccasionally threw stones at them or carried razor blades intheir pockets to discourage searches.   People remember Mr. Gamble for his restraint at the time-- &quot;none of this John Wayne stuff,&quot; says David Marker, thehousing authority's management director. As the only blackofficer on the unit -- only 9% of the force was black,compared with 40% of the city's population -- he was aspecial target of verbal abuse. Mr. Marker recalls the firstnight he met Mr. Gamble at one of the projects. A large manstarted calling Mr. Gamble &quot;Uncle Tom&quot; and &quot;Ace Coon&quot; andthen spit in his face. Mr. Gamble walked away. &quot;If someonespit in my face, I don't know if I could be so restrained,&quot;says Mr. Marker.   Not everyone in the districts' details, frequently called&quot;the task force,&quot; was so restrained either. At one point,their reputation for over-aggressiveness was such that onearea law-enforcement agency refused to work with them. By theend of 1987, the public defender's office began receivingnumerous charges of physical abuse by task-force members.   Though Mr. Gamble wasn't a subject of those complaints, headmits he did occasionally use too much force. He oncewhacked a fleeing suspect across the forehead with analuminum flashlight. Another time, he shoved a drug suspectagainst the van, shattering a window. &quot;If {a suspect} ran andgot caught, he took an ass-whipping,&quot; he says.   Before long, Mr. Gamble and the other officers on the taskforce were viewed with a mixture of respect and utter fear.Black leaders complained that innocent people were picked upin the drug sweeps; others were arrested for minor offenseslike trespassing. Some teen-agers were so scared of the taskforce they ran even if they weren't selling drugs. ChiefBroomfield later acknowledged that the tactic was like&quot;fishing for a tuna with a net 40 miles long.&quot;   Many police departments have since stopped making massarrests. In Washington, D.C., the police chief pronouncedsweeps a failure after arresting 47,000 people over 18months. He felt law enforcement alone couldn't stem the drugviolence. The police department in Tulsa, Okla., was soworried about the potential for problems that it refused everto use the tactic, despite intense political and communitypressure.   The Boys Club in Dayton told Mr. Gamble he shouldn't comearound anymore because some of the older kids might try tohurt him. Mr. Gamble stuffed his basketball scrapbook in acloset, where it sat unopened for three years. &quot;That seemedlike another life,&quot; he says. &quot;It was like it never happened.&quot;He found himself arresting some of the kids he had coached.   Despite their estrangement from parts of the community,the police felt emboldened by the hysteria whipped up aroundthe crack problem. In 1988, both presidential candidatesreferred to the fight against drugs as a &quot;war.&quot; WilliamBennett, the former drug czar, suggested that beheading drugdealers might be morally defensible and urged police to gettougher. In Dayton, the media were full of laudatory storiesabout the task force. One city commissioner was quoted assaying that city residents would support &quot;any means that arenecessary . . . whether legal or illegal.&quot;   The publicity &quot;made us feel that what we were doing wasacceptable,&quot; says Ron Norton, a policeman who joined the taskforce in early 1989. &quot;The chief all the way down wascommending us.&quot; Mr. Norton says he once shoved a suspectthrough a plaster wall.   Mr. Gamble, who had grown up on Dayton's west side andstill lived there, took the drug wars personally. Hiscompassion and commitment, especially toward the children,were much admired on the force. The chief, in an interview,called him &quot;an excellent young officer.&quot; In performanceappraisal reports, he consistently received above average andsuperior marks. &quot;A lot of officers looked up to him,&quot; saysSgt. Randall Warren.   But the work was heaped with frustrations. The sweeps hadbeen so successful in apprehending small-time drug dealersthat the judicial system was swamped. The jails, asthroughout the country, had no more space. So by the end of1988 in Dayton, plea bargaining was routinely reducing manydrug felonies to misdemeanors. Some suspects were freedwithout having to post bond. Most were sentenced to 60 days,with eight days off for good time. It came to be known as&quot;the 52 special.&quot; The cops began to wonder if their effortwas worthwhile.   Mr. Gamble drew several threats. One afternoon, he waswaiting in line at a McDonald's, holding his two-year-oldson, Eric. A man quietly walked up to him, put a pistol tohis head and pulled the trigger. The chamber was empty. &quot;Nexttime,&quot; the man said, &quot;it'll be real.&quot; He then ran off,leaving a trembling Mr. Gamble holding tightly to his son.&quot;Daddy, you're squeezing me,&quot; Eric said.   By early 1989, the task force was involved in longer druginvestigations. The work became more dangerous. Some dealerscarried submachine guns. One task force officer wore twobullet-proof vests. An undercover officer asked to betransferred after she learned her photo had been posted incrack houses.   Mr. Gamble, as the lone black on the unit, did a lot ofthe undercover work. He was working long hours, sometimesgetting as little as two to three hours of sleep. He sufferedfrom colitis, which got so painful at times he had to misswork. He worried so much about his son that he often stoppedby his home two or three times during his shift.   People who knew Mr. Gamble said his tolerance for verbalabuse dropped. In May 1989, he arrested a young man forallegedly dealing heroin. The suspect was sitting in a chairat the district office, his arms handcuffed behind him, whenhe began to bad-mouth Mr. Gamble. Then he made a noise thatto Mr. Gamble sounded as if he was going to spit at him. Mr.Gamble pushed him hard and his head slammed on a doorjamb. Herequired stitches. &quot;I got a reprimand,&quot; says Mr. Gamble, whoconcedes his actions weren't justified. &quot;It was no big deal.It was like, `Try not to let it happen again.'&quot;   Later, while he was taking a drug suspect to the station,the prisoner told Mr. Gamble he'd get him when he got outbecause &quot;I know where you live.&quot; The threat particularlyriled Mr. Gamble, who feared for his son. He started to chokethe suspect.   In the four-month period from January to April 1989,according to city personnel records, Mr. Gamble was suspendedtwice (both times for missing court dates) and received awritten reprimand (for not reporting the discharge of hisgun). Before these incidents, he had been suspended only oncein his four years on the force, for being late to trafficcourt. Also in 1989, according to police records, Mr. Gamblewas accused by citizens five times of using excessive force.The police department exonerated him of some of theallegations; in other cases, it said it didn't have enoughinformation. Before 1987, he had never been accused of usingexcessive force.   Mr. Gamble became more withdrawn and obsessed with hisjob. He rarely visited his mother. His son often asked himwhere he was all the time. He quarreled with his girlfriend.His stutter became so bad that fellow officers say hesometimes had trouble getting words out. Officer Norton sayshe was &quot;a loose cannon.&quot;   Nonetheless, Mr. Gamble and his colleagues were ridinghigh. They made a big bust in November 1989 that received alot of media attention. Mr. Gamble's unit had been awardedtwo citations by the police chief. They were executing asmany as six search warrants a night. &quot;Morale was high,&quot; saysMr. Norton. &quot;We were uncovering more dope than any otherunit. We couldn't do any wrong.&quot;   Then came Jan. 12, 1990, a date that would prove thebeginning of the end of Dayton's war on drugs as it had beencarried out. The task force obtained a search warrant for analleged drug house. The bust went off without much problem.As the police burst through the front door, guns drawn, theyquickly disarmed the suspects, who had semi-automaticweapons.   The policemen took David Greer, 18, to an upstairs bedroomfor what Mr. Gamble's attorney later called &quot;an attitudeadjustment.&quot; Mr. Greer had been caught by Mr. Gamble and Mr.Norton dealing crack in Dayton eight months earlier. Mr.Norton pulled the handcuffed Mr. Greer onto a mattress on thefloor and began demanding to know where he got an Uzi and thedrugs. Mr. Greer, according to Mr. Gamble, then told him: &quot;Iknow who you are . . . I know where you live.&quot;   Mr. Gamble, the &quot;loose cannon,&quot; went off. He picked up ahot clothes iron and straddled Mr. Greer. &quot;The fact that thiskid was just holding an Uzi downstairs and we're inMontgomery County, he may just be out of jail tomorrow,&quot; saysMr. Gamble. &quot;I had no reason to think that he wouldn't comelooking for me.&quot;   Three times, Mr. Gamble touched the iron to Mr. Greer'sbare chest and stomach, each time asking him what he meant byhis comment. According to Mr. Norton and Mr. Greer, Mr.Gamble then yanked down Mr. Greer's pants and moved the irontoward his genitals. Mr. Norton, who was allegedly holdingMr. Greer down, stopped Mr. Gamble.   At first, the incident received scant attention. In fact,Mr. Gamble's fellow officers joked about it. Someone on thetask force hung a T-shirt in the district office with theimprint of an iron. &quot;Don't worry about it,&quot; they'd tell Mr.Gamble. &quot;It'll iron out.&quot;   Mr. Greer, though, filed a complaint. Repeatedly, Mr.Norton, Mr. Gamble and a third officer who was present in thebedroom denied knowledge of the burning to Internal Affairsinvestigators. But eventually, all three confessed. Withindays, the Dayton Daily News learned about the incident andran a series of stories.   While it sent shockwaves through the city, it particularlyupset blacks, who said it confirmed what they had been sayingsince the sweeps began in 1987: The police had beenoverstepping their bounds. The city capitulated to earlierdemands and created a citizens' review board to hearcomplaints against the police, but an NAACP leader contendsthat police harassment continues.   Tensions between the police and the black community are sotaut that for some they bring back haunted memories of thetinderbox years of the late 1960s. &quot;For a brief period, whenGamble and the others came out here to try to make the kidsunderstand them, it was a definite help,&quot; says Mr. Moses, theformer Parkside Recreational director. But now, he reflects,&quot;some of the kids are so angry, I'm afraid something's goingto happen.&quot;   As for the war on drugs, the current chief, James Newby,now refers to it as &quot;a joke.&quot; In a survey by the U.S.Conference of Mayors, Dayton listed as its most successfulanti-drug program its new two-dog canine unit. The districttask forces have been all but disbanded in favor of a morecentralized narcotics unit -- and officers working drugs nowmust undergo periodic psychological evaluations. Chief Newbyplans to return to more traditional beat policing in hopes ofrepairing relations with the community while continuing tofight drugs. Many other cities, including New York and Tulsa,have done the same.   Crack continues to plague Dayton. The mayor, who drives areporter in midday to view the open-air drug trafficking, hascalled for more treatment and prevention programs -- and forde-emphasizing stepped-up law enforcement.   John Gamble and the other two officers were fired. Theyare appealing the dismissals. Mr. Greer, who is serving atwo- to 15-year sentence for drug trafficking, sued the cityand settled out of court for $300,000.   Mr. Gamble plans to leave Dayton. First, though, he facespossible criminal charges as a result of a U.S. JusticeDepartment investigation. Mr. Gamble variously feels defiantand apologetic about the incident. In the same breath, hesays it's lucky Mr. Greer wasn't more seriously injured andthen admits that his action was out of line. He denies havingburned him badly.   Mr. Gamble has since reflected further on his three yearsof battling drugs. Now that he is no longer in combat, hewonders aloud whom he was fighting. &quot;A lot of them were outthere just to feed their families,&quot; he says in an unusuallysoft voice. &quot;It's a war without an enemy.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>