<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910625-0026</DOCNO><DOCID>910625-0026.</DOCID><HL>   Unfair Advantage:   Japanese Stock Scandal   Sends Strong Message:   Small Investors Beware   ---   Pay-Back Scheme Triggers   Top Resignations, Calls   For Stronger Enforcement   ---   Canceling a Yamaichi Customer   ----   By Clay Chandler and Masayoshi Kanabayashi   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   J.DST J.NKT J.NOM J.TYU J.YMS</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)</IN><NS>SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   TOKYO -- Will scandal make the world's largest stockmarket a fairer place to invest?   There's little sign of it yet.</LP><TEXT>   For decades, the Tokyo stock market has in spirit embracedthe American model of market trading, complete with its ownversion of U.S. securities rules outlawing insider tradingand other market manipulations.   But last week's revelations that Japan's top securitiesfirms improperly paid off clients for stock-market lossesshows again how rules don't always match reality on the TokyoStock Exchange. In fact, the widespread scandal underscoreshow far Japan still lags the standards of many of the world'smarkets. Closed doors, close relationships and mystery governbusiness here. Indeed, even the news of the scandal becamepublic in a typically Japanese way: a quiet but comprehensiveleak to the press by a government agency.   By comparison, oversight is generally more stringent inother stock markets. And while those markets are hardlyimmune to corruption, a similar pay-back scheme &quot;probablywould have been uncovered a lot faster&quot; in the U.S., says IraLee Sorkin, a former enforcement official at the Securitiesand Exchange Commission.   For the first time, however, the Japanese may be signalingthat lapses of this sort are intolerable. In a country wherestock market pecadilloes were swept under the rug, and wherethere has never been a single insider trading conviction, thepayback scheme is being taken very seriously.   Already, heads are rolling: Yesterday, Yoshihisa Tabuchiand Takuya Iwasaki, respectively the presidents of top-rankedNomura Securities Co. and No. 3-ranked Nikko Securities Co.,resigned in the wake of charges that their firms paidhundreds of millions of dollars to favored clients tocompensate them for losses suffered when Tokyo share pricescollapsed in early 1990. The firms also allegedly helpedfinance the business dealings of one of the nation's mostnotorious gangsters. Top officials at Japan's second- andfourth-largest securities firms -- Daiwa Securities Co. andYamaichi Securities Co. -- also confessed to improperlycompensating clients for stock market losses, though no oneat either of the firms resigned.   The dimensions of the scandal sent the Tokyo marketplummeting more than 500 points, to 23765.46, Monday, andcaused severe aftershocks in markets around the world,including the U.S. Yet the greatest concussion will likely befelt in the ranks of Japan's individual investors,particularly the small ones.   Japan's brokerage firms have &quot;grown into giants, but theyhaven't learned ethics,&quot; says Michiaki Inoue, a 60-year-oldinvestor standing outside a Yamaichi office in Tokyoyesterday. For years there were whispers about one set ofrules for big clients and another for everyone else, and now,insists Mr. Inoue, the rumors have been borne out. So Mr.Inoue is making his anger heard: He has just canceled hisaccount with Yamaichi.   In nearby Yokohama, an equally bitter businessman recountshow his wife lost 15 million yen, or about $108,000, in theTokyo market this year -- but didn't get compensated like thebig firms. &quot;They're half yakuza,&quot; he says, likening Japan'sstock brokers to the nation's organized crime bosses. &quot;Iwon't be satisfied until the entire boards of the Big Foursecurities firms resign.&quot;   Some students of the Japanese market say the pay-offscheme was simply the latest chapter in a long history ofquestionable practices in the Tokyo market. &quot;The Japanesetrade stocks like they trade rice and fish -- it's allspeculation,&quot; says Albert J. Alletzhauser, a former Tokyostock broker and author of an unflattering book about Nomurathat has sparked a libel suit by the firm.   Investors tend to pay little attention to fundamentalcorporate information, such as profit outlooks; in fact,research reports that probe a corporation's financialwell-being are considered impolite here. Instead, tradersmore often base investments on technical factors, such asfifty-month moving averages, or daily market themes providedby the big brokerage firms.   &quot;People try to corner the market, do covert deals,&quot; Mr.Alletzhauser contends. &quot;It's not a fundamental market. In theU.S. you raise money to help industry expand. In Japan, youraise money to reinvest in stocks and real estate.&quot;   And, on occasion, to influence politicians. In Japan'smost recent stock market scandal, a large conglomerate calledRecruit Co. allowed a handful of the nation's most powerfulpoliticians to get rich quickly by letting them buy shares ina soon-to-be-listed real estate subsidiary at artificiallylow prices. The affair brought down the cabinet of PrimeMinister Noboru Takeshita in 1989.   When Japan's stock market was founded in 1878, smallinvestors weren't much of a factor. The market was dominatedby zaibatsu, or dynastic money cliques, which controlledJapan's banks and commercial institutions. The market didn'ttake on its modern form until after World War II. During thepostwar period, U.S. occupation authorities broke up theholdings of the zaibatsu and began selling them off to thepublic. Shortly after the withdrawal of U.S. forces, many ofthe old prewar financial networks re-emerged, however, asJapan's companies began to buy each other's shares in thecomplex web of &quot;cross-shareholding&quot; relationships thatpersist today.   In part, these reciprocal -- and friendly -- shareholdingarrangements sprang up because Japanese companies areprohibited by law from buying their own shares. Today, bigcorporations own about 70% of all the nation's outstandingstock and few of those shares are actively traded.   Regulation of the stock market, in turn, is carried out bya handful of elite civil servants in the securities bureauinside the Ministry of Finance, which tends to exercise itsauthority informally. In the U.S., disputes about fairness inthe market typically are settled in the courts. The emphasisis on procedure, and guaranteeing that all players in theprivate sector have an equal opportunity to compete. Not soin Japan. Here, disputes are mediated by ministry officials,who have vast discretionary power and who aren't as concernedwith rules as they are with the harmony of the markets. Theofficials rely heavily on the Big Four brokerage houses toenforce their directives. No wonder: The four firms areresponsible for about a third of all the shares traded on theTokyo Stock Exchange.   In the latest scandal, which surfaced in the Japanesepress last Thursday, Japan's Big Four paid more than 65billion yen, or about $471 million, to their richestcorporate and institutional clients to compensate them forlosses in the market's slump in 1990. The securities firmshid those payments -- and the identity of their recipients --from the public by listing them as trading losses infinancial statements.   Then, to avoid incurring the wrath of officials at Japan'sNational Tax Agency, they eventually reclassified them as&quot;entertainment&quot; and &quot;social&quot; expenditures. Even governmentpension funds may have benefited from the scheme. Japanesenewspapers report that Nomura paid 4.5 billion yen to thegovernment's Pension Welfare Service Public Corporation tooffset losses it suffered in 1990.   While acknowledging the paybacks, officials at the BigFour brokerage firms stress that they didn't guarantee inadvance that their clients wouldn't lose money. That wouldhave put them in clear violation of Japan's Securities andExchange law, which forbids such assurances. The law ismurkier, though, in cases where brokers compensate clientsafter losses have occurred, which is what apparently happenedin this controversy. Many market participants say offeringimplicit guarantees is a common practice here, however.   Whether the practice is common or not, the sheer scale ofthe recent paybacks has astonished even some veteranobservers of Japan's securities industry. Robert Zielinski, afinancial analyst at Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd. andauthor of a book that explores inequities in the Japanesemarket, estimates that if the Big Four brokerage houses hadrecorded as profit the 65 billion yen they paid back to theirbig clients last year, they would have been 13% moreprofitable for the fiscal year ended in March 1990.   &quot;It's an incredible amount of money,&quot; he says.   The resignations of Mr. Tabuchi and Mr. Iwasaki also werespurred by press reports alleging that their firms had tiesto organized crime figures. The Asahi Shimbun, one of Japan'slargest dailies, last week charged that top officials atNomura and Nikko arranged for their subsidiaries to provideloans totaling more than 36 billion yen for Susumu Ishii,former head of the Inagawa-kai, one of Japan's most notoriouscrime syndicates.   According to the Asahi, Nomura and Nikko helped push theprice of shares in a railroad company, Tokyu Corp., after Mr.Ishii made heavy purchases in the company's stock. Mr. Ishiibegan buying stock in the company in March of 1989; duringOctober and November of that year, the railway's share pricenearly doubled. Officials at the Tokyo Stock Exchange areinvestigating the charges to determine whether the surge inTokyu's stock was the result of illegal manipulation.   Both securities firms admit having dealings with Mr.Ishii, although they said it was through a third party whomthey didn't realize represented Mr. Ishii.   In announcing his resignation, Mr. Tabuchi -- who willremain with Nomura as vice chairman -- showed no signs ofhaving lost any of the swagger for which he is famous. Heducked questions about whether he personally was aware of hisfirm's connection to Mr. Ishii and opted to leave mattersvague. &quot;As president, I accept ultimate responsibility forthe management of Nomura,&quot; he said impassively. &quot;Whether Iknew or didn't know is irrelevant.&quot;   The scandals also have sullied the reputation of Japan'spowerful Ministry of Finance. Many in the market charge thatthe misdeeds of the nation's securities behemoths are aconsequence of regulatory negligence. Ministry officials, forexample, turned a blind eye when in 1983 brokers introducedeigyo tokkin investment trust funds. Those accountsessentially gave brokers wide discretion in managing clientsaccounts, thus creating an opportunity for stock manipulationand other abuses, analysts say.   Craig Chudler, an analyst with UBS Phillips and DrewSecurities International, Ltd. says it was widely known thatJapan's big brokers solicited investors for the funds with awink and a nod to suggest that there was no need to worryabout returns. When the Finance Ministry in late 1989 finallyordered that the funds be phased out, the market was near itspeak. The Ministry's move helped drive stock prices down,which led to sizable losses for many of the institutionalinvestors. The investors clamored for compensation, and thecurrent pay-back scandal resulted.   In the U.S., hardened veterans of the Tokyo stock marketseem unfazed by all the recent controversy and said theydon't plan to change their investment strategies in Japan.&quot;It isn't surprising; this kind of stuff happens all thetime&quot; in Japan, says John Hickling, an internationalportfolio manager at Fidelity Management andamp; Research Co. inBoston. &quot;We've all known that this has gone on for years, andthey've known it too. Some of the people feigning surpriseand shock are some of the ones who have been benefiting allalong.&quot; He wonders whether the hand-wringing in Tokyo isn'tfor foreign consumption, that is, to make Japan's marketappear more pious than it is.   Mr. Hickling and others nonetheless believe that the Tokyoexchange may be slowly raising its standards -- a function ofinternational pressure and disillusionment among domesticinvestors. But this isn't a widespread sentiment.   &quot;It's still a pretty good game&quot; in Japan, says JardineFleming's Mr. Zielinski. Rather than initiating genuinereforms in the wake of the pay-back scandal, he says, &quot;peopleare regrouping for the next bull market. They figure thateventually the good times will come again.&quot;   ---   Michael R. Sesit contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>