<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920207-0064</DOCNO><DOCID>920207-0064.</DOCID><HL>   Aiding Ex-Soviets Brings Hard Lessons   ---   Germany Learns to Target and Verify Assistance   ----   By Timothy Aeppel and Terence Roth   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/07/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7A</SO><RE>EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GERMANY (GE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UKRAINE (UKR)COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   When residents of Freiburg, Germany, started sending aidto the Ukrainian city of Lvov in the fall, they had heardplenty of stories about donated goods being diverted to theSoviet Union's black market.   So the Freiburgers began sending a few volunteers to rideshotgun and make sure each convoy of trucks laden withbuilding materials, food and medical supplies winds up whereit's supposed to. With typical German thoroughness, some ofthem make the 60-hour journey in tow trucks, just in casethere is a breakdown.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;We don't see ourselves as policemen,&quot; says Thomas Held,one of the German organizers, &quot;more like logistical supportto make sure the materials go where they are supposed to.&quot;   Episodes like this illustrate a sobering reality dawningon Germany. After months of talking about the country'sleading role in aiding the former Soviet Union, some Germansare beginning to wonder whether the aid has been effective.Reports of German humanitarian aid shipments ending up on theblack market are only a small part of the problem. Germanbankers and government officials are studying whether theformer Soviet economy is making efficient use of the wave oftrade credits and guarantees extended by Germany.   And it isn't only the Germans who are wondering whethersuch aid really is effective or whether much of it is beingsquandered or padding the pockets of black marketeers. Therest of the world is looking for lessons on what to do andwhat not to do from the experiences of Germany, which haspledged more than half of the world total of aid intended forthe former Soviet republics over the past two years.   The clearest lesson is that closely monitored,project-linked credits going directly to the people who needthem, rather than some faceless bureaucracy, have the bestchances of success. All-purpose credits, once typical of aidto the former Soviet Union, are a thing of the past, says F.Wilhelm Christians, supervisory board chairman of DeutscheBank AG, who for nearly 20 years was Germany's unofficialcredit ambassador to Moscow.   &quot;The procedure is what is important now,&quot; Mr. Christianssays, &quot;and the most effective credits are the ones that aredirectly channeled into specific projects and carefullywatched.&quot;   It's a conclusion that others are applying, too. TheEuropean Community commission has managed a massive food aidprogram for which it has relied on such organizations as theRed Cross and Medecins Sans Frontieres to do the groundwork.The EC also recently started selling food at reduced pricesin Moscow to help keep prices reasonable and to provide someexperience in the workings of the market.   Enormous sums are involved. The republics of the newCommonwealth of Independent States are expected to need $20billion to $25 billion a year in coming years. The ECcalculates that so far the world has pledged or extendedabout $80 billion in financial, humanitarian and technicalaid. About $45.5 billion, or 57%, is from Germany.   For Germany and the rest of the world, one overridinginterest lies behind largesse on this scale: stability. Theother EC states have been anxious to help make clear that allof Western Europe is interested in a prosperous, stable CIS.That's the argument Bonn has been making in urging others todo more.   While that message isn't being lost, there is someresentment over Germany's posture. At a recent 47-nationconference in Washington on coordinating future aid, therewere signs of behind-the-scenes tensions. German officialshave said for weeks they don't need help coordinating aid.Instead, they urged greater efforts from other majoreconomies, above all the U.S., Japan and the oil-rich PersianGulf states.   The two-day session yielded no broad accord on how tocoordinate Western aid. While the U.S. did announce more foodaid, it and others, such as the U.K., are limited by economicproblems and election-year politics. Others are waiting forconfusion in the C.I.S. states to die down.   And clearly, as some German officials themselvesacknowledge, the German aid total can't set a standard forothers. At least 40% of Bonn's 75.4 billion marks ($47.03billion) in aid reflects amounts Bonn agreed to in connectionwith German unity, including 13.4 billion marks to easeSoviet troops out of eastern Germany and the assumption of17.1 billion marks in debts owed by the former Soviets forgoods bought from former East German concerns. Indeed, someargue that nearly all the aid is somehow linked tounification.   &quot;Many of the measures can't be used as examples forothers, who can't be expected to provide the same levels ofaid,&quot; says Hans-Hermann Hoehmann, a Soviet expert at theGerman government's Federal Institute for Eastern Europeanand International Studies in Cologne.   Moreover, a big part of Germany's aid package consists of36.7 billion marks of export credit guarantees intended tokeep German exports to the former Soviet Union flowing.Germany's allies point out this is as important for Bonn'sdomestic budget as it is for former Soviet importers. Morethan 450,000 jobs in eastern Germany are dependent on Soviettrade, so many in Bonn see export credits as a substitute foreven costlier unemployment payments for eastern Germans.   More than self-interest has been behind the German aid,though. Last year's dire predictions of starvation andrefugees spurred Germany to mobilize and to ship food andmedicine to Soviet cities. Even the &quot;Berlin stockpile,&quot; 200warehouses stuffed with necessities for surviving anotherBerlin blockade, was donated. German television stations ranpledge campaigns, and some department stores set up boothswhere customers could pack and mail cartons of canned meat,chocolate and powdered milk to Soviet families.   While that sort of aid apparently got where it wassupposed to, worries about diversions are just part of theproblem.   &quot;The general impression you get from business is thatthere's a lot of money earmarked and sitting in banks waitingfor something to happen,&quot; says Heinrich Vogel, director ofthe Institute of Eastern European and International Studies.&quot;The question is whether this will get translated intoproductive uses.&quot;   Germany's willingness to heap export credits on the C.I.S.ran into a confused jumble of new bureaucracies in theemerging states. Fully 20 billion marks of possible deals areon hold because Bonn can't find an appropriate authority toback credits for the enterprises.   Plenty of the stalled projects fall into the void thatexists between the collapse of central control and thedelayed arrival of new structures in the republics.   Now Bonn is tapping on the brakes. Recently it imposed acap on guarantees for German exports of five billion marks,despite requests for guarantees totaling 70 billion marks.Also under scrutiny is a five-billion-mark general creditextended to Moscow by Bonn in the summer, intended to helpshore up Moscow's growing balance-of-payments deficit. Mostbankers believe it will be the last of its kind.</TEXT></DOC>