<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910124-0132</DOCNO><DOCID>910124-0132.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   Vivid Images of Electronic War --   But What's Really Happening?   ----   By Hodding Carter III</HL><DATE>01/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   MDEST LATAM</CO><IN>MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   Everyone is scrambling to place the war with Iraq in anunderstandable context. As often as not, the process beginswith a well-worn negative: This &quot;isn't Vietnam.&quot; That's trueenough, but it's barely the beginning of wisdom.   This is a war for which the experiences of the recent pastoffer no guidance on the one hand and caution on the other.It is a war whose early days have turned fixed U.S. policieson their head. And, rather than being the &quot;first war made fortelevision,&quot; it thus far has been a war made for governmentcensors. Strip away the verbiage and in-house experts, theotherworldly electronic images shown over and over again, andwhat has been transmitted so far has been, at base,propaganda.</LP><TEXT>   Propaganda does not have to include lies, and no one issuggesting lies are being told by our side. Propaganda is&quot;ideas, facts or allegations spread deliberately to furtherone's cause or to damage an opposing cause,&quot; says onedictionary, and that is what the briefings are producing.Further, that is exactly what a government in war can beexpected to produce.   Thus, while we saw pictures of the new warfare's startlingprecision, bombs and missiles slipping down smokestacks andthe like, we have seen no pictures of the weapons missingtheir targets. The only pictures carrying the message thatwar is hell -- which is to say, a situation in which humanbeings suffer pain and anguish -- have been those provided bySaddam Hussein. He exhibited injured allied airmen, mockingtheir condition, and mocked all notions of decency in war bytargeting civilians in a non-belligerent nation, Israel.   Otherwise, we have been largely treated to the composure,or lack of it, of TV reporters caught in the possibility ofincoming fire. Mostly we have seen a disembodied, bloodlesswar, made real only by the networks' expensive graphics.Virtually everything else has rested on the interpretation ofwhat is being done by those who are doing it. All theballyhooed promise of a new kind of coverage thanks totechnology has rung hollow. Rather than roaming thebattlefield, zapping back instant, uninhibited reports,journalists have for the most part been transmitting onlywhat governments allow them to gather and transmit. Thecommercial satellite services seem to have gone blind.   Which raises questions. Are the networks, under governmentprodding, not using the 30-meter (Landsat), 10-meter (SPOT)or five-meter (Soviet) resolution images of the war zone,which experience indicates ought to be for sale? Or areFrench, U.S. and Soviet pictures no longer available forcommercial use, cut off for the duration by governmentpressure? Someone knows, but strangely enough none of ourhard-charging news organizations is asking the questionspublicly or reporting the answers. Nor are the vastcommunications corporations providing enough visible,sustained pressure on the government to loosen up.   As for reversal of fixed policies and abandonment ofothers, the list is expanding rapidly. The war we arepreparing to fight -- massed ground forces vs. massed groundforces -- is not the war we expected to fight. What had beenenvisioned under several administrations was a rapiddeployment force to deal with localized difficulties. What wehave is all-out conventional war; while the Pentagonundoubtedly had a contingency plan for such a possibility, itwas never high on the list.   In the area of diplomatic policies, there was theforgiveness of Egypt's $6.7 billion debt, reversing a refusalto consider such a step right up until Egypt's decision tojoin the anti-Iraq coalition. There has been the overnightembrace of the Soviet Union as a partner-participant, both inthe creation of an international consensus against Iraq andin a possible peace conference after victory, after decadesof effort to keep Russia out. And there was the real-politikdecision to bring Syria into the alliance, therebyobliterating the past, suggesting a future in which PresidentAssad will have a leading role and standing by while Syriaannexed Lebanon in all but name.   Implicitly, the way we went to war this time suggests thatat least the fig leaf of internationalism will be affixed tofuture U.S. military interventions. Presumably, a &quot;new worldorder&quot; means something new, and while the use of the U.N. asa starting place for the military defeat of aggression is notprecisely new, it has been almost two generations since itwas embraced by Washington. Assuming Moscow's internationalinterests remain as minimal as they are today, theprobability of future use of the Security Council is high.   The &quot;new world order&quot; seems to promise something thatwould have been dismissed as unacceptable and irrelevant justseven months ago: U.S. troops will be needed on the ground,or just offshore, in the Middle East for a fairly long time.&quot;Pax Americana&quot; would have been a ludicrous notion in theGulf in early 1990. In early 1991 it seems almost inevitable,with all the messy involvement and regional reaction it'sbound to produce. From the Arab perspective, there was nevermuch air between the U.S. and Israel before the war. Giventhe close relationship so quickly developed in the past week,it is likely there will be even less distance after the war.It seems almost certain Israel will expect more than oneprice to be paid for its extraordinary restraint in the faceof Iraq's missile attacks, and it's hard to see how thepresident can say no.   Since Vietnam, there have been several U.S. interventions,some of whose results are cautionary and some inapplicable.Among the latter is the idea this will be as quick andrelatively bloodless as Grenada and Panama. The example morelikely to be relevant is Lebanon. If we have to go furtherand destroy the Iraqi army within Iraq itself, we will takeand inflict horrendous casualties and be left with a nationand region whose anti-American hatred will be as implacableand unforgiving.   But Panama offers an example that cannot be ignored. Ayear after the easy victory over Noriega's outgunned forces,we are in danger of losing the peace. The new government isnot functioning well. We have been slow to make good on someof our promises. The economic and political situation withinPanama is not promising, since the woods seem to be filledwith former national guardsmen eager to restore their former,U.S.-sanctioned position as &quot;guardians&quot; of the nation. Thequick-strike intervention of December 1989, was not the endof the story.   And so it will be when, as surely we will, the U.S. andits allies defeat Iraq. How we deal with Iraq and the PersianGulf, what lessons we decide to learn and which to ignore,and the extent to which the costs of the victory are sharedequitably by the coalition partners will determine the shapeof U.S. foreign and military policy for years to come. Forbetter or for worse, the outcome of the war against Iraq willbury forever the Vietnam analogy. From now on, the touchstonefor discussion, comparison and debate will be the PersianGulf.   (Ave atque vale: In December 1980, I wrote my first columnfor this newspaper. Today is my last as a regularcontributor. There could not have been a better forum oraudience. I will always treasure your response, from outragedto supportive, and the opportunity The Wall Street Journalprovided.)   ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads atelevision production firm.</TEXT></DOC>