<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900924-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>900924-0005.</DOCID><HL>   Don't Punish the Banks, Liberate Them   ----   By Ron Chernow</HL><DATE>09/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>BANKS (BNK)</IN><LP>   We stand on the eve of this century's third great wave offinancial reform, as giddy stock markets and merger feveronce again yield to fear and retrenchment followed by reformand regulation. The bull market of the early 1900s and therise of big trusts led to the 1912 Pujo hearings, spurringthe Federal Reserve Act a year later. The 1933 Pecorahearings exposed Wall Street's Jazz Age excesses, speedingpassage of the Glass-Steagall Act. Now the savings and loancrisis and the mounting toll of bad property, LBO and ThirdWorld loans will force a fundamental revamping of the U.S.banking system.   Once again reform will come when cool heads are leastlikely to prevail and when the political power of the banksstands at its nadir. Many of today's banking problems,indeed, have roots in the sensational Pecora probe, whichstraddled FDR's national bank holiday of March 1933. Adisenchanted public wanted to slay the bankers rather thanhear their problems. Not surprisingly, the reform thatemerged had a strongly populist tinge, reducing the scope ofbanks' activities and fragmenting the banking system. Thefragmented banks, epitomized by the Sandamp;Ls, were unable tocarry diversified portfolios or spread their risks overdifferent businesses. This is a recipe for risk and failure.</LP><TEXT>   As our own post-Crash recession looms, once again populistindignation will demand that the culprits be stripped oftheir powers, like children of their toys. But the nextreform cycle must favor deregulation and consolidation of thebanks, rather than further atomization -- political passionsto the contrary. The last crumbling remnants ofGlass-Steagall (the 1933 act that separated commercial frominvestment banking) and the McFadden Act (the 1927 law thatforbade interstate banking) must fall. By granting J.P.Morgan andamp; Co. the power to trade and underwrite corporatestocks, the Federal Reserve Board last week took a momentousstep in the right direction. Such a change will satisfy nopublic craving for revenge. Rather, it will seem as ifbrazen, self-serving bankers are being rewarded for theirblunders just when they should submit to condign punishment.   Things were simpler in the New Deal. After the 1929 marketcrashed, Main Street surveyed the wreckage with&quot;Schadenfreude.&quot; The political outrage gathered force onlywhen people began to trace their joblessness to Wall Streetspeculation. Wall Street financiers -- yesterday's idols --were suddenly pilloried by a pugnacious new populist hero,Senate counsel Ferdinand Pecora.   In retrospect, the Glass-Steagall Act seems a historical&quot;non sequitur.&quot; It addressed glaring evils, such as theability of commercial bankers to waylay depositors into riskysecurities investment. But it didn't curb speculation orrepair the banking system's instability.   Glass-Steagall's architects wanted to insulate savingsfrom speculation. Safe, humdrum commercial banking would beshielded from volatile investment banking. The result hasbeen otherwise. For 20 years now, our commercial banks havecourted disaster. The list of their lending fiascoes --shipping, real estate investment trusts, farmland, oil, ThirdWorld debt, leveraged loans, commercial property -- is trulyastounding. Unless we assume that all commercial bankers aredunces, we must suspect some deep, systemic flaw behind thisflirtation with disaster.   By no coincidence, the tide of bad loans has risen withthe defection of corporate clients to the capital markets anddepositors to money-market funds. As corporations havebypassed banks to issue securities, commercial banks havebeen saddled with less creditworthy customers. In the 1920s,Latin debtors issued bonds. In the 1970s, they resorted tobanks because bondholders would have balked at theirsovereign junk. Bolstered by creditworthy clients, investmentbanks have seemed safer havens than commercial banks,subverting Glass-Steagall's intention.   Meanwhile, the geographically segmented banking systemcreated by the McFadden Act turns regional downturns intofull-blown banking catastrophes. Instead of large,diversified national banks, such as England, France, andGermany enjoy, the U.S. supports 13,000 localized banks. Inthe 1920s, many Southern and Western banks failed when oiland agriculture slumped. In the 1980s, the Sandamp;Ls eerilyre-enacted this precedent. A bank's fortunes are now tied toTexas oil, Nebraska wheat or Boston real estate. When theregional economy falters, the bank fails; these bank failuresthen aggravate regional distress.   National banks could resist local downturns throughoffsetting profits in prosperous regions. Banks that offereda fuller range of financial services than Glass-Steagallpermits wouldn't be victimized by changes in the waycompanies finance their operations. They could simply shiftemphasis along with their clients. With diversifiedportfolios, banks could more readily enforce prudentiallimits on the amount loaned to any single country, company,region or industry. And since banks increasingly packageloans into securities, the distinction between commercial andinvestment banking has become meaningless.   A system of diversified, national banks would encounterthe historic American antipathy toward concentrated financialpower -- the main reason for the splintered U.S. bankingsystem -- an antipathy aggravated by recession. Populist ragewill boil over as property, Third World and LBO disastersdangerously drain the deposit insurance fund.   Some differences between the present and the 1930s dooffer hope. This time, banking reform will occur against abackdrop of foreign competition. In the 1930s, American bankswere global powers and could afford some shrinkage of theirdomestic market share. Today, the four biggest U.S.commercial banks scarcely make the world's top 50. Seven ofthe 10 largest banks are Japanese; two are French. It's hardto rail against concentrated financial power when America'sgiants are dwarves abroad.   Americans may also be shedding their sentimental faith insmall-town banks. In the 1920s and 1930s, thousands ofsmall-town banks foundered upon corruption or mismanagement,but political anger was directed against the New York banks,which had for the most part survived intact. (FranklinRoosevelt feared deposit insurance would prop up small-town,Republican banks.) The Sandamp;L crisis has again shown how fraudand cronyism can riddle small banks. Perhaps taxpayerdisenchantment with the thrifts may create a new receptivitytoward national banks. The growth of strong regional banksover the past decade -- thanks to regional banking pacts --will buffer any raw power plays by New York banks.   Back in the days of Pierpont Morgan or Jacob Schiff, therewas some truth in the stereotype of the all-powerful banker.When capital was scarce, bankers lorded it over companies andinvestors. Now multinational corporations that issue debt andinstitutional investors that buy it have slashed the power offinancial intermediaries. In the 1980s, companiescircumvented banks, selling debt straight to institutionalinvestors. Banks compete with clients. General ElectricFinancial Services, with $91 billion in assets, would rankfourth if listed as a commercial bank, nosing out J.P. Morganandamp; Co., GE's traditional banker.   The power of investment bankers has eroded too. Thissounds strange in an age when yuppie bond traders anddeal-makers earn astronomical salaries. But trading anddeal-making are secondary functions of the financial system.They have grown important because of a crisis in the primarysystem: the provision of money for business, whether throughcommercial bank credit or issuing securities. And in thisprimary activity, fierce competition is shrinking margins.Wall Street's &quot;creativity&quot; in the 1980s was a desperateattempt by commercial and investment banks to findcomparative advantage in a commodity business.   One advantage of deregulating commercial banks right nowis that for the moment they cannot capitalize excessively onnew opportunities. Hobbled by scant capital, poor creditratings and low stock prices, they lack the means to expandrapidly. Best to let the tiger out of the cage when he's nothungry. The Federal Reserve should insure a gradualtransformation of the system through friendly,well-capitalized mergers. The process has in fact alreadybegun, as out-of-state banks buy up ailing thrifts.   Politicians who understand the need for reform, but fearbeing tarred as buddies of the banks, may want to portray therepeal of Glass-Steagall as a populist assault on investmentbankers -- the fat cats of the 1980s. As commercial banksenter capital markets, they will intensify the pressures in aprofitless underwriting scene. Nor need politicians fear thatthese guests at a bleak banquet will reap &quot;obscene&quot; profits.Nobody will be making much money from underwriting anytimesoon.   Universal banks will make the current regulatory structureobsolete. A new federal regulatory structure based onfunction must be designed. In exchange for new powers,universal banks will have to accept stricter, broadersupervision from banking authorities; as an additionalsafeguard, some form of risk-based deposit insurance wouldenforce discipline on the use of small depositors' money.   Reforms in banking regulation can make bank failures lesslikely, but they can never eliminate them. Nonetheless, abroader range of bank powers, joined with toughersupervision, seems preferable to the mix of narrow powers andlax supervision that has led to the frightening presentimpasse. The need to face unpleasant realities is urgent:More than a thousand commercial banks are already in troubleand the downturn has just begun.   ---   Mr. Chernow is the author of &quot;The House of Morgan&quot;(Atlantic Monthly Press, 1990.)</TEXT></DOC>