<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910718-0031</DOCNO><DOCID>910718-0031.</DOCID><HL>   Unwelcome Guests:   With Cut-Rate Inns   Scrimping on Security,   Criminals Move In   ---   Motel 6 Case Highlights Issue   Of Lax Policies on Keys,   Guards and Identification   ---   Rapes, Robberies on the Rise   ----   By Kevin Helliker   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   F.ACC MCTL</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)</IN><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FLORIDA (FL)FRANCE (FR)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The woman, a professional photographer, was leaving fordinner one September night in 1988. What followed was 45minutes of terror, as two ex-convicts bulled their way intoher room at a Motel 6 in Fort Worth, Texas, raped herrepeatedly, stole her equipment and drove off in her car.Last month, Motel 6 settled her negligence suit for $10million.   Unfortunately, her experience wasn't an isolated one.Police in many cities are all too familiar with Motel 6, thebudget lodging chain with the breezy radio ads and homeymotto -- &quot;We'll leave the light on for you&quot; -- that haveattracted millions of middle-class travelers.</LP><TEXT>   Police in Tampa, Fla., have recorded about 200 visits toone Motel 6 in the past 12 months for incidents ranging frompublic drunkenness and assault to burglary and robbery. Insouthwest Houston, crime and criminals are so prevalent atone Motel 6 that &quot;anytime we're looking for {a suspect} inthat area, we check that motel first,&quot; says police Sgt. RalphGonzales. In Buena Park, Calif., Sgt. Terry Branum holds up areport of more than 300 police visits to the local Motel 6since January 1989 for reasons ranging from drunkenness tohomicide. &quot;If they hung this up near the registration desk,&quot;he says, &quot;a lot of people wouldn't stay.&quot;   Since last September, at least three unsuspecting guestsin three cities have been murdered by criminals hauntingMotel 6 grounds. And since the 1988 incident, three morewomen have been raped at the Fort Worth motel. In adeposition in the photographer's suit in state court inHouston, Clark Minton, a former Motel 6 security executive,estimated that the 600-plus-unit chain, a unit of France'sAccor S.A., averaged a rape a month during his nearlythree-year tenure ending in 1990.   Motel 6 officials declined to be interviewed for thisstory, or to respond to a submitted list of writtenquestions, citing pending litigation. But a spokesman for theDallas-based chain says that &quot;the safety and security of ourguests is of paramount importance to Motel 6, and is the veryessence of the hospitality industry.&quot; In Paris, a spokesmanfor Accor says security at Motel 6 is adequate, and crimetouches &quot;a very small percentage&quot; of more than 25 millionguests a year.   By no means is the problem limited to Motel 6.Law-enforcement officials say crime is rising at many otherbudget motels as well. David Niebur, chief of police inCollinsville, Ill., says crime at budget motels is sowidespread that he's seeking a special state grant to combatit. In the past year, he says, the city's 11 budget motelshave accounted for 72 drug busts -- and 70 of the city's 90auto thefts have occurred at the motels.   While budget lodging is the industry's fastest-growingsegment, it is a highly competitive business with narrowprofit margins. Because of this, budget motels face pressureto scrimp on locks, lights, key-control systems, securityguards and trustworthy help. &quot;Crack has turned a lot ofpeople into addicts who need money quick,&quot; says formerHouston Police Chief Harry Caldwell, now a securityconsultant who had been recruited to testify on behalf of thephotographer. &quot;And there's no quicker way to get it than tobust through the door of a woman who's new to the city andstaying at a budget motel. She's passing through, thesecurity is usually lax there, and she's not going to comeback to town to prosecute.&quot;   Moreover, law enforcement officials say budget motel roomsare being rented to criminals themselves, especially drugdealers. The motels offer anonymity -- many don't requireidentification -- and an environment where strangers don'tstand out, solving the problem of snoopy neighbors. And allfor as little as $23 a night.   Police also point to the rise of a &quot;motel society,&quot;consisting of people who lack the references or finances tosecure an apartment. &quot;In the motel society, a higherpercentage of people are criminals, and they prey on thebusiness people and travelers who stay in budget motels,&quot;says Buena Park police Sgt. James Dixon.   Because the victims of motel crime are generally fromelsewhere, crimes against them draw little notice and provokelittle community outrage. &quot;Everyone thinks of it as a crimethat occurs to outsiders,&quot; says New York attorney RichardFrank, who won a $2.2 million judgment in 1976 on behalf ofsinger Connie Francis, the victim of rape at a Howard Johnsonmotel, which isn't considered a budget motel.   That often helps keep dangerous situations hidden fromview. In Orlando, Fla., a big theft problem at a local DaysInn was revealed by a local TV reporter to be largely afunction of the kind of housekeepers the inn employed --prisoners on work-release programs. A Days Inn spokeswomansays those workers have since been dropped and that crime atthat location has dropped dramatically.   With no outcry over the issue, the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation and other law enforcement agencies, which foryears have tracked convenience-store crime, don't keepstatistics on hostelry crime. And the industry itself won'treveal any statistics. &quot;Each company considers its crimestatistics proprietary,&quot; says Ray Ellis, director of riskmanagement and operations for the American Hotel andamp; MotelAssociation, a trade group.   The hostelries with the worst crime problems vary fromcity to city. In the Kansas City suburb of Lenexa, Kan., forinstance, three of the six locations that generated the mostcalls to police last year were motels, with Holiday Inntopping the list, followed by Days Inn, then Motel 6 in thenumber six slot. And even the finest hotels are not immune tosecurity lapses. In the past five years, in fact, security atMotel 6 facilities has increased: The company has addeddeadbolts to room doors, which previously had featured onlyhandle locks, and installed room telephones, which can becrucial to guest security.   But Motel 6 is still widely cited as a problem by policein many cities. And because of the chain's size, nationalvisibility and the wealth of information on security thatflowed out of the photographer's suit and a suit filed instate court in Fort Worth by an 18-year-old rape victim, alook at Motel 6 provides insight into the security problemsof the entire budget-motel industry.   Depositions in those cases, and interviews with Motel 6employees and police in several cities, show that in theirquest to lower expenses and increase occupancy rates, companyofficials have failed to enforce measures that could reducecriminal activity, such as requiring identification fromcash-paying guests, refusing rooms to known or suspectedtroublemakers and routinely hiring security guards.   In some regions, according to information from Motel 6managers that was confirmed by executives in depositions inthe photographer's suit, Motel 6 has also dangled financialrewards in front of managers who maintain a more-than-100%occupancy rate -- which can be achieved only by renting thesame room more than once a day. Among the &quot;hourlies&quot; thatattracts, says Mr. Caldwell, the former Houston police chief,are &quot;whores and dope fiends.&quot;   In a deposition last year in the photographer's suit,Motel 6 executive vice president Jerry Manion conceded thathe had no motel security training, didn't know who at Motel 6had such expertise, was unaware of any written securitypolicy at the company and didn't know whether any companystudies had ever been conducted on the subject. Mr. Manionsaid in the deposition that he was in charge of security atthe company.   In depositions in both cases, top Motel 6 officials saidresponsibility for identifying and addressing crime problemsrests largely with motel managers. These are mostlymiddle-aged or elderly married couples who receive an on-siteapartment, health benefits and about $20,000 a year forworking about 40 hours a week. In the two-inch-thick trainingmanual these managers receive, the section called &quot;Securityof Guests&quot; is six pages long. &quot;The chances of a particularmotel being disrupted by a robbery, burglary or assault areextremely remote,&quot; the section begins.   Until recently, new managers couldn't tell whether theirproperty was crime-ridden because the company didn't tabulatecrime reports on its motels, company officials said indepositions in the photographer's case. A relief managerfilling in at the Buena Park Motel 6 is surprised to hear ofits long history of crime. &quot;I always thought this was a realsafe motel,&quot; she says.   The company's lock maintenance has also come under fire.In early 1989, it took two months for the company to supplythe manager of an Arlington, Texas, Motel 6 with parts he hadordered to repair deadbolts, testified Ralph Miller, theregional maintenance engineer for Motel 6. For an 18-year-oldOhio woman assigned to a room with a broken lock, the partsarrived too late; she was awakened in the middle of the nightby a knife-wielding assailant who sliced off her clothes andraped her, according to police and records in the civil suitshe has filed against Motel 6. It is pending.   Although it isn't known how her assailant got past thedoorknob lock, which locks automatically when the doorcloses, it's possible he had a key. The company's writtensecurity policy didn't require a change of locks to protectguests from lost or stolen keys. A clerk at an Anaheim,Calif., Motel 6 says locks are changed at that property onlywhen rooms thought to have been empty are instead foundoccupied by intruders with stolen keys.   Speaking generally of such policies, Robert Rissone, a NewYork locksmith who has served as a security consultant forhotels and motels, says: &quot;It's like they're saying, `We'llleave the light on for you -- and for the 16 other people whoprobably have a key to your room.'&quot;   One young maid was sexually accosted by a stranger inArlington, Texas. She fled, abandoning her cleaning cart --and her master key. When her key wasn't found, a companyofficial ordered new locks for all the doors as Motel 6policy requires for lost master keys -- and then ordered themotel manager and his wife to fire the maid, which they did,according to the deposition of Darlene Everett, the manager'swife, in the 18-year-old's suit.   A big part of the problem, critics say, is that propertymanagers are given the responsibility, but not the authority,for solving crime problems. The best example may be the FortWorth motel where the photographer was raped. On Feb. 15,1987, during the Fort Worth property's last evening as AppleInn, an armed robber held it up. The next morning, as Motel 6assumed ownership, Samuel Kemp and his wife, Myrl, arrived tomanage the property, largely ignorant of its crime problem.It didn't take them long to find out: Within three weeks, ashootout occurred between police and drug dealers stayingthere.   Early on, Mr. Kemp determined that the motel needed asecurity guard. But lacking the authority to hire guards, hesought approval from his boss, Ernest Maxey, the areamanager. Mr. Maxey &quot;said he couldn't give me any, didn't havethe money for them,&quot; Mr. Kemp testified in a deposition inthe photographer's suit. More than a year after he started,Mr. Kemp was finally given a security guard, on weekendnights. Mr. Maxey said in his deposition that he didn'trecall Mr. Kemp complaining about security or asking forguards.   To rid the property of drug dealers and prostitutes, Mr.Kemp developed a &quot;no-rent&quot; list -- common in the motelindustry -- containing the names of known or suspectedcriminals. But Mr. Maxey's successor took away the list,insisting that the manager rent rooms to everyone &quot;whetherthey crawled in or somebody shoveled them into the office,&quot;Mr. Kemp testified. In his deposition, Motel 6 PresidentJoseph W. McCarthy said the company discourages no-rentlists, which he called &quot;too discretionary.&quot;   Fed up, Mr. Kemp turned in his resignation in a July 1988letter, submitted as part of the photographer's case,alleging a &quot;push to rent to scum, dopers, hookers, thievesand whatever.&quot;   When the photographer drove up that September, she askedthe new manager whether the motel had security. &quot;At night,&quot;he replied, according to the new manager's deposition,although guards were still present just two nights a week --Friday and Saturday. The woman arrived on a Sunday.   The next evening, Olan Wayne Stover, an ex-convict andrecent guest of the motel, was loitering in the parking lotwith a friend when the photographer, having finished herday's work, drove up and dragged her equipment into her room.&quot;Right then and there, we knew what we wanted,&quot; Mr. Stover,who later pleaded guilty to raping her, testified in hercase.   Until the photographer's suit, the company had had nolarge settlements against it concerning security issues. &quot;Thefact that budget motel guests are less sophisticated makesthem less inclined to stand up for their rights,&quot; says G.Robert Friedman, the photographer's attorney.   But now, pressure may be building for Motel 6 to increasesecurity. Its insurers, stuck with $9.75 million of thesettlement after Motel 6's $250,000 deductible, are likely todemand as much. And some police departments, such as in ElCajon, Calif., have ordered Motel 6 -- at the threat ofclosure -- to increase security at particularly crime-riddenmotels.   On top of that, at least one competitor is making securitya competitive issue. Microtel Franchise andamp; Development Corp.of Rochester, N.Y., is building budget motels featuring roomsthat open onto an enclosed corridor that is locked afterdark, doors that have three locks and a policy that calls forlock changes every time a key is lost. Computerized cardsystems are too expensive for most budget motels.   For some, any Motel 6 move to improve security will be abitter reminder of past tragedies. Last October, BarbaraWendt's 32-year-old son, an armored-truck driver in Amarillo,Texas, traveled to California to visit a girlfriend andstayed at a Motel 6 in Southern California. One night, afterdinner with his girlfriend and her parents, he returned aloneand was accosted by three men who put a shotgun to his headand followed him into his room, where they took his walletand some other valuables. As the assailants walked out, oneof them produced a handgun, said &quot;by the way&quot; and shot Mr.Wendt, according to the statement he gave police before hedied.   &quot;For a security officer to go out and get shot onvacation,&quot; says Mrs. Wendt, &quot;it just doesn't seem right.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>