<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910206-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>910206-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Nofziger Blocked in Reimbursement Bid   ----   By Paul M. Barrett and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   TAXES CTYFE XON</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENTS (RGU)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)PETROLEUM (PET)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   The federal appeals court in Washington refused to orderthe government to pay the legal fees of former Reagan adviserLyn Nofziger, whose conviction on illegal lobbying chargeswas later thrown out.   The ruling yesterday by a three-judge panel of the courtsets an important standard on reimbursable fees in caseshandled by special court-appointed prosecutors, known asindependent counsel. Robert Plotkin, Mr. Nofziger'sWashington attorney, said that &quot;lawyers shouldn'tautomatically anticipate that their fees will be paid&quot; by thegovernment, even when an independent counsel's indictment isset aside, as happened in the Nofziger case. Mr. Plotkin saidhis client's legal fees may be as high as $1 million and thatMr. Nofziger is considering an appeal.</LP><TEXT>   The former Reagan political adviser was convicted inFebruary 1988 of illegally lobbying the White House within ayear after leaving his government job. His conviction wasreversed in June 1989, when the federal appeals court inWashington ruled that the indictment had failed to allegethat Mr. Nofziger had &quot;knowingly&quot; violated the law, andtherefore was invalid.   The independent counsel law -- designed to prosecutehigh-level official wrongdoing -- allows for reimbursement oflegal fees if there isn't an indictment and if the subject ofthe investigation incurs costs that wouldn't have beennecessary but for the independent counsel's actions.   The appeals court ruled that Mr. Nofgizer met the firstrequirement, but not the second. The court said the voidingof an indictment is equivalent to no indictment beingbrought. But it said that the independent counsel didn'timpose any greater burden on Mr. Nofziger than a conventionalU.S. attorney would have.   Mr. Nofziger, the court said, &quot;accepted a high governmentposition and a thorough scrutiny of his conduct goes with theoffice if he trespasses into apparent criminal conduct.&quot;   ---   NEW JERSEY THRIFT executive indicted in kickback scheme.   A former vice president of City Federal Savings Bank, afailed thrift, has been charged with bribery, fraud and taxevasion for his alleged part in a loan and kickback scheme.   In addition, four real estate developers who allegedlypaid kickbacks to the banker entered guilty pleas before U.S.District Judge Harold A. Ackerman in Newark. Four otherdevelopers were named as unindicted co-conspirators.   William J. Spagnoli, a former senior loan officer withCity Federal, of Somerset, N.J., allegedly took more than$2.5 million in kickbacks from eight developers as rewardsfor granting $338 million in residential real estatedevelopment loans. He also failed to report $2.2 million ofthat money to the Internal Revenue Service, the indictmentcharges.   In addition to the 30-count indictment, the U.S attorney'soffice in Newark filed a warrant seeking the forfeiture ofMr. Spagnoli's illegally derived assets. Mr. Spagnoli'sattorney, Justin Walder, couldn't be reached for comment.   &quot;This is the largest case of Sandamp;L corruption we have everseen in this state, and one of the worst in the country,&quot;U.S. attorney Michael Chertoff said.   City Federal had 105 branches when it was taken over bythe Resolution Trust Corporation in 1989. The takeover,estimated to have cost taxpayers $1.5 billion, is among thefive largest Sandamp;L failures, Mr. Chertoff said. He said it wastoo early to tell if the alleged kickback-and-loan scheme ledto the bank's failure.   City Federal was the principal unit of CityFed FinancialCorp., based in Palm Beach Florida.   Charles Sicurella and Gerald Cernero, who received morethan $87 million in loans from City Federal to developproperties in Monmouth County, N.J., each pleaded guilty toone count of conspiracy and one count of bank fraud. Mr.Sicurella's attorney, Dino Bliabas, blamed Mr. Spagnoli for&quot;shaking down&quot; his client and Mr. Cernero. Mr. Cernero'sattorney couldn't be reached for comment.   Monmouth County developers Albert Bresnick and DanielMatthews, who received $134 million in loans from CityFederal to finance several residential projects, also pleadedguilty to charges stemming from the alleged scheme. Mr.Bresnick's attorney couldn't be reached for comment.   Mr. Matthews' attorney, John Ford, said his client was areputable developer who was pressured by Mr. Spagnoli to paykickbacks.   ---   NOVELIST ACCUSES Harper's Magazine of mangling a letter.   In a suit pitting artists' rights against First Amendmentfreedoms, Gordon Lish charged that Harper's printed a&quot;bowdlerized&quot; version of a letter he wrote to hisfiction-writing students.   Mr. Lish, a book editor at Alfred A. Knopf Inc. and aneditor of the literary journal &quot;The Quarterly,&quot; said themagazine violated copyright infringement and libel laws. Thesuit, filed in federal court in Manhattan, seeks unspecifieddamages and a court order forcing the magazine to run acorrection.   Harper's, however, says its use of the letter was proper-- and that the case is an attempt to use copyright law as a&quot;backdoor censorship maneuver.&quot;   The letter was sent to 48 participants in a privatewriting seminar last fall, setting forth Mr. Lish's goals forthe program and what students should expect. Harper'sobtained a copy of the letter, which Mr. Lish says was meantto be confidential, and published an excerpted version in itsDecember 1990 issue.   Mr. Lish says Harper's made it appear that the letter, asedited, was his work. Harper's version includes about halfthe original text, but doesn't indicate with ellipses wherematerial was omitted.   Harper's publisher John R. MacArthur said the magazinetypically leaves out ellipses in such material. He saidreaders knew it was an excerpt because the magazine began theitem with the phrase &quot;From an introductory letter. . .&quot;   Mr. MacArthur said, &quot;We are planning to fight this all theway because of the larger copyright issues that areinvolved.&quot;   The suit accuses Harper's of violating Mr. Lish'scopyright protection by printing the letter. Moreover, thesuit said that Harper's editing defamed Mr. Lish.   &quot;Their purpose was to make him appear to be a less giftedwriter than he is and to make him appear somewhatridiculous,&quot; said Kathryn Barrett, Mr. Lish's attorney atSkadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom in New York.   In recent years, the courts have granted greaterprotection to authors' unpublished letters. In the mostnotable case, a biographer was barred from using theunpublished letters of J.D. Salinger.   Mr. MacArthur said his magazine's use of Mr. Lish'sletter, however, was permissible under what is called thefair-use doctrine. &quot;In literary markets, what Gordon Lish hasto say about himself and to his students is newsworthy,&quot; Mr.MacArthur said. &quot;And Harper's Magazine covers the literaryworld.&quot;   ---   FORMER BANKING EXECUTIVE charged with improper tradingpractices.   David L. Astheimer, a former treasurer and executive vicepresident at Independence Bancorp Inc., was indicted by afederal grand jury in Philadelphia on charges of bank fraud,interstate transportation of money taken by fraud, andcommodities violations. Independence Bancorp is a Perkasie,Pa., bank holding company.   According to the indictment, Mr. Astheimer maintained hisown futures trading account while he traded Treasury bondsand Eurodollars on behalf of five banks owned by Independencebetween 1985 and 1987. But he delayed designating whichaccounts were being traded until after the trades werecompleted. Federal prosecutors maintain that Mr. Astheimerused the scheme to designate $2.5 million in profitabletrades for himself while charging $4 million in losses to thebanks.   Mr. Astheimer left Independence in 1988. His lawyer,Arthur Schwartzstein of Washington, said: &quot;We deny thecharges and welcome the opportunity to lay these allegationsto rest.&quot;   ---   EXXON HOLDERS can sue company for not disclosing suitsover Alaska oil spill.   A federal judge in Manhattan rejected Exxon Corp.'srequest that the suit be dismissed. Exxon argued thatsecurities regulations don't require companies to make suchdisclosures in shareholder proxy materials. But U.S. DistrictJudge John E. Sprizzo said companies may have to disclosesuch suits if the failure to do so would give investors afalse or misleading impression.   The judge also noted that Exxon has appointed its owncommittee to investigate whether legal action should be takenagainst current or former Exxon executives over the 1989spill.   &quot;Where, as here, the company has taken the extraordinarystep of setting up an independent litigation committee tolook into such charges, a new factor has been added . . .which supports the conclusion that the complaint shouldn't bedismissed as a matter of law at this stage of theproceedings,&quot; Judge Sprizzo ruled.   Judge Sprizzo set July 31 as the trial date -- after theExxon committee is expected to have completed itsinvestigation.   ---   CONTROVERSIAL GUN-CONTROL law repealed by Washington citycouncil.   Under pressure from congressional Republicans, the citycouncil repealed a measure designed to curb semiautomatic&quot;assault&quot; weapons by making gun makers liable for injuriesand deaths caused by the guns. The 13-member council voidedthe law because GOP members in the House had threatened tolimit federal funding for the city if the local governmentdidn't repeal the measure.   Rep. Thomas Bliley, (R., Va.), the ranking GOP member ofthe House Committee on the District of Columbia, hadintroduced a resolution asking Congress to set aside the citylaw, which was enacted in December.   Congress has the authority to veto legislation approved bythe D.C. government.</TEXT></DOC>