<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900712-0141</DOCNO><DOCID>900712-0141.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   The Issue Is Religious Intolerance</HL><DATE>07/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><LP>   Dallin H. Oaks, a leader of the Church of Jesus Christ ofLatter-day Saints (the Mormons), complains in his May 23editorial-page article, &quot;When `Freedom' Becomes ReligiousCensorship,&quot; that current law is hostile toward religion inthat it prohibits all prayer in public schools. And he isright that government oversteps the separation between churchand state when it rewrites prayers. However, in attempting toinstill Christianity in what should be a nonsectarianceremony, namely graduation, Mr. Oaks fails to see our entiresystem at work.   First, because governments pay the operating expenses ofpublic schools, they inherently sponsor and endorse anyprayer in a public school. Therefore, any discussion over thelanguage to be used in a school is irrelevant. No prayershould exist. And though public schools should acknowledgereligious beliefs, teaching and honoring them differabsolutely with teaching about them.</LP><TEXT>   Second, if all the people at a public-school graduation,or for that matter in a classroom, wish to pray and arereligiously identical, nothing prevents them from engaging ina prayer with the language of their denomination. Andgovernment does nothing and can do nothing to prevent thistype of prayer, for no one would complain. Nonetheless, suchprayer should not exist in public schools. Public schools,after all, serve to educate, not to further embed religiousbeliefs.   If Mr. Oaks does not like the system, I recommend he sendhis children to a private school. I'm sure he'll have noproblem finding one willing to make his religious beliefs theimplicit assumptions of his children and eliminate anythinking that would show his beliefs faulty. Because of thisnation's &quot;religious plurality,&quot; however, its tax money mustgo toward instilling objectiveness and free thought.   Henry J. Wiggs   St. Paul, Minn.   ---   Mr. Oaks wrote of a case last year where a Utah schooldistrict resolved not to have prayers at high-schoolgraduations rather than agreeing to use &quot;nondenominational&quot;prayers. He implied that the school board's decision washonorable because it did not want to write or censor prayers.I served as counsel for the students in that suit.   Mr. Oaks mischaracterizes the response of that schooldistrict. The suit was brought because every year for manyyears every invocation and every benediction at the school'sgraduations were exclusively prayers for and by members ofthe Mormon Church. The suit sought to acknowledge thediversity of religions.   Rather than the noble response alleged by Mr. Oaks, thedistrict's response in reality was, &quot;If we cannot have Mormonprayers as we always have had, we will have no prayers.&quot;   The issue in Utah is religious intolerance defended underthe guise of preventing censorship. Any attempt to removereligion from schools in Utah is largely in response toreligious intolerance by a majority and not some sinisterplot by a minority.   Mr. Oaks suggests that public prayers &quot;honor the religiousplurality of our nation.&quot; That plurality is dishonored by thereligious monopoly and intolerance that led to the suit lastyear.   Brian M. Barnard   Utah Legal Clinic   Salt Lake City   ---   Prayers at public high-school graduations are nothing morethan government forcing religion down the throats of thepeople. That's religious tyranny. The Founding Fathers werenot Christians, they were deists. They realized the horrorsand harm caused by religion. That's why they erected a wallseparating church and state, and to protect the people, freefrom religion. Today they would be believers in the Big Bangtheory, and acknowledge that the make-believe god and bibleare merely a collection of myths and legends borrowed fromearlier superstitious cultures. Today, enlightened peopleeverywhere understand these superstitions were inventions ofthe primitive mind to explain the unknown.   Rodger K. Johnson   Lancaster, Ohio   ---   I fully agree with Mr. Oaks's concluding remarks in hisarticle that religion should have a place in the public lifeof our nation. But one must not confuse religion with deity.Any prayer to a deity is a sectarian or denominational act.It may be as unacceptable to a devoutly religious person asthe setting up of a golden calf for worship is to a devoutJew.   It is to be remembered that Siddhartha Gautama (theBuddha, to those who choose to follow his way) did not advisethe worship of any deity, nor did he set himself up as one.His last words to his followers were to &quot;look to the lightwithin you.&quot;   If I choose to go to a Catholic picnic or to a Jewishfeast I had better tolerate their form of religion during mytime there. But I find it quite unacceptable for the publicauthorities to require that I kowtow to a deity in the courseof my ordinary activities as an American.   If a school district is an Islamic or Mormon schooldistrict, it should by all means prescribe or censor prayersoffered at official functions within the district, in keepingwith its doctrine and traditions.   The lack of religion unquestionably (in my opinion) leadsto ruin, but at the same time no public organization in theU.S. has any business requiring anyone to recognize any deityin the course of one's normal activities.   Robin Datta   Hopkinville, Ky.   ---   My education was the public schools of Detroit, and myundergraduate degree was earned at the University ofMichigan. The time frame was 1940 through 1956.   In none of those institutions was there any such thing asprayer or devotional Bible reading in the classrooms oranywhere else, and I would have been shocked if there was. Infact, I never even heard of such a thing until after I hadgraduated, moved to California and had a landlord who wastrying to get daily Bible readings incorporated into thepublic-school routine. I was aghast at the suggestion, sinceit impressed me as being improper on its face. The SupremeCourt reached the same obvious conclusion in 1962.   The lack of religious observances in those classrooms didnot imply hostility toward religion. On the contrary, one ofthe most interesting and culturally broadening courses I everhad was one in which we studied the world's religions.   I believe that those who went to school with me are noless religious than the general population. I am active in mysynagogue, and the friends whom I know from that era areactive in their churches.   The constant complaining that has followed the 1962Supreme Court decision lacks scholastic rigor and contributesnothing whatsoever to this country's domestic peace andtranquility.   Leonard W. Williams   Sunnyvale, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>