<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900917-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>900917-0122.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   Advice From an Office Temp, On Her Own Time   ----   By Dixie Peterson</HL><DATE>09/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><LP>   I am a temp. When I arrive promptly at 9 a.m. at theaddress my agency gave me, the person to whom I am supposedto report is often not in yet. I don't mind at all, since Ibill from when I get there. Sometimes I'm given anorientation of the office; most of the time I am not. Thebetter secretaries leave a note for me. These notes vary inusefulness, but are always better than no note at all.Frankly, most offices haven't got a clue as to what I need tomake my work cost-effective. Many don't even know what toexpect from a temp.   Here are the picky-little things I need to do my one- totwo-week job well, things that anyone with an iota of commonsense could come up with, but, alas, never does:</LP><TEXT>   -- Maps -- Buildings have floor plans, and I need one ofthe department. Who sits where? I won't need (and don't want)a detailed plan of the whole building, but running from deskto desk reading names off of memos -- upside down, of course-- to find out who's who is not very efficient. Also, whenhand-delivering messages it is helpful to know that &quot;Fred&quot; isfemale and &quot;A Boy Named Sue&quot; grew up and now heads sales.   -- Phones -- The extensions should be clearly marked withthe names and numbers. A memo listing &quot;x 124-A. Dahl, x125-M. Smith&quot; is useless. Most calls are for &quot;Ann,&quot; not &quot;Ms.Dahl.&quot; Equally useless is an out-of-date phone listing.Ideally have two lists in no less than 12-point type -- onealphabetized by first names and the other by surnames. A tempdoesn't need details for all 30,000 people world-wide in12-point type, but please have that directory nearby.   Make clear the ring protocol. Does the temp pick up on thefirst ring? The third? When do phones bounce and where dothey go? Or come from? If you're on the other line, is thetemp supposed to intercom you, hold all calls, or run to youroffice with a name on a note? Do you prefer being &quot;not atyour desk&quot; or &quot;in a meeting?&quot;   If your phones have multiple-city extensions (great forhooking up several small offices) and your temp is going tohave to do relatively complicated maneuvers, you all hadbetter practice a few times -- and keep your humor.   -- Stationery -- I keep hoping that someday someone willleave me a sample of all the different types of stationeryand memo paper, along with instructions on what goes on whatand how many spaces down I have to go with the date to notprint over the letterhead. I can dig around, but not everyoneI work for has personalized letterhead tucked under theregular letterhead. I would appreciate knowing that paper forinter-office memos exists before I set one up on regular memopaper. Post-its are essential.   -- Annual Report -- A 50% chance I'll need other offices'addresses, the president's name, all stuff within. Ideally,I'll find a green pen so you can recognize my notes. When I'mreally organized I bring one.   Here are the things your temp should (and shouldn't) do:   -- Filing -- Do not have your temp file anything moreinvolved than correspondence into a three-ring chronologicalfolder. Two reasons: 1) the full-time person should look atthe stuff to know what went on; 2) things that can get lostwill get lost, especially if they are lost in a computer harddrive and named something interesting. Even chronologicalcorrespondence files can be a problem if there's one fordepartment memos, one for corporate memos, howeverall youbreak it down. On the other hand, one-of-a-kind filingprojects are a very good temp task because there is no systemto learn or to damage.   -- Errands -- Most temps love errands. I've shopped foreverything from costumes for a sales meeting to arefrigerator. I'll get great pastries on my way in and dropoff Fed-Ex on my way home (all billable hours, of course). Ilove being a messenger on nice days.   -- Typing/Word Processing -- I give word-processeddocuments to my boss with hand-written proofing marks,explaining: &quot;I find this the fastest way, since there areusually changes and I hate wasting paper.&quot; No one has everdisagreed.   Most of the stuff I'm asked to type has lots of littletense problems, is redundant, and then, to make certain thatthe point is made, is redundant again. (Young men are theworst and young women, though only marginally better, areterritorial. Young engineers are clearer.)   -- Working with computers (PCs) -- Don't have your temphired for word processing do interesting documentmanipulations on the first day. There are too many variationsin the programs and temp agencies don't screen us thatcarefully. (I go on jobs that will require software I'venever touched because my agency knows I will figure it outpretty quickly.) Even when I know the software, the keyboardis different, the memory is more or less, or somebodycustomized something.   Don't let your temp loose in the hard drive. Either starta C:/Temp file or have an empty, formatted &quot;Temp&quot; disk forthe full-timer to review and file upon return.   Very seldom can I turn on a computer and figure outsomeone's filing system, primarily because not many peopleare well organized. If you might need a price-quote update orwant a proposal altered, make certain you know what it'scalled and where it is: It could take me a day or two to findit, and I'm a better-than-average temp.   -- Working with computers (mainframes, minis) -- Mostproprietary software is user-antagonistic and often thebudget priorities changed before the user manual was written.Yet since I have been hired to do word processing -- acomputer thing -- I am expected to be fluent on all computerthings. On any proprietary system I have used, even simpleprocedures -- such as processing a check request -- take methree supervised times before I catch on: once -- totaldarkness; twice -- vague familiarity; thrice -- minimumcompetence. If it is only done a couple of times a week, justfarm it out to another secretary; it is not worth teaching atemp.   For date entry or form-filling ventures, break it intosteps as much as possible. Do not have your temp uploadingdata onto a proprietary system or running the analytics thefirst day.   -- Photocopying -- I hate it mostly because I jammachines. But reams of photocopying is a good, safe tempchore -- although not one worth $20 to $25 per hour. Mosttemps like photocopying because your boss can't hassle youwhen you're miles away at the copier.   My boss at a large retailer -- now brushing againstChapter 11 -- hired temps to make extra copies of all reportsso that she would always be able to find one someplace if allthe others got lost. (This departmental system was logicalrelative to the company's international communicationsmethods.)   -- Travel Arrangements -- I will not know what you likeand where your price cut-off point is. Call the agentyourself; it will be faster.   ---   Ms. Peterson is delighted that she never made enough moneyas a temp to buy a highly mortgaged co-op in Manhattan.</TEXT></DOC>