<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911028-0017</DOCNO><DOCID>911028-0017.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Ads May Haunt Kent Cigarette Maker   ----   By Milo Geyelin and James P. Miller   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   LTR WNEWS</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)LEVERAGED BUYOUTS (LBO)</NS><RE>ILLINOIS (IL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Early television commercials touting the safety of Kentcigarettes were so effective that the campaign was cited forits &quot;hard sell&quot; approach by Advertising Age magazine in 1953.In a trial scheduled to begin today, those ads could comeback to haunt the cigarette's maker, Lorillard Inc.   A stockbroker is contending in federal court inPhiladephia that the &quot;Micronite&quot; filters featured in the adscontained asbestos fibers that are responsible for hismesothelioma, a rare and usually fatal form of lung cancerbelieved to be caused solely by exposure to asbestos. Theplaintiff, Peter Ierardi, and his wife, Angela, maintain thathe has never had any other exposure to asbestos. Mr. Ierardiseeks compensatory and punitive damages.</LP><TEXT>   Lorillard, based in New York, declined to comment on thecase. In the past, the company hasn't disputed that Micronitefilters manufactured between 1951 and 1957 containedasbestos. When the suit was filed a year ago, an attorney forthe company said &quot;the asbestos didn't get out of thefilters.&quot; In more recent court filings, the company maintainsthat &quot;nothing significant&quot; escaped through the filters.   In court pleadings, Lorillard has indicated that it willchallenge whether Mr. Ierardi, 56 years old, ever smokedKents and will allege that asbestos, a fire resistant mineralused for fireproofing and electrical insulation, is now soprevalent in the environment that Mr. Ierardi could have beenexposed to it anywhere.   Dozens of plaintiffs have sued cigarette manufacturers forfailing to warn of the dangers more generally associated withsmoking, particularly heart disease and lung cancer. Thefuture of these suits will depend in large part on a casecurrently before the U.S. Supreme Court on whether federallymandated warnings on packages after 1966 effectively precludemost suits by people who smoked after that date. The industryhas won most smoking-related lawsuits to date.   But the current trial in Philadelphia offers a new twistby alleging an injury caused by asbestos in a filter that wastouted as being particularly safe. &quot;This is not a tobaccocase. This is an asbestos case.&quot; says Daniel G. Childs, aPhiladelphia tobacco and asbestos claims lawyer who isrepresenting the Ierardis.   Before becoming a stockbroker for Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. in1983, Mr. Ierardi held a variety of jobs. He worked as anelectronic technician, both for the Air Force and for aPhiladelphia manufacturer, owned a record production companyin Philadelphia and operated a banquet hall where asbestoshas been found behind the wallpapering, apparently used forinsulation. Lorillard is expected to make much of hispotential opportunities for asbestos exposure.   But the central issue is likely to come down to the adsthat Lorillard used. The campaign during the early 1950s wasconducted about the same time that researchers linked theinhaling of asbestos fibers with respiratory diseases,including lung cancer. Mr. Childs, the plaintiffs' lawyer,contends that Lorillard learned from tests in 1954 thatasbestos was escaping from the Micronite filters intocigarette smoke but kept the filters on the market anywayuntil 1957.   Lorillard touted the Micronite filters as a sophisticatedtechnological advance that made Kents almost risk free,according to court papers filed by Mr. Childs. &quot;Kent offersthe greatest health protection in cigarette history,&quot; saidone magazine ad.   Micronite was described as a &quot;pure, dust-free, completelyharmless material that is so safe, so effective, it isactually used to help filter the air in hospital operatingrooms.&quot;   Mr. Ierardi switched from Kools to Kents in 1953, heclaims in his suit, and dropped the brand 10 years later,when he switched to Marlboros. He said he quit smoking in1987.   The outcome of the trial is expected to have little effecton the future of product liability suits against the tobaccoindustry because the case involves only one brand ofcigarettes manufactured for a short period of time by asingle company. However, a victory establishing the linkbetween asbestos in Kents and respiratory ailments would makeit easier for other plaintiffs to win similar suits -- andput a dent in the tobacco industry's litigation armor.   &quot;If the plaintiffs win,&quot; said Richard Daynard, of theTobacco Products Liability Project, Boston, &quot;at that pointthese aren't the guys who can't be beaten.&quot;   ---   WEIBOLDT STORES fraudulent-conveyance suit settled out ofcourt.   The remaining defendants in the high-profile suitinvolving the leveraged buy-out of Weiboldt Stores Inc.reached a settlement just days before the case was to go totrial in Chicago federal court.   Without agreeing to any wrongdoing, a group that includesinvestors Jerome Schottenstein, and Julius and Edmond Trump,agreed to pay $11.7 million to the estate of the retailchain, which collapsed into bankruptcy in 1986.   The Schottenstein and Trump group -- no relation to DonaldTrump of New York -- held controlling voting stakes and boardrepresentation in the publicly traded company before sellingtheir shares to an outside group in a $38.5 million leveragedbuy-out in 1985. The debt-laden company was forced intoinvoluntary bankruptcy less than a year later.   The trustee for the estate subsequently filed suit againstshareholders, lenders and other participants in thetransaction, under, among other things, fraudulent-conveyancelaws. Such laws, based on English common law and on the booksin a majority of states, are designed to prevent debtors fromwrongfully moving assets to avoid creditors.   The Wieboldt trustee claimed, in essence, that theleveraged buy-out represented an effort by the owners toescape liability for the troubled company's debt.   While defendants have argued that fraudulent-conveyancelaws shouldn't apply to complex business transactions such asLBOs, such litigation has become increasingly frequent ascompanies that overleveraged in the heady 1980s falter andfail in a tougher economic climate.   In the latest example of the trend, a court-appointedexaminer last week found that Interco Inc. has grounds to sueits chairman and others involved in an ill-starred 1988recapitalization. The legal issues are still considered to beevolving, however, and cases such as the Wieboldt litigation,and a pending suit involving Revco D.S., a unit of AnacHolding Corp., have been closely monitored for precedent.   In a ruling in late 1988, Judge James F. Holderman in theChicago federal district court held that while failed LBOscould be attacked under the legal doctrine, Wieboldt's publicshareholders aren't liable under the conveyance laws. But heruled that individuals -- such as directors, lenders andcontrolling shareholders involved in putting the dealtogether -- who knew that the buy-out might leave the companybroke, could be held liable.   While the buy-out lenders had settled earlier, the caseagainst the Wieboldt directors and principal holders had beenset for trial on Nov. 4.   The settlement announced Friday means that the Wieboldtestate's suit, which originally sought $100 million incompensatory and $500 million in punitive damages, has beensettled for a total of $30.8 million.   &quot;The trustee is satisfied, and believes it's a fairsettlement,&quot; said an attorney for the estate, Marshall Seederof Sachnoff andamp; Weaver in Chicago. The distribution to thecompany's creditors hasn't yet been calculated, he said.   ---   OLWINE, CONNELLY faces tough times as many partners leave.   A dozen partners have already left or have plans to leavethe New York law firm Olwine, Connelly, Chase, O'Donnell andamp;Weyher. According to one former member of the firm, thelawyers accounted for $8 million to $10 million in annualbillings, one-quarter to a one-third of the firm's totalbillings.   Meanwhile, the firm -- which had 110 lawyers at thebeginning of the year and is estimated now to have no morethan 70 -- recently moved into six floors of space at 750Seventh Avenue in Manhattan and is facing increased rentcosts. Two weeks ago, it also gave notice to a group of youngassociates, according to the former partner, who asked not tobe identified.   The firm's managing partner did not return phone calls forcomment, nor did other partners who were contacted last week.   The exodus from Olwine began last spring when partnersPeter Aron, Michael E. Twomey and Gary Hoppe left to formtheir own commercial litigation firm. Since then, six otherpartners have left, and three partners in Washington are saidto be planning to leave. Recent merger talks withPhiladelphia's Dechert Price andamp; Rhoads failed to bear fruit.   Formed as a spinoff of one of New York's most establishedfirms, Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore, Olwine Connelly has gained anexcellent reputation from work in a variety of areas. Itrepresented International Business Machines Corp. inantitrust litigation and defended Sen. Dave Durenbergeragainst ethics charges.   Mr. Twomey, whose new firm subleases space from Olwine,said that he and his partners left because they wanted theopportunity to work in a smaller firm and that theirrelationship with the old firm was still good.</TEXT></DOC>