<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900912-0082</DOCNO><DOCID>900912-0082.</DOCID><HL>   To Break the Deadlock, Reclaim Kuwaiti Airspace   ----   By Albert Wohlstetter and Fred Hoffman</HL><DATE>09/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   If Saddam Hussein persists in flouting United Nationsdemands to return Kuwait to its rightful government, heshould be told that combat aircraft will be allowed to fly inKuwaiti airspace only if permitted by the Kuwaiti government.Preferably the news should come from the Kuwaiti government,whose right to self defense the U.N. is invoking. Iraqicombat aircraft on the ground -- fighters on the threeKuwaiti airfields able to support them, as well ashelicopters -- would be permitted to leave Kuwait underescort or stay put on the ground. Fighters penetrating fromIraq would be subject to interception and hot pursuit.   Blocking Saddam's use of Kuwaiti airspace would accomplishdirectly and immediately an important part of the president's-- and the U.N.'s -- goal of getting Iraq out of the whole ofKuwait; it would make accomplishing the rest not easy, butsignificantly easier.</LP><TEXT>   In another measure, Saddam would be told that the Kuwaitisare retrieving their authority to allow aircraft of friendlygovernments to use Kuwaiti airspace. If Iraqi surface-to-airmissiles (SAMs) attack aircraft legitimately using Kuwaitiairspace, we would disable not only the sites launching theattack, but all missile sites in Kuwait capable ofinterfering with the use of Kuwaiti airspace.   The measures proposed need not be applied in sequence.Disabling the SAM launchers used to attack our aircraft mightbe necessary in any case in order to enforce the firstmeasure's injunction against bringing fighters in from Iraq,and in order to ground Iraqi helicopters based in lessaccessible places than the three jet fields close to SaudiArabia and the coast. Our dominance of the air over Kuwaitwould permit our helicopters to land Kuwaiti resistancefighters and greatly improve their ability to harass andhinder the resupply of Iraqi military forces now in Kuwait.Both measures would increase the pressure on Saddam to getout of Kuwait and would make his invasion of Saudi Arabiaeven harder.   There is a third measure that can break the deadlock,worth weighing soberly but urgently. It would involve usingthe air blockade to isolate and cut the overlandreinforcement of Iraqi ground forces now concentrated in thesoutheast of Kuwait, where they threaten the Saudi oilfields. The goal would be to cut also their resupply by road.(The present naval blockade stops the resupply by sea ofIraqi forces in Kuwait, but only as a byproduct -- lessfocused on the military and on Kuwait -- of a wider effort tostop shipments to all territory controlled by Iraq. We arenot recommending an air blockade now of all Iraq).   Even more obviously than the naval blockade, which may beeffected outside of Kuwaiti territorial waters -- and whichwe wholly support -- these aerial blockades would be anexercise of the inherent Kuwaiti right of self-defense underArticle 51 of the U.N. Charter. Like the naval blockade, eachof these measures might be achieved without anyone actuallyfiring a shot; they leave it up to the Iraqis to accept them-- or face a very high probability that a challenge to themwould fail. In this respect, the measures contrast with ourinitiating an invasion on the ground in Kuwait or a strategicbombing offensive against Iraq.   Despite the lengthening odds, Saddam might invade SaudiArabia and attack our forces there. Then clearly the U.S. andits partners would want to consider options extending farbeyond reclaiming Kuwaiti airspace. Nor has President Bushruled out any military option, including our own initiationof a ground force invasion at some later date. These measuresfocus on Kuwait, but they do not imply that any area of Iraqwill be a sanctuary in a war. Nor do they imply that we would&quot;escalate&quot; actions gradually in such a war. Nor that in thatwar we would aim for less than a decisive destruction ofIraqi military forces and installations. For now, however, toreclaim Kuwaiti airspace would go well beyond relying on thepresent economic embargo of Iraq; and it would do thatwithout starting an invasion or a strategic bombingoffensive.   Each of these measures focuses on combatants rather thanon noncombatants, whether Iraqi civilians or foreignhostages. (Iraqi pilots flying MiG 23s are unlikely to carryhostages as passengers.) And the measures focus tightly onthe Iraqi forces now illegally in Kuwait. All three measureswould aim at an important, but much more restricted andprecisely defined, objective than military options like thevague calls for &quot;carpet bombing&quot; or a barrage of 2,700-poundshells from the battleship Wisconsin's naval guns, or theless obviously vague call for us to start at once a strategiccampaign &quot;to deprive Iraq of the industrial and storagefacilities that supply its armed forces.&quot;   The measures we propose are also more feasible -- andwould risk much less -- than a U.S. ground invasion. If themeasures supplement the naval blockade, the pressure is morelikely to wear down Saddam's will to defy the demands of thelarge coalition President Bush has so skillfully assembledbefore that coalition itself erodes. The larger anycoalition, the less likely it is to last without blurring orlosing its purpose -- here, getting Saddam outunconditionally in order to show that in the future suchaggression will not pay off.   Even the first measure, blocking Iraqi military aircraftfrom any use of Kuwaiti airspace in peacetime, wouldimmediately reduce Saddam's ability to invade the major Saudioil fields, or to defend the Kuwaiti territory he has seized.It would be a substantial, not only symbolic, break in thedeadlock. Yet the symbolic aspects in this test of wills andendurance are entirely relevant.   The president and his partners in this effort have stakedtheir credibility and that of their governments on gettingSaddam out of Kuwait unconditionally. Any concession thatSaddam exacts he can paint as a success for his invasion anda symbolic launching platform for future aggressions.Saddam's credibility and that of the president are notmutually compatible. Through his spokesman, Saddam has againand again talked of humiliating President Bush. Humiliationis on his mind. These measures -- forcing him withoutconcessions to give up a critical part of what he has taken-- are humiliating. They might shorten his political life.They are designed to do that. Nonetheless, it could be along, hard winter.   In that winter, we should expect a Saddam television show,not of Iraqi soldiers, but of starving Iraqi and hostagechildren. Saddam's care for &quot;pretty children,&quot; like a cat'sfor a mouse, is lethal. His public diplomacy abounds inreferences to body bags. Saddam is not exactly a diplomat inthe mold of U.N. Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar.He is even less like such figures on the American scene asAmbassador Sol Linowitz, who believes Saddam responded todiplomacy with &quot;flexibility&quot; when he disgorged the lastresidue of what he swallowed by invading Iran. Saddam,however, was yielding not to Iran's diplomacy but to a U.S.show of force: He has had to transfer Iraqi forces from hisIranian border to better the odds we've been piling up to gethim out of Kuwait.   For all his unlimited ambition, brutality and unyieldingbluster, Saddam has shown in other ways that he will bow toplainly overwhelming force and the will to use it. He hadissued standing orders to his tanker captains to resistboarding or be shot. When it was plain they would be boarded,he told them not to resist.   He shows signs of increasing awareness of thevulnerability of his forces in Kuwait. He has alreadywithdrawn Republican Guards, his most effective groundforces, and replaced them with members of the People's Army,lower in morale. He has brought in Soviet SA-2s and SA-3s,but he appears not to be putting many of hishighest-performance SAMs in Kuwait. He is cutting his lossesin case he is forced out. In short, while digging in, Saddamseems also poised to get out. But he will leave Kuwaitunconditionally only if it is clear that the coalitionagainst him can and -- especially -- that it will enforce theU.N. demand.   To weaken the coalition's will, Saddam is using Iraqi aswell as foreign women and children to soften the navalblockade; and as shields to deter strategic bombing as analternative to the blockade. He has made it clear that ifmedical supplies and food are lacking, women, children andother noncombatants will suffer. And the first cracks in thecoalition respond to or use that humanitarian concern. China,India and Iran now talk of sending food and medical supplies.   In the broadcast of his visit with Western hostages, hesaid that Iraqis working in economic and &quot;scientific&quot; (i.e.,chemical and nuclear) installations live on or near thoseinstallations and &quot;some pretty children, just as pretty asthe children we have here&quot; would be at risk. His purpose isto make any attack on military installations and combatantsinevitably an attack on noncombatants.   For that reason, as well as on obvious moral grounds, thethree measures we propose would confine effects as much aspossible to the military forces rather than civilians. Acomplete separation from civilians isn't feasible. But thereis a large difference between carpet bombing of militarytargets embedded in population centers on the one hand, and,on the other, intercepting a jet fighter or homing in on theradiation from a SAM radar with 50 pounds of explosive orcutting precisely an isolated road used as a supply line toIraqi troops in southeast Kuwait.   Only staffs with the most recent data on the performanceand location of the varied aircraft and missiles arrayedagainst each other in Kuwait can speak with any finality onthese matters. We hope that they will test, flesh out andimprove the three measures we outline. However, somethingmore can be said about the three measures proposed to breakthe deadlock.   First, keeping Iraqi jet fighters from using Kuwaitiairfields should be possible with minimal danger to ouraircraft, our air crews, or civilian bystanders. These threeairfields are nearly 100 miles from Iraq, but so close to theSaudi border or to the coast that aircraft flying from thesefields could be destroyed by air-to-air missiles fired fromaircraft that would hardly need themselves to penetrateKuwaiti airspace. The coalition now has in the Gulf airbornewarning and control aircraft, including the British Nimrod,as well as the U.S. E-3 Sentry flown by the Saudis andAmericans, that can stay far back from Kuwait and detect,identify and track all aircraft flying from these fields --and from Iraq.   We have also brought aircraft with air-to-air andair-to-surface missiles with powerful radar or infraredsensors, as well as decoys and missiles that can jam ordeceive passive sensors, that can home in on active sensors,and that can jam communications. We can disablesurface-to-air missiles that would interfere with ourdestruction of military helicopters rising from pads close toIraq, or our interception of aircraft from Iraq. While theU.S. has brought in the preponderance of air power now in theGulf, in quality and quantity, the British and French havequalitatively excellent air power and can contribute sometechnologically ingenious capabilities that we haveneglected.   The air power assembled in the Gulf appears able to carryout the second measure, to gain air dominance by finding andrendering ineffective essentially all SAMs, even those thathave been moved and are being recalibrated to make themoperational. During testing or operation, radar or radioemissions would reveal their location. Powerful optical andinfrared sensors on board both aircraft and satellites couldlocate them. Stealth aircraft would have a particularadvantage in finding them and destroying them at night. Somenormally accurate missiles would go astray. They would dosome unintended harm. Some aircraft would be lost, butdominance of the air over Kuwait would permit an even moreprecise application of force by the resistance, as well asfrom the air.   The third measure, to reduce reinforcement and supply forIraqi forces as a way of inducing them to leave, might beachieved without Saddam compelling us to spread the harm to agreat many Iraqi and foreign civilians. With the worst willin the world, Saddam would find it hard to keep live hostagesat all the points we might usefully attack and reattack onthe sparse, desert roadnet needed to resupply the huge armyhe has concentrated in southeast Kuwait.   That army is already reported to be troubled by dysentery,cholera and other problems associated with sanitation andfood and water supply. Cutting its supply of fuel wouldreduce its ability to fight a war. Cutting its supply ofwater would make it difficult simply to stay there. We shouldtighten the tourniquet as close as possible to the Iraqiarmed forces and as far away as feasible from theconcentration of population in the Al Kuwait metropolitanarea and the thin settlements along the coast. How to beatSaddam in a contest in which we try to focus effects onmilitary forces in Kuwait, while he tries to make us hurtcivilians, is the right question to pose to the responsiblestaff.   If we're clear enough about the nature of this contest, weshould be able to enforce the reclaiming of Kuwaiti airspace,even if Saddam challenges it -- and do that with air powerfocused discriminately enough on Saddam's military forces tomaintain the coalition's resolve to get Saddam out of thewhole of Kuwait without rewarding his aggression. That wouldaccomplish part of the president's immediate objective. Butthe president intends his immediate objectives to servelarger interests and goals, which now need clarifying if thedomestic consensus is not to fall apart. The current muddleddebate in the media makes visible some of the potentialcracks.   ---   Mr. Wohlstetter is president of Pan Heuristics, a researchgroup in Los Angeles, and a fellow of the Rand GraduateSchool. Mr. Hoffman consults on energy and defense mattersfor Pan Heuristics and other organizations.</TEXT></DOC>