<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910913-0009</DOCNO><DOCID>910913-0009.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Regulators Add Details of Milken's   Alleged Influence on Sandamp;L Officials   ----   By Wade Lambert   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   AMC CSV DLP KMB MXM OXY PG WNEWS</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)ENERGY (ENE)FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ALUMINUM (ALU)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ALL NON-FERROUS METALS (NFR)OIL-SECONDARY (OIS)PETROLEUM (PET)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)MARYLAND (MD)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)OHIO (OH)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   Thrift regulators have provided new details of MichaelMilken's alleged influence on savings-and-loan executives inthe 1980s, painting a broad picture of bribery and swindlingat a dozen financial institutions.   The allegations have been made in recent weeks in amendedlawsuits filed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. infederal courts in Manhattan and Los Angeles. In their suits,thrift regulators accuse Mr. Milken, former head of DrexelBurnham Lambert Inc.'s junk-bond department, of defraudingthe savings-and-loan industry of billions of dollars throughrigged junk-bond transactions.</LP><TEXT>   Several thrift executives -- including Charles H. KeatingJr., chairman of the parent company of Lincoln Savings andamp;Loan, and Thomas Spiegel of Columbia Savings andamp; Loan --already had been linked to the alleged scheme. But theregulators' latest filings add several new names to the listof industry executives allegedly involved and describe howthey allegedly were enticed to take part.   The alleged bribes and special favors range from sharingthe use of a private airplane to cutting executives in onlucrative transactions, the suits say. In return, theregulators claim, the thrift executives and fiduciariescaused their companies to buy large amounts of junk bonds,often at inflated prices and without proper financial review.   Mr. Milken and the other defendants have denied anywrongdoing in the thrifts' junk-bond transactions. They saythe regulators are making Drexel's junk-bond department ascapegoat for the thrift industry's huge losses.   &quot;There isn't a single fact that can withstand discussionin court that will back those charges up,&quot; said a spokesmanfor Mr. Milken. Mr. Milken, who pleaded guilty last year tosix felony counts related to securities transactions, isserving a 10-year prison sentence.   The thrift executives who took part in the alleged scheme,regulators said, came from CenTrust, Commonwealth FederalSavings andamp; Loan Association, Gibraltar Savings Association,Guaranty Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association, San JacintoSavings Association, Security Savings andamp; Loan, Sunbelt SavingsAssocation of Texas, and United Savings Association of Texas,as well as Lincoln and Columbia, which all have since failed.   Not only were thrifts involved, however. The suits alsoname a former official of Fidelity Investments and anOccidental Petroleum Corp. official, who allegedly profitedpersonally by having their companies buy Drexel junk bonds.   Only Mr. Keating, Mr. Spiegel and David Paul, former headof Miami-based Centrust, are named as co-defendants in theregulators' civil suits against Mr. Milken. Neither Mr. Paulnor Mr. Spiegel could be reached for comment. An attorney forMr. Keating declined to comment.   By making accusations against other individuals, whoallegedly played a role but aren't yet named as defendants,thrift regulators appear to be putting pressure on formerjunk-bond customers to cooperate in the case against Mr.Milken.   &quot;One of the things we are signaling to them is that we dohave evidence of their wrongdoing,&quot; said David Boies, apartner at Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore, the New York law firmrepresenting thrift regulators in the cases.   Mr. Boies said most of the new information comes frompeople already cooperating and from documents regulatorsinherited when they took over the failed thrifts.   &quot;Through a series of improper payments, {Mr. Milken andothers in the junk-bond department} got these fiduciaries tobuy overpriced and weak debt securities,&quot; Mr. Boies said.&quot;These institutions suffered very large damages because theypurchased and held these securities, while the fiduciariespersonally benefited.&quot;   The amended suits allege that as a reward for Gibraltar'spurchase of several hundred million dollars of Drexel junkbonds -- and as an inducement to buy more -- Mr. Milken'sgroup allowed Herbert Young, then chief executive officer ofthe Beverly Hills, Calif., thrift, to take part in alucrative transaction in 1985 involving another Drexelclient. The suits said that Mr. Young made a profit of$100,000 on the $200,000 investment in less than a month.   The suits said that salespeople in Mr. Milken's junk-bonddepartment also gave &quot;preferential treatment&quot; to the personalaccounts at Drexel of other Gibraltar executives, includingTreasurer Terry Crow and Investment Manager T. Ole Dial, &quot;toensure that they were profitable.&quot; In return, the suits said,the Milken group sought to influence the executives'decision-making.   Mr. Crow, who left Gibraltar in 1986 before it failed,said he never received any favoritism from Drexel in itshandling of his personal account and that the account didn'taffect Gibraltar business decisions. &quot;I had accounts atDrexel and at other places,&quot; Mr. Crow said. &quot;I probablydidn't make any money on that {Drexel} account.&quot;   Mr. Crow also said, &quot;I certainly know that {Mr. Dial}didn't receive any specialized treatment from Drexel either.&quot;Messrs. Dial and Young couldn't be reached for comment.   The suits also said that Mr. Milken's group assisted Mr.Keating, former chairman of American Continental Corp., whichowned Lincoln Savings andamp; Loan, in several ventures in returnfor Lincoln's participation in the alleged junk-bondmanipulation. The suits said Mr. Milken helped Mr. Keating,who is on trial in state court in Los Angeles, promote theEstrella development, which was described as &quot;a speculativedesert real estate development which has since gonebankrupt.&quot;   The suit said Mr. Keating and executives at other thriftsalso were allowed to buy equity interests in companies makingacquisitions using junk bonds. In return, the executives'companies bought junk bonds, the suit said. While the thriftswere out money for the junk-bond investments, the individualsbenefited from the equity investments, the suit said.   Similarly, the suit said Mr. Milken's group rewardedHouston investor Charles Hurwitz, chairman of Maxxam Inc., byraising about $1.8 billion for his takeover schemes; inreturn, Mr. Hurwitz allegedly caused a thrift he owned,United Savings Association of Texas, to buy about $1.4billion in junk bonds underwriten by Drexel. Mr. Hurwitzhasn't been charged with any wrongdoing.   A spokesman for Maxxam said, &quot;The assertions are blatantlyfalse and irresponsible.&quot;   Some of the alleged favors came in the form of stock tips,the suits said. The suits alleged that to encourage Edwin T.McBirney, former president of Sunbelt Savings of Dallas, toallow his thrift to be used in the scheme, Mr. Milken's group&quot;tipped McBirney to purchase U.S. Home warrants.&quot; The suitsaid Mr. McBirney bought the securities and later sold themfor a profit. Mr. McBirney couldn't be reached for comment.   In exchange for the participation of Security Savings,Scottsdale, Ariz., in the junk bond scheme, the Milken groupcaused Drexel to buy 600,000 shares in the thrift's closelyheld holding company, the suits said. They said the stock wasbought directly from some of the holding company's directors,including Chairman Tom R. Van Sickle and general counselWilliam Foley.   Neither Mr. Foley nor Mr. Van Sickle could be reached forcomment.   The suits allege that executives of non-thrift Drexelclients also were given special treatment in return for theircompanies' junk-bond purchases. They add new names to thelist of individuals who allegedly benefited from theso-called MacPherson limited partnership operated by Mr.Milken. As previously reported, Mr. Milken is alleged to havesecretly used the partnership to enable executives andmoney-managers at Drexel's clients to personally profit fromthe leveraged buy-out of Storer Communications Inc.   As previously reported, Mr. Spiegel of Columbia allegedlymade a profit of $7 million on his $132,000 MacPhersoninvestment. The suit said that others who benefited fromStorer investments through MacPherson include PatriciaOstrander, formerly a junk-bond manager for FidelityInvestments, and Ray Irani, currently chairman of OccidentalPetroleum.   In a statement, Dr. Irani said, &quot;That was my own personalportfolio, and it had absolutely nothing to do withOccidental.&quot;   Ms. Ostrander couldn't be reached for comment. LaurenceDwyer, a spokesman for Fidelity, said Ms. Ostrander left thecompany in 1987, and that Fidelity at the time was unaware ofher alleged MacPherson trading, which would have been aviolation of company policy. Mr. Dwyer said Fidelity hasfiled a civil suit against Ms. Ostrander in state court inMassachusetts seeking to recoup any profits she allegedlymade through the MacPherson partnership. The Fidelity suitseeks to have any profits she made turned over to the fundsthat she managed.   ---   JUDGE RESOLVES diaper-flap flap.   A U.S. district court judge in Seattle ruled thatKimberly-Clark Corp. invented cuffs that control leaks indisposable diapers. But the judge said the so-calledcontainment flaps on rival Procter andamp; Gamble Co.'s diapersdon't violate Kimberly-Clark patents. He ruled that Pandamp;G won'thave to pay Kimberly-Clark damages.   Judge William Dwyer, ruling on a 1989 suit, said thepatented flaps inside the leg openings of Pandamp;G's Pampers brandare different and don't infringe on Kimberly-Clark's patentfor its Huggies brand.   The suit is one round in the ongoing battle between thetwo diaper kingpins, which control more than 80% of the $4.3billion U.S. disposable diaper market. Several other suitsare pending in various courts, including antitrust suitsfiled by Kimberly-Clark accusing Pandamp;G of trying to monopolizethe diaper market.   Pandamp;G, which makes Pampers and Luvs, has nearly 50% of thedisposable diaper market. Huggies is the leading brand withabout 33% of the market.   Still pending is a dispute before the U.S. Patent Officein which Kimberly-Clark is asking for a determination thatits patent should prevail over the one issued to Pandamp;G and thatit has exclusive patent rights to the flaps. &quot;We feel JudgeDwyer's ruling supports our argument that we have exclusiverights to all forms of the containment flaps,&quot; said TinaBarry, a Kimberly-Clark vice president.   In Cincinnati, a Pandamp;G spokeswoman said &quot;we'll have to waitand see what happens when the issue comes before patentofficials.&quot;   ---   NOTED: Banking-law specialist Ronald R. Glancz has becomea partner in the Washington office of Venable, Baetjer,Howard andamp; Civiletti, a 300-lawyer firm based in Baltimore. Mr.Glancz will lead the law firm's bank-regulatory practice. Hehad been a partner in the Washington office of Drinker,Biddle andamp; Reath, a Philadelphia firm, and previously worked asassistant general counsel at the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorp. and as litigation director for the Comptroller of theCurrency. . . . Former FDIC assistant general counsel HowardL. Feinstein has become counsel in the Washington office ofThacher Proffitt andamp; Wood, a 120-lawyer firm based in New York.Mr. Feinstein headed the FDIC's conflicts and resolutionsunit, which was formed almost two years ago to assist inbank- and thrift-fraud prosecutions and to resolve competingclaims between failed thrifts and banks.</TEXT></DOC>