<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910930-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>910930-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Wary Lenders:   Credit Crunch Appears   Likely to Linger On   For Years, Some Say   ---   Despite Bush's Moves to Spur   Loans, Many Banks Cling   To Cautious New Policies   ---   Profitable Firm Gets Rejected   ----   By Kenneth H. Bacon and David Wessel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)</IN><GV>COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Like many executives today, Roger Nolancomplains that he can't get bank loans to finance hisbusiness. But unlike most disappointed executives, he hasseen his grievance go all the way to the White House.   When President Bush called his top economic advisers tothe White House on Friday to discuss how to attack the creditcrunch, Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher told of theplight faced by Mr. Nolan's Aquidneck Management AssociatesLtd. The small Newport, R.I., defense-consulting firm can'tfind a bank to renew a $1 million line of credit even thoughit is profitable and repaying its debts on time. Bankers,facing tough regulatory scrutiny of their credit standards,are skittish about lending to a firm with a $2.6 millionmortgage on a building that would bring only $2.4 million ifsold at today's depressed prices for New England real estate.</LP><TEXT>   This was just one of the tales about harsh regulators andstingy bankers that Mr. Bush heard at the meeting. Thesession, which lasted more than an hour, began with thepresident voicing his frustration at continuing to hear aboutbusinesses unable to get loans.   Later, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan,making an unusual appearance at the Cabinet's Economic PolicyCouncil, told the president that the credit crunch isn'tgetting worse but also isn't getting better, and so isrestraining the economic recovery. That worries Mr. Bush andother Republicans facing re-election next year.   Mr. Bush and his advisers discussed several possible newapproaches to the problem -- tinkering with the details ofnew capital requirements for banks, rewriting real-estatevaluation rules to give more weight to future growthprospects and sending teams of regulators across the countryto work out specific problems with bankers and borrowers. Butthose are all small-change proposals, and the only concreteconclusion the participants reached was that they should meetagain.   &quot;The president made it very clear that he's serious aboutfinding a solution to the problem,&quot; says an official who wasat the meeting. &quot;He said he thinks that the regulators arethe problem.&quot;   Yet, for all their private bashing of regulators, WhiteHouse and Fed officials are hesitant to take the campaignpublic; they fear it could backfire. They think that bankexaminers, after moving too slowly to curb exuberantreal-estate lending in the 1980s, are now erring on the sideof caution because the consequences of erring on the otherside -- and being blamed for a big bank failure -- are solarge.   &quot;Everyone is trying to cover their own derriere,&quot; Mr.Mosbacher said about regulators and bankers after themeeting.   For the administration, the credit crunch is becoming thedomestic equivalent of Saddam Hussein -- an enemy that won'tgo away.   Nine months ago, Mr. Bush told Treasury Secretary NicholasBrady to find ways to get banks lending. Since then, theFederal Reserve has slashed interest rates, the president hasimplored bankers to make &quot;more sound loans,&quot; and regulatorshave issued several directives to bankers and examinersencouraging the prudent extension of credit to troubledborrowers, particularly in commercial real estate, where theproblems are greatest.   But little has come of these efforts. &quot;The problem hasn'tbeen resolved,&quot; admits Deputy Treasury Secretary John Robson,who meets regularly with bank regulators to explore newinitiatives.   Many bankers say the banks and their regulators are simplyreacting to the lousy economy.   &quot;We have lots and lots of money to lend for good loans.We're just not seeing them,&quot; says Louis Betanzos, chieffinancial officer at NBD Bancorp. in Detroit. He says herarely comes across creditworthy borrowers who have beenturned down by other banks. One reason: In recessions, loandemand declines, and many companies that need money are poorrisks.   But other bankers say the credit crunch is far more than asimple reaction to the recession or to more rigid regulation.The excesses of the 1980s triggered a return to cautiouslending practices that are likely to endure for years, theysay, making the credit squeeze a lingering problem.   This view also offers little hope for the administration,because it holds that bankers have moved far beyondregulators in their caution. Several years ago, bankers mayhave started turning cautious in response to regulatorypressure to build reserves against loan losses, raise morecapital and boost lending standards. But bankers &quot;soonoutdistanced the regulators by returning to more prudentiallending standards,&quot; says Paul Homan, chairman of FirstFlorida Banks Inc. in Tampa.   &quot;Banking conditions are now worse than they have beensince the Depression,&quot; he says. &quot;I don't think the survivingbanker is going to revisit some of the loose standards thatthey tolerated in the past.&quot; The days are gone whenaggressive bankers competing to make loans drove down creditstandards and the cost of borrowing. &quot;I think that a riskpremium will again be paid in the banking industry,&quot; Mr.Homan says. &quot;That will drive up the cost of borrowing to thegood customers, as well as to the poor ones.&quot;   Many banks have tightened their lending requirements, andthe tougher standards are likely to persist even as theeconomy recovers. &quot;We've really changed our loan procedures,&quot;says Frederick Schultz, chairman of the audit committee atBarnett Banks Inc. in Jacksonville, Fla. &quot;We've centralized.We have a chief credit officer at the holding-company level.We've set up all these committees to look at credit quality.There's no question that it's a lot more difficult to get abank loan than it used to be.&quot; He adds: &quot;I think these thingsare permanent.&quot;   Lyle Gramley, chief economist of the Mortgage BankersAssociation and, like Mr. Schultz, a former member of theFederal Reserve Board, agrees: &quot;What's happening is a majorturning back of the clock to the standards of conservatismand prudence of a generation ago. Once you turn that clockback, you would expect to operate on 1965 time for a while.&quot;   That's not all bad. Over the long run, Mr. Gramley says,the change will produce a financial system that is stronger,more resilient and better able to sustain economic growth.   But the transitional costs are high, especially in areassuch as the Southwest, New England, Washington, D.C., andCalifornia, where banks enthusiastically financed too muchcommercial real estate and are suffering from pricecollapses. &quot;We have two to five years too much commercialreal estate,&quot; Treasury Secretary Brady says. &quot;We have to finda way to work this through the system. We have to extend theability of financial institutions to hold on to the realestate. In the meantime, the job is not to immolateourselves.&quot;   But the administration hasn't found it can do much to helpwith that job. That's a shift from the early 1980s, when theFederal Reserve and the Comptroller of the Currency helpedbanks skate over the thin ice of the Third World debt crisisby allowing them to stretch out bad loans and gradually buildreserves.   Now, the politics of financial regulation have changed.The collapse of the savings and loan industry gaveforbearance a bad name. With the taxpayers shelling out atleast $200 billion, before interest costs, to protectdepositors in failed Sandamp;Ls, and the Treasury about to lend asmuch as $70 billion to the shrinking bank deposit insurancefund, Congress wants to make sure that regulators err on theside of strictness in policing bank safety. And regulatorsare determined to show that they're vigilant.   Mr. Brady says that &quot;the witch-hunting character ofcongressional investigations&quot; into bank failures makes itdifficult for bank examiners to show much flexibility. Inrecent weeks, congressional inquiries have highlightedregulatory mistakes preceding the collapse of the Bank of NewEngland and the failure of many small national bankssupervised by the Comptroller of the Currency. Otherallegations of regulatory laxity will surface as the SenateBanking Committee grills Robert L. Clarke in its hearings onwhether to approve his nomination for a second five-year termas comptroller.   &quot;I strongly believe this isn't a classic recession whereyou just lower rates and everybody jumps up and down,&quot; saysFinn Caspersen, chairman of Beneficial Corp., theconsumer-finance company based in Wilmington, Del. Because ofthe regulatory climate, bankers aren't making enough loans,he says. &quot;When Congress tells the comptroller, `It's yourfault you let some banks get into trouble,' that's tellingevery examiner in the country, every bank in the country,`Don't take any risks.'&quot;   That message runs exactly counter to the one theadministration has been trying to send to bank examiners: Thejob of bankers is to take risks, albeit prudently. In March,the comptroller, the Fed, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.and the Office of Thrift Supervision issued a joint releaseencouraging banks to work out problem loans rather than tocall them and foreclose on real estate or other collateral.The directive also tried to ease pressure on banks to setaside large reserves on real-estate loans collaterized byproperty that had declined sharply in value.   Sometime in the next few months, regulators hope to expandon this guidance by issuing a new directive that couldliberalize current interpretations of real-estate valuationand loan-loss reserve rules. The message to examiners willbe, &quot;Don't let the analysis of the loan be overly dependenton a distorted price&quot; for the collateral based only ontoday's fire-sale prices for real estate, says Susan Krause,Senior Deputy Comptroller of the Currency for banksupervision policy.   Such a change would help Mr. Nolan and Aquidneck, amongothers. Even though the company that drew President Bush'ssympathy is current on the mortgage payments for its officebuilding, the loan has been declared nonperforming becausethe current value of the building has fallen below thebalance of the mortgage. &quot;It's hard when you pay yourmortgage every month and stay current with your line ofcredit, and you're put in this category,`performing-nonperforming'&quot; because the value of yourcollateral has fallen, Mr. Nolan says.   During the summer, regulators also issued directivestelling banks that they wouldn't necessarily be criticizedfor rolling over real-estate construction loans coming due.Some $400 billion of these loans are outstanding, and nearlyhalf are coming due in the next two years, according to theNational Realty Committee, a trade group.   Borrowers expected to refinance these five-to-seven-yearloans and make the final large payments with long-term loansfrom insurance companies and other nonbank lenders. But suchrefinancing isn't widely available now. Thus banks face anasty choice: continue the loan or foreclose in a marketalready glutted with unsold properties. If they continue theloan, they still must set aside adequate reserves againstweak credits, a move that can hurt earnings. But now theywon't automatically draw regulatory fire for doing so.   Over the next few weeks, the regulators are likely toannounce steps to encourage banks to bring their problems tothe attention of top regulatory officials. One plan underconsideration is a new &quot;non-retribution&quot; appeals process thatwould allow banks to go over the heads of their examiners.The Comptroller of the Currency's office is trying to workout the details.   In addition, William Taylor, a Fed official about tobecome FDIC chairman, wants to send top regulators out tomeet with bankers. &quot;I think probably the next step has to beto go out in volume to the bankers and find out exactly whatis going on,&quot; he said at his confirmation hearing.   ---   Fred R. Bleakley in New York and Peter Truell inWashington contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>