<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900829-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>900829-0081.</DOCID><HL>   Credibility Gap:   UAW and Big Three   Face Mutual Mistrust   As Auto Talks Heat Up   ---   Despite the Major Threats   Of Recession and Imports,   Suspicions Carry the Day   ---   Why GM Is the Strike Target   ----   By Gregory A. Patterson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/29/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GM LABOR C F</CO><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)</IN><LP>   FLINT, Mich. -- In a gesture of trust toward 500 unionizedworkers at a gritty factory that stamps out truck body panelshere, General Motors Corp. three years ago told them thatthey didn't have to punch a time clock when they left work.   GM managers allowed workers to leave once they finishedbanging out the day's quota of parts. The move sparked astartling jump in productivity: Employees, many on the jobfor more than 20 years, suddenly found ways to do a fullday's work before lunch.</LP><TEXT>   But management, dismayed at paying a full day's wage for ahalf day's work, unilaterally increased the quotas to thepoint that workers have to put in eight hours even at thehigher production levels they had achieved when they had theincentive to finish early. The workers feel they have beentricked into a speedup, and the United Auto Workers union isthreatening a local strike over the issue. A programpromising mutual benefit ended in mutual mistrust, an emotionall too often present in auto-industry labor relations.   The mistrust that sabotaged the Flint plant's modesteffort at cooperation illustrates the biggest obstacle UAWleaders and Big Three executives must overcome as they headinto the final phase of their negotiations for a new nationalcontract. The UAW yesterday named GM as the target companyfor negotiating a pattern-setting agreement to replace thethree-year pact expiring Sept. 14. The UAW said it chose GMover Ford Motor Co. partly because Ford would have been ableto grant a job-security guarantee that GM would behard-pressed to match. More than anything else, the unionwants the contract to be uniform across the industry. Fordhasn't closed any plants in the past three years, while GMhas closed four.   Union leaders say the key to the negotiations is for thecompanies to treat workers as partners, and guarantee theirjobs. Company officials want more freedom to move workersfrom job to job, and a more cooperative, flexiblerelationship with the union. Both must overcome suspicion ofthe other to achieve their goals.   &quot;The problem can be summed up in one word: credibility,&quot;says Harley Shaiken, a labor expert at the University ofCalifornia at San Diego. &quot;The union doesn't believe that GMwill provide job security, and GM doesn't believe the unionwill provide the flexibility it needs.&quot;   But the UAW and the Big Three -- GM, Ford and ChryslerCorp. -- need each other now in a way they haven't since1982. Then, the unifying threats facing the auto industrywere a severe recession and imports of Japanese compact cars.Now, another recession is near, and Japanese auto makers areforging into almost every segment of the U.S. car market.   Japanese companies now account for almost 30% of all U.S.car sales, up from 25% in 1987, when the previous contractwas negotiated. The Big Three's share of the U.S. car marketfell to 65% from 70% in that period. Japanese firms haveopened five assembly plants in the U.S. since 1987, and nowoperate more car plants here than Ford. Productivity ishigher in those plants. GM requires 30.3 man-hours to build acar, six more than required by Japanese plants in the U.S.,according to industry consultant James Harbour.   The UAW, for its part, also has been thwarted by theJapanese companies, whose plants in the U.S. represent amajor potential source of growth for the union. Last year, itsuffered a humiliating defeat when workers at a Nissan MotorCorp. plant in Smyrna, Tenn., rejected UAW representation bya margin of more than 2-1. The Big Three now employs 440,000UAW members, down from 510,000 in 1987; nonunion workers atJapanese plants in the U.S. nearly doubled to 13,000 in theperiod.   Just a few years ago, Big Three executives and UAW leadersalike were clamoring for the Japanese to build more plants inthe U.S., so all the companies would compete on a &quot;levelplaying field.&quot;   To an outsider, all this would seem to call for a radicalre-invention of industry-labor relations. But don't bet onit. Most industry officials expect the national talks toproduce nothing more than evolutionary change. The union willget a more comfortable safety net for displaced workers, andthe companies will get a little more flexibility. TheJapanese will keep their huge advantages in costs andefficiency.   To be sure, the UAW and the Big Three have come a long wayfrom their constant confrontations of the 1970s. In 1987, infact, the UAW continued to negotiate with Ford after thecontract had expired, and a new pact was reached without astrike. The unprecedented step was possible largely becauseFord really has delivered job security in recent years, inexchange for more moderate wage demands by workers.Nonetheless, far too often the Big Three and the UAW stillcross swords instead of joining hands.   Examples abound. When Chrysler and the union openedbargaining in July, UAW officials cursorily dismissed aproposal that would have paid employees some of the moneythey save by improving attendance or quality. The UAW, inaddition to its automatic preference for uniform contractsthroughout the industry, mistrusts Chrysler. The uniongranted the company big givebacks when Chrysler was introuble in the early '80s, and the UAW feels the companynever returned the favor after the concessions helped it backto health.   At GM, the union recently drew a line in the sand at aFlint plant that makes gasoline tanks. GM, despite a pledgenot to close plants, had announced plans to close a portionof the factory that makes radiator brackets and lay off about600 workers. The UAW earlier this month sanctioned a six-daystrike that had a ripple effect, forcing the auto maker totemporarily close part or all of six assembly plants and 10parts factories. Before that, the union had been satisfied toseek arbitration over what it considered infractions of thecompany's no-closings pledge.   The union struck to press the job-security worries ofmembers like Harold Allen, 36 years old, who is currentlylaid off from the Flint plant the union struck. In the 17years since Mr. Allen first went to work for GM, he has spentabout as much time on layoff as he has on the job.   Mr. Allen has been helped, however, by the big, expensivesafety net the union negotiated with the company during the1980s. GM is paying him full wages and benefits to takecollege classes. But the future is uncertain for him, hiswife and his four children. &quot;I'd like to get out of thisprogram and back to work,&quot; he says.   GM settled the Flint strike by delaying plans to close theradiator-bracket operation and promising to bring enoughbusiness back into the facility to keep the workers busy forthe next five years. By that time, presumably, many olderworkers will have retired with full pension benefits, makingroom for Mr. Allen and others to be recalled to work. GM hadnever before offered such terms. But the pattern of strikefollowed by compromise is how the industry has long operated.   The pattern endures because each side has good reason tobe wary of the other. Three years ago, GM included aplant-closing moratorium in its contract with the UAW. But bycalling closedowns &quot;indefinite idlings&quot; instead of&quot;closings,&quot; GM has closed four car plants and has laid plansto close three truck plants by 1992. In all, GM haseliminated one in 10 of its UAW jobs since 1987.   This year, GM compounded the UAW's outrage by paying topexecutives bonuses for 1989 averaging $44,800 a person, andat the same time telling workers that slim profits wouldlimit their UAW-negotiated profit-sharing to just $50 apiece.In the spring, GM nearly doubled the pensions of topexecutives. News of the plan hit just as top UAW officialswere trying to convince restive troops that it would be toocostly to demand cost-of-living-adjustments to workerpensions. Union leaders fumed, but the new executive pensionplan went through. Recently retired Chairman Roger B. Smithwill draw an annual pension of $1.1 million.   The UAW's relations with Chrysler aren't much better. Theunion is smarting over the No. 3 auto maker's decision toclose an aging plant in Detroit earlier this year, and itsplans to close another factory in St. Louis next month.   Ford's labor relations are in better shape, largelybecause Ford made big cuts in its work force during the early1980s and, with the help of several well-executed products,has been able to run its plants close to capacity for thepast few years. It has thus avoided permanent layoffs inrecent years. Ford has also kept its work force lean by usingovertime instead of increased hiring to meet heavy demand.   While the union has legitimate grievances, the companieshave valid gripes of their own. Absenteeism at many Big Threeplants runs as high as 15% a day, and can force factories toclose for several days during Michigan's deer-hunting season.Generous health-care benefits negotiated in the days when theBig Three were a virtual oligopoly now add $600 or more tothe cost of each Big Three vehicle.   The companies and the union have established elaborateso-called jointness programs designed to improveproductivity, quality and relations between company andunion, but those have become a costly bureaucracy. At GMalone, more than 17,000 people work in various &quot;jointness&quot;activities. In all, the companies spent more than $200million last year on the programs, which include payinglaid-off workers to find more efficient ways to assembleautos. Despite all this, union-company relations are stillgoverned by a 500-page contract that has a list of amendmentslonger than the document itself.   What's most striking, perhaps, is that commitment tocooperation varies widely from plant to plant, and itschances of success are hurt by longstanding labor-managementacrimony. At GM's big luxury-car assembly plant in LakeOrion, Mich., for example, more than 120 people work in jointlabor-management programs. But Lake Orion has one of theworst labor relations records in the company.   Worker opposition forced the plant management to scrap aneffort to get employees to operate in teams to improveefficiency and quality. Earlier this year, several Lake Orionworkers touched off an unsanctioned strike in a dispute overthe safety of a machine that mates car bodies to theirengines. The walkout lasted just a few hours, but sparked abitter dispute between the union and GM after the auto makerfired four workers involved in the incident. They werereinstated by an arbitrator last week.   Just across the street from the Lake Orion assembly plant,however, GM has a small plant that makes car seats. Here,with relatively little fanfare, managers and the 216 UAWmembers have worked together to cut by more than 80% thenumber of flaws in the seats they make for the Oldsmobilesand Cadillacs assembled across the street. GM got help fromHarold Masters, a 47-year-old forklift driver, who suggestedand helped win acceptance for a plan to improve the plant'ssystem for ordering seat cushions.   While Mr. Masters's suggestion may be an example of thekind of union cooperation GM needs, his job is of the sortthat illustrates the kind of productivity problems thecompany doesn't need. For hauling crates of cushions andboxes of covers from the receiving docks to the line thatassembles the seats, Mr. Masters earned $59,000 last year,albeit by working a lot of overtime and by skippingvacations. He expects to earn just as much this year.   Even Mr. Masters doesn't believe his job is worth thatmuch. &quot;It's stupid. I think it's really ridiculous,&quot; he saysfrom the seat of his dingy yellow forklift. But as long asthe UAW can get that kind of money from GM, Mr. Masters says,&quot;I'll take it.&quot;   The Big Three's rivals have only a few jobs like Mr.Masters's. At those companies, the work would more likely beperformed by a worker at an independent subcontractor earningperhaps $10 an hour less than a UAW member. That's becausethe Japanese companies in the U.S., while paying virtuallyidentical wages for assembly workers, use independent partscompanies much more than the Big Three. Union resistance tosuch &quot;outsourcing&quot; is the reason.   For example, a worker at Johnson Controls Inc., thebiggest independent U.S. maker of car seats, earns half ofwhat Mr. Masters does for the same job. Not surprisingly,Johnson Controls is snapping up most of the seat-makingbusiness at the U.S. assembly plants of Nissan, Honda MotorCo. and Toyota Motor Corp. And Johnson Controls' lower-costseats are helping those Japanese companies build lower-costcars than the Big Three.   Thus, the Big Three and the UAW face hard choices. &quot;Theyultimately have to build higher-quality products at lowercosts,&quot; says Douglas K. Laughlin, an analyst with BearStearns andamp; Co. &quot;If they don't, it's a slow, painful death.&quot;   Union members say they'll fight any assault on theirstandard of living. But many are like Ernie Emery, presidentof the union local that represents the Lake Orion assemblyplant. His advice to his son speaks volumes about what hereally believes about the future of the U.S. auto industry.When his son showed interest in mathematics as a high-schoolstudent, Mr. Emery told him to become an accountant, not anauto engineer. And the young man followed his father'sadvice.   &quot;I'm very happy,&quot; says Mr. Emery, &quot;that he foundemployment outside the auto industry.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>