<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910313-0083</DOCNO><DOCID>910313-0083.</DOCID><HL>   Sudafed's the Last Thing to Be Afraid Of   ----   By Paul H. Rubin</HL><DATE>03/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   U.WCM</CO><IN>DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)COSMETICS, PERSONAL CARE, OVER-THE-COUNTER REMEDIES (COS)CONTAINERS andamp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)</IN><LP>   Two people have died after taking poisoned Sudafed. Thesemurders, apparently due to a random act of wanton violence,are tragic but not unique. In the past decade, there havebeen at least six previous episodes of poisoning ofover-the-counter drugs, involving perhaps 10 deaths. Thefirst and in many ways most significant incident was the 1982Tylenol poisoning, which involved seven deaths. Theseincidents can provide several lessons:   -- As a society, we have trouble adapting to small risks.The number of deaths involved has been very small by anymeasure. There are more than two million deaths a year fromall causes in the U.S. There are about 5,000 deaths a yearfrom accidental poisoning, and more than 20,000 deaths fromhomicide. If there continues to be one death per year fromtampering, risk to a typical consumer is on the order of onein 30 million. This is 30 times smaller than the smallestrisk that the Environmental Protection Agency, not aconservative body, will address. In the grand scheme ofthings, deaths from product tampering are a minute problem,whether relative to all deaths or to homicides.</LP><TEXT>   Nonetheless, consumers have reacted strongly to thesepoisonings. By some measures, Tylenol has never fullyrecovered from the loss in brand value from two poisoningincidents. (The second was in 1986.) The price premiumTylenol could command before the tamperings has been reduced,and the company has spent a lot on promotion and advertisingto regain market share. Mark Mitchell of the University ofChicago has estimated that the loss in brand value has beenabout $1 billion. This is a measure of the reduced valueplaced by consumers on the product, over and above the directcost of the recall, estimated at more than $100 million.   Before mass communications, a person probably would learnof a hazard only if it harmed someone in the community. Suchrisks were likely to be sufficiently probable to be worthworrying about. Today, however, our intuitions about risk arenot a good guide to action. We can learn of risks with minuteprobabilities. Indeed, the more unusual the death, the morenewsworthy it becomes, and we may be more likely to learnabout such risks than about more common and more significantrisks, such as death from automobile accidents. The Alarepisode teaches that we may even learn about nonexistentrisks.   Because of the publicity given trivial risks, peopleincorrectly perceive that the world is becoming riskier. Inreality, it is becoming ever more safe, and life expectanciesare continuously rising. Life expectancy at birth in the U.S.was 59.7 years in 1930; by 1987 it had risen to 75 years.Moreover, death rates from accidents of all sorts are fallingin the U.S.   -- Businesses must respond to consumer perceptions, evenif these perceptions are not objectively justified. After thefirst Tylenol poisonings, makers of over-the-countermedications began using tamper-resistant wrappers. Based onindustry information, I estimate that such packaging costsroughly $50 million to $75 million a year for materials, andthe costs of capital equipment and added assembly-lineprocessing are also large.   Since the 1986 episode, Tylenol has not been available incapsule form. This costs the company, in lost sales, andconsumers, in lost convenience. Ralph Nader and others whoclaim that businesses are indifferent to consumer risk haveit exactly backward. Businesses are exceedingly sensitive toconsumer perceptions of risk, even when these perceptions arebiased.   -- As in many other areas, the tort system serves only tocreate additional injury, not to provide real benefits. Therewere at least four claims of $5 million each filed in theTylenol matter, and at least one claim has already been filedagainst Sudafed. There is no negligence and no blame ineither case, and nothing the manufacturers could reasonablyhave done to prevent the incidents. The only effect of suchlitigation is to raise the price paid by consumers forover-the-counter medication.   -- Some harms may have no cure. Unfortunately, there maybe nothing feasible to do about product poisonings. After theTylenol poisonings, many firms began using tamper-resistantpackaging, perhaps a rational response given the consumerfears generated by the poisonings. No package, however, isentirely tamperproof.   We see this clearly with the Sudafed murders. Like allover-the-counter medications, Sudafed was sold intamper-resistant packaging -- but tampering nonethelessoccurred. A walk through a grocery store or a drug store willquickly indicate that there are innumerable places wheresomeone could insert poison. (Remember the poisoned Chileangrapes?) A determined killer can always find something topoison.   In the case of over-the-counter drugs, tens of millions ofdollars a year are already being spent on a hazard thatexperience tells us may involve one death a year. Regulatoryagencies, such as the Consumer Product Safety Commission,commonly estimate that it pays to spend about $1 million to$2 million to save a life; upper-bound estimates are about $9million. The tens of millions we are spending on packagingcould save more lives if spent more efficiently -- and,anyway, do not seem to be effective in saving even one life.   Some authorities suggest that consumers examine packagesmore carefully to determine if tampering has occurred.However, the risk is so small that this would not be a usefulway to spend time. Time spent in other actions, such asbuckling seat belts, would save more lives than time spentexamining drugs.   -- Government reactions are often counterproductive. Afterthe first Tylenol incident, the Food and Drug Administrationbegan to require tamper-resistant packaging forover-the-counter medications. As we've seen, this hasn't beeneffective (though, of course, it's impossible to tell if it'sdeterred less-determined poisoners). While firms may decideto introduce such packaging themselves, there is no reason tomandate it by law. Now, as a result of the Sudafed incident,there have been calls for the FDA to ban capsules for allover-the-counter medications. David Kessler, the new FDAcommissioner, has instituted a task force to examine thisissue. There are benefits to capsules, such as ease ofswallowing, and it would be misguided to ban them.   The only appropriate government response to such incidentsas the Sudafed poisonings may be increased resources devotedto policing and detection of the perpetrator, and increasedpunishment if he or she is caught. The threat of execution ismore likely to be effective at eliminating future poisoningsthan are increased requirements for packaging or other costsimposed on manufacturers. (Washington state, where theSudafed poisonings occurred, has not executed anyone sincethe 1960s, even though a woman was convicted in 1986 ofpoisoning her husband and another party by tampering withExcedrin capsules.)   Most of us do not routinely wear bulletproof vests, eventhough the chance of being shot by a mugger or being a victimof a random bullet in a drug war is vastly greater than thechance of buying a poisoned capsule. Public authorities and aresponsible press should indicate the order of magnitude ofrisks, and allow people to take whatever precautions areappropriate. Unfortunately, sometimes there aren't any.   ---   Mr. Rubin, formerly chief economist at the ConsumerProduct Safety Commission, is a consultant in Washington andwill soon be a professor at Emory University.</TEXT></DOC>