<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900711-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>900711-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Lockerbie Legacy:   Airlines Try to Improve   Their Security Abroad   But Often Are Stymied   ---   FAA Rules Clash With Those   Of Host Nations, Leaving   The Carriers in the Middle   ---   The Dutch Limit X-Raying   ----   By William M. Carley   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   TWA PN AMR EUROP MDEST LABOR</CO><IN>AIRLINES (AIR)</IN><GV>TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   When U.S. Federal Aviation Administration inspectorschecked security at the Brussels airport last year, thesecurity agents hired by Trans World Airlines flunked.   And there's nothing TWA can do about it.</LP><TEXT>   The Belgian government insists that TWA use a localairport-security company, Belgavia Security Systems N.V.   &quot;We have absolutely no control over Belgavia,&quot; saysCharles Adams, a TWA senior vice president. &quot;I mean, we cango out there and stand there and tell them what to do, andthey don't pay any attention to us.&quot;   Mr. Adams complained about the problem before apresidential commission in April. Three months later, withthousands of Americans beginning the annual summer pilgrimageto Europe, Belgavia -- which insists the problems are solved-- continues to X-ray checked bags and screen carry-on itemsfor TWA in Brussels. Pan American World Airways and AmericanAirlines are in the same fix.   That's just one example of the problems that U.S. airlineshave faced as they have mounted a huge effort to improvesecurity after a bomb in a checked bag downed Pan Am Flight103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988. The securitydrive is focused on flights to and from Europe and the MiddleEast.   The carriers have been trying to install better equipmentto detect bombs, hire better screeners and give them moretraining, and develop more sophisticated techniques forspotting someone who might, knowingly or unknowingly, becarrying a bomb in a bag. The FAA also has taken a series ofsteps, including trying to post more of its own securityofficials overseas to help the airlines improve theirdefenses.   But despite some progress, many of these efforts have runinto all sorts of obstacles. A new device called TNA that issupposed to detect plastic explosives isn't working very wellin tests. In some cases foreign governments have put uproadblocks because of parochial concerns, in the name ofsovereignty, or because of honest differences over securitytechniques. And some of the FAA's efforts have been stymied,in part, by disputes with the State Department.   There has been &quot;continuing improvement in security, butmuch remains to be done,&quot; says Ann McLaughlin, chairman ofthe President's Commission on Aviation Security andTerrorism, which held the April hearings on airline safety.   Security experts believe that one sign of progress is arapid shift away from the shotgun approach of simplyscreening everybody boarding the plane. They say anadditional move, carefully screening a small number ofpassengers, increases effectiveness.   A number of U.S. carriers are adopting elements of asystem developed by International Consultants on TargetedSecurity, a firm started by former security officials of ElAl, the Israeli carrier. First adopted by American Airlines,the system is considered one of the best in the industry. Byusing profiles of potential terrorists, it seeks to focus onthe few passengers who may pose a threat.   Before each international flight, American's computersscan the passenger manifest, checking six items, such aspassport data and itinerary, to pinpoint certain passengers.When passengers arrive at the terminal, American screenersagain narrow the list, this time also using behavioralcharacteristics.   Passengers fingered by the list are given intensivescrutiny by screeners trained much better than those handlingU.S. domestic flights. For example, &quot;we train ourinternational screeners very carefully on how to search abag,&quot; says Homer Boynton, managing director of security atAmerican.   Pan Am has adopted a version of the plan too. A TWAsubsidiary has developed its own version, and is using it tohandle security in Europe for TWA and, under contract, insome European cities for UAL's United Airlines and for DeltaAir Lines.   Another sign of progress is the rapid deployment of thelatest and most effective generation of X-ray machines, whosescreens are color-coded. Though these units won'tspecifically detect explosives, as TNA machines are supposedto do, the color X-ray devices will portray any organicmaterial as bright orange. Plastic explosives are organic, soan orange-colored item on the screen tells the scanner totake a closer look. Astrophysics Research, an EGandamp;G Inc.subsidiary that makes the color-coded X-ray machines, sayssales are climbing rapidly.   For every step forward, however, there seem to be stepsbackward. TWA's Mr. Adams told the presidential commissionthat as security becomes a bigger business, governments andairports abroad are setting up their own organizations tocreate jobs and revenue -- and requiring the airlines to usethem. &quot;That security is not adequate for our needs,&quot; he says.&quot;It doesn't measure up to our standards.&quot;   According to Mr. Adams, an FAA official visited Brusselsairport last year to check Belgavia's performance, &quot;and theydidn't pass.&quot; After screeners asked an FAA agent questionssuch as &quot;Did you pack your own bag?&quot; and the answer indicatedthat the passenger's bags should be X-rayed, Belgavia failedto do that. The FAA could have fined TWA had the airline beenresponsible, but it has no jurisdiction over Belgavia.   Marc Pissens, general manager of Belgavia, says securitylapses were TWA's fault because the airline wouldn't hireenough Belgavia guards. He says the problem is solved becauseTWA has increased its budget and hired more guards.   But all three U.S. carriers flying to Brussels -- TWA, PanAm and American -- recently complained to the Belgiangovernment about Belgavia and sought permission to do theirown security. Thus far, the government hasn't taken anyaction on their request, the carriers say.   Jean Paul Emplit, a spokesman for the Belgian AirwaysAuthority, defends the requirement that a local firm be hiredfor airport security. &quot;Each country performs its own security-- that's normal,&quot; he says. &quot;Would you accept Belgiansecurity forces acting in the U.S.?&quot;   Monique Delvoy, spokeswoman for the Ministry of Transport,adds that security has been delegated to a private local firmintegrated with Belgium police forces because the governmentdoesn't have enough officers itself. &quot;What we don't want isuncontrolled development of other private security firms,whose uniforms might be obtained by terrorists and used as adisguise,&quot; she says.   Adm. James Busey, chief of the FAA, went to Europe lastmonth to try to improve relations with foreign governments,including meeting with Belgian authorities. But Belgavia willstill perform security for U.S. carriers.   In numerous cases, U.S. airlines are getting caughtbetween FAA orders aimed at improving security and foreigngovernments that want to do it another way. Within days ofthe Pan Am bombing, the FAA ordered U.S. carriers to X-ray orsearch every bag checked in Western Europe and the MiddleEast. At London's Heathrow airport, British authoritiesinitially blocked the move, arguing that it would create longlines that would jam the terminal, creating a fire hazard. Inthe end, the British relented.   In Amsterdam, however, the Dutch refused to permitX-raying of every bag, arguing that concentrating on a fewhigh-risk passengers was more effective.   &quot;We were in the middle,&quot; Tim Thornton, a former NorthwestAirlines vice president, told the presidential commission.&quot;Sometimes we were in violation of American laws; sometimeswe were in violation of the foreign law. . . . For sixmonths, it was, you know, whose jail did we want to go to?&quot;   A spokesman for the Dutch national police will say onlythat in discussions with the FAA, &quot;the matter has beenresolved.&quot; Industry sources say the Dutch refused to backdown, and the FAA has granted Northwest an exemption to thenew regulation in Holland.   Airline executives have been asking the U.S. government toplay a greater role. &quot;If we walk into a government and say wewant to do X, Y and Z at your airport to improve security andthey say no to us, what do we do?&quot; asks Mr. Adams of TWA.&quot;What we're looking for is the FAA to come forward and be thenegotiator.&quot;   For over a year the FAA has been trying to do that, inpart by seeking to deploy 27 security agents abroad. Theywould make suggestions, help U.S. carriers deal with foreignauthorities and report major problems to officials inWashington.   But the agency has run into resistance from several U.S.ambassadors. The diplomats play a major role in deciding whois posted to their embassies and, according to a StateDepartment document, some object to the FAA securityofficials for several reasons: The FAA agents might not haveenough to do, costs might be high, and the ambassadors worryabout encroaching on host-country sovereignty.   For months the FAA and its parent agency, the Departmentof Transportation, have been locked in negotiations with theState Department and the ambassadors. In the process theproposed FAA security force has been cut from 27 to 21.   To further bolster the U.S. airlines in dealing withforeign governments, the presidential commission recommendedthat the State Department create the post of coordinator forinternational aviation security, with ambassadorial rank. TheState Department has yet to act.   Foreign labor unions also can pose problems, as they aredoing for American Airlines. To test its own security, thecarrier, a unit of AMR, has hired a former Dallas bomb-squadofficer who builds simulated bombs and conceals them in bags.Each month American employees are sent without advancewarning to European terminals with the concealed &quot;bombs&quot; tosee if the airline's screeners will ask the right questionsand search thoroughly enough. (Asked how often &quot;bombs&quot; getthrough, Mr. Boynton will say only: &quot;Not very often.&quot;)   In most cities, American employees carrying the simulatedbombs wear hidden tape recorders so a screener's questioningcan be analyzed later, and improved if necessary. But atFrankfurt, the Works Council, a powerful labor-managementgroup that functions at nearly every company in Germany,won't permit taping. Labor representatives apparently feartapes might be used as evidence to justify dismissal of ascreener who does poorly.   Even when carriers can implement tougher securityprocedures, their own employees can foul things up. An FAArule imposed after Lockerbie bars flights in Europe and theMiddle East from taking off with unaccompanied bags. The ideais to foil a bomber who checks a bag with an explosive deviceand then doesn't board.   Just last month, agents at a European terminal for oneU.S. airline thought all passengers were aboard a flight,which then took off for New York. Later, a passenger appearedat the gate; he had missed the flight, but his checked baghadn't.   Worried airline security officials radioed the jet, whichby then was high over the North Atlantic. The pilot turnedand flew back to London, where the plane stayed overnight. Asearch of the bag uncovered no bomb, but the flight wasdelayed by a day and the airline incurred an estimated$100,000 in extra costs.   Machines using TNA, or thermo neutron activation, had beentouted as the ultimate solution to bomb detection. But theyare running into problems too. The one TNA device now in testoperation, at TWA's terminal at Kennedy airport in New York,is too slow.   At Kennedy, virtually all flights from Europe come induring the early afternoon and leave in the late afternoon.That means almost all bags going through TWA's terminal mustbe handled within a couple of hours. In those hours, the TNAmachine handles only about 400 bags, or enough for oneflight.   The TNA machine also has a high falsealarm rate, about 8%.This brings screening to a crawl because bags triggering thefalse alarms must go through the machine again or behand-searched.   Worst of all, the machine is calibrated in such a way thatit wouldn't detect a small bomb like the one that broughtdown Pan Am 103. But if the machine were set to detect smallbombs, its false alarm rate could soar as high as 20%,industry sources say.   The machines, about 45 feet long, also take up too muchroom, airlines say. To process every bag at Kennedy airport,&quot;we would need an army of machines that would take up halfour terminal,&quot; says TWA's Mr. Adams. The FAA, which hadproposed that U.S. carriers be required to buy 150 of the $1million machines and install them at airports around theworld, is holding off.   A number of airline security officials believe, however,that the TNA machine or a unit using another technology willbe developed with reduced size and improved capabilities, andeventually will become practical to use. There also are hopesthat European governments may become more cooperative.   U.S. airline officials say that the French have becomemuch more concerned about security since a terrorist bombbrought down a French UTA airliner over North Africa lastSeptember, killing all 171 on board. UTA has hired FairfaxGroup, a security consultant based near Washington, D.C., tohelp improve defenses.   Still, the job of stopping bombs remains daunting. &quot;Theindustry will board 1.1 billion passengers this year, andwe're looking for just one or two bombs,&quot; says American's Mr.Boynton. Moreover, as the carriers tighten security in Europeand the Middle East, some security experts think terroristswill shift to putting bombs on planes in Africa or LatinAmerica, where security is considered abysmally weak.   &quot;We are making significant progress,&quot; says Frank Moss, anofficial in the State Department's counterterrorism office,&quot;but as terrorists develop new tactics and technologies, wewill continue to have to do more.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>