<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910618-0132</DOCNO><DOCID>910618-0132.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- On Sports:   Stewart Outlasts Simpson and Wild Weather   ----   By Frederick C. Klein</HL><DATE>06/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><LP>   Chaska, Minn. -- Mr. Murphy undoubtedly was a golfer, butit's unlikely that he had something as horrific as the latestU.S. Open men's golf tournament in mind when he coined hisfamous dictum that anything that can go wrong will.   On Thursday, the first day of play, lightning -- golf'sscourge -- struck the Hazeltine National Golf Club in thisMinneapolis suburb, killing one spectator, a 27-year-old man,and injuring five others. On Friday, a stairway leading to astand of bleachers collapsed and 10 people suffered minorinjuries.</LP><TEXT>   It rained Thursday, Friday and Saturday, delaying play andturning the parking fields surrounding the course intoquagmires. Many lots were closed as too muddy on Saturday,forcing spectators to drive extra miles to far-distantparking facilities and bus in. That worsened the trafficcongestion the event brought to overtaxed roads in thisrural-suburban area.   And on Sunday, when sunny skies promised compensation forearlier miseries, another snafu materialized: a 72-hole tiebetween Payne Stewart and Scott Simpson, at asix-strokes-under-par score of 282 -- which threw thechampionship into an 18-hole playoff the following day.Stewart won it with a 75 to Simpson's 77, thanks ultimatelyto Simpson's dunking his tee shot into a pond alongside thepar-three 17th hole.   For reasons best known to itself, the U.S. GolfAssociation, which runs the Open, remains the last golfingentity on the planet to insist on a full extra day's playinstead of some form of &quot;sudden death&quot; to resolve first-placedeadlocks. The policy produces canceled appointments andfractured travel plans for many. It also means that theorganization's showcase events are decided not before a bigon-site crowd and a weekend-afternoon television audienceprimed for sport, but before a few thousand hooky players onan understaffed course (a lot of the volunteers who reallymake these things go have to be back at work on Monday) and aTV audience that's angry about missing its favorite soapoperas.   It's happened three times in the past four men's Opens,and last year, at Medinah Country Club near Chicago, HaleIrwin and Mike Donald wound up in sudden death anyway aftertheir 18-hole playoff also ended in a tie. One wonderswhether the USGA's blue-blazer brigade will get the messagebefore the 20th century becomes the 21st.   Besides winner Stewart, about the only folks who came outof the fray looking good were those from Hazeltine. Theirlakeside layout hosted the 1970 Open at the too-tender age ofeight years, and was characterized, memorably, as a cowpasture with flags. This time, the place looked great andplayed like a true Open course, which is to say it penalizederror zealously. It's three closing holes -- the par-four16th and 18th and the par-three 17th -- will go into thebooks as a golfing gauntlet of the first order.   The course, however, was like others in that it couldn'treveal its full terrors until the weather was right. The rainof the first two days wasn't accompanied by high winds, andthe big-time pros don't mind getting their shoes wet as longas they can keep their caps on. Twenty-three players beat parof 72 on Hazeltine's rain-cushioned acres Thursday, and 33did it the next day.   But on Saturday, the clearing skies that followed morningrain were accompanied by wind gusts to 35 mph, and scoressoared like kites in the breeze. &quot;It was like playing theBritish Open, but with a lot more water,&quot; said ZimbabweanNick Price, whose 71 was one of just two sub-par roundsposted during the day.   The ability to cope with Saturday's winds was whatseparated the contenders from the pretenders here: Fourteenplayers began the third round within five strokes ofStewart's leading 36-hole score of 137, but by day's endStewart's 73 and Simpson's 72 put them four up on thenextbest fellas and, in effect, had them playing a match forthe crown in Sunday's final twosome. They'd finish the roundthat way, too; third place, at 285, went to veterans LarryNelson and Fred Couples, neither of whom ever seriouslymenaced their betters.   The playoff contestants sported quite-different personas.Simpson, 35, is a careful sort who treads the greenswardswith a purposeful plop, keeps the ball in play and, earnestlyreligious, says he believes he &quot;pleases God by doing my beston each shot.&quot; He has only five titles to show for 13 yearson the PGA Tour, but his tidy game is well-suited to thetight courses on which U.S. Opens are staged. He won the 1987event, at the Olympic Club in San Francisco, and has finished15th or better seven times in 11 previous Open appearances.   &quot;Scott's the type of player who'll bore you to death, butonce he gets it going, he doesn't give it back,&quot; says fellowpro Fuzzy Zoeller.   Stewart affects 1920s garb on course -- knickers andlittle flat golf caps -- making him a kind of golfing Gatsby.For the past few seasons, he's contracted with the NationalFootball League to wear his getups in NFL team colors.Besides whatever cash is involved, this permits him to garnersome cheap applause by donning the local pro-grid hueswherever he appears. But there's nothing cheap about hisgame, which is almost as tight as Simpson's and with a bitmore dash. At age 34, he's rated among the top few Americanplayers.   The two stayed true to form on a Sunday whose low humiditydried Hazeltine's greens to their tourney-long slickest anddiscouraged challengers; Stewart posted 16 pars en route tohis 72, and Simpson 14 in his. Simpson came to the 16th hole,a 384-yard par four with a narrow, peninsula green, twostrokes ahead, but hit his first two shots into the rough andlost a stroke with a bogey. Stewart had botched the holesimilarly the previous day, but saved par, and his playoffplace, by sinking a curling, 35-foot putt he likened to &quot;ananaconda.&quot;   Both parred 17, but Simpson's drive landed a few inchesinto the rough on the long, narrow 18th, and it cost himanother stroke and a chance to end things there. Stewart hada 20-foot birdie putt on the hole, but missed it long andneeded a white-knuckles five-footer to gain the tie. On holes15, 16 and 17, he'd missed birdie putts of between six and 12feet, but later refused to say he'd putted poorly. &quot;I madesome pretty good ones, but they were all for pars,&quot; he noted.   Monday produced no weather extremes, but dry, warm breezesfurther slickened the greens and turned the playoff into atest of who could sink a putt of decent length. Simpson didit first with a 25-foot birdie effort on the par-four 14th,and that, coupled with a Stewart bogey on the hole, turned aone-stroke deficit into a stroke edge.   Simpson built the lead to two shots with a par-five on 15,only to lose them both on 16 when Stewart made his firstbirdie putt of the day from 20 feet, and Simpson missed athree-footer for par. Then, on 17, came Simpson's fatalerror, which was turned into the final margin when he bogeyed18.   The winner's score was the highest in a U.S. Open playoffsince 18 holes became the tiebreaker standard in 1947. Beforethat, it was 36 holes. Who says the USGA makes no concessionsto modernity?</TEXT></DOC>