<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910508-0135</DOCNO><DOCID>910508-0135.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Apache: Swift, Sure and Deadly</HL><DATE>05/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)</RE><LP>   I found your April 19 article about the Apache helicopterperformance in Operation Desert Storm to be fundamentallyflawed and misleading.   As I see it, you wanted to give the reader twoimpressions: First, &quot;high-technology&quot; systems like the Apacheare not really required because &quot;low-technology&quot; systems likethe A-10 proved they can do a better job. Second, despite&quot;desperate moves&quot; by the Army to fix maintenance problems,the Apache was still not able to perform its missions.Neither conclusion is warranted nor justified by the facts.</LP><TEXT>   Comparing the Apache AH-64 with an A-10 is like comparinga sports car with a station wagon. They both go down theroad, but which one meets our requirements? Well, it dependson what you want to do. The A-10 has many virtues, and I jointhe chorus of voices praising its performance in the GulfWar. But the Apache's sophisticated &quot;high-tech&quot; systemsallowed it to fly through adverse weather at night at verylow altitudes to attack targets with precision. The Apachesfought on every night of the 100-hour ground campaign, withdevastating effect and pinpoint accuracy, supporting theground attack. Without the A-10's need for loitering andawaiting target acquisition and direction, the Apache couldproceed directly to the target from a forward position, not afixed rear air base, laser designate the target either itselfor with the assistance of an accompanying scout helicopter,and return to a forward base in minutes. No wonder Apacheflying times were shorter. One Apache battalion fired 102Hellfires and had 97 direct hits, resulting in 97 track orvehicle kills. Support was immediate, lethal and consumedminimal flight hours.   The first shots fired in Operation Desert Storm were byApaches. On the night of Jan. 16, eight Apaches of the 101stAirborne Division destroyed Iraqi early-warning radars andsupport systems far inside western Iraq. Achieving completesurprise by flying close to the ground, they fired 27Hellfire missiles and several thousand rounds from their 30mmcannons. All the targets were destroyed and no Apache wasdamaged. This action cleared the air corridor for the airforces shortly afterward. Fixed-wing aircraft could not haveaccomplished this mission without substantial risk ofalerting the Iraqis.   You allege the Apaches were &quot;outgunned and outflown byA-10s.&quot; By giving the impression the A-10 is better than theApache, basing your comments on only superficial comparisonsof flying times, insults the intelligence of your readers. Ananalytical reader would pick up on the fact that if A-10skilled 1,000 tanks and flew 3.5 times as many hours asApaches during Desert Storm, then Apaches, by killing 500tanks, proved these helicopters are better tank killers (tobe on a par with Apaches, the A-10s, by flying 3.5 timesmore, should have killed 1,750 tanks). You go on to writethat despite the pampering (referring to maintenance) theaverage Apache was available to fly fewer than 37 hoursduring the six-week war. You should know full well (frombriefings by Army officials) that the average Apache wasrequired (i.e., given a mission to execute) to fly fewer than37 hours during those six weeks. At any time during thatperiod more than 90% of our Apaches were available formissions. By using the word available instead of required,you again appeared to want to give the erroneous impressionthat the Apache's maintenance problems resulted in a poorbattlefield performance. Nothing could be further from thetruth.   As to the second impression -- faultymaintenance/spare-parts management. At no time was themaintenance management of the Apache &quot;desperate,&quot; as youassert. Apache maintenance programs, like those of all Armyaviation systems, are controlled carefully. In the case ofDesert Storm, Army planners estimated that the harshenvironment of Southwest Asia would require spare-partsinventories to be doubled for the Apache. The planners alsoestimated that Apaches deployed to Desert Storm would beflying 2.5 times the amount nondeployed Apaches could beflying. Spare-parts requirements deployed to Desert Stormwere therefore increased by a factor of five (2.5 times two).   How were we able to secure sufficient spare parts? For onething, we asked contractors to accelerate delivery times forspare parts. We also reduced flying hours for nondeployedApaches. You state that these 250 Apaches were virtuallygrounded to be used as a source of spare parts. You give theimpression that half the Apache fleet was grounded becauseparts were being taken off these aircraft to be used byApaches in Desert Storm. This is not true. Those aircraftremained in a mission-capable status. Flying hours peraircraft per month were reduced from 14.5 to six. By reducingthe flying hours, maintenance -- and thus spare parts --requirements were reduced. Spare parts that normally would besent to a nondeployed unit were therefore available fordeployed Apache units. This seems to me to have been prudentmanagement. Instead, your article implies improper partsmanagement, Army culpability and weakness throughout thewhole Apache maintenance system. Having large partsinventories to support Army weapon systems, as desirable asthat may be from a wartime perspective, is probably notsomething the Army should do or can afford to do.   Ideally, the Army would like to keep in stock an inventoryof spare parts that would keep all weapon systems operatingin a high-intensity conflict for a stipulated number of days.With the possible exception of ammunition, the level ofinventory is usually not as high as the Army would like it tobe. If the inventory were as high as the Army academicallywould like, very large sums of money would be tied up forindefinite periods. Storage requirements are substantial.Obsolescence after a time begins to be a factor, and even ifa system is becoming obsolete, there is usually justificationfor maintaining a substantial spare-parts inventory.   As this cycle evolves, the Army can be criticized easily,and is indeed criticized frequently, for maintaining too highan inventory of spare parts.   The other horn of the dilemma is a condition that findsthe Army with too low a spare-parts inventory to sustainconsumption during a conflict. This is your article'simplication. Apache parts availability, aside from the issuesdiscussed above, has been affected by two extraneous factors.First, there have been a number of design changes, as Apachereliability and performance have been increased. Many ofthese changes have required spare-parts modification, hence aneed to build new inventories. Second, as has been pointedout frequently by the Army, the severe 1989 windstorm damage,damage that was sustained by 25% of the entire Apache fleet,depleted Apache parts inventories, and the Army was only justin the position of satisfactorily replenishing thoseinventories in adequate quantity when Operation Desert Shieldstarted a year after the windstorms occurred.   The final factor is one that relates to the U.S.industrial base. The Apache is nearing the end of itsproduction run for the Army. Follow-on export orders arematerializing, but in limited quantities. As the productionwind-down occurs (McDonnell Helicopter recently let go anadditional 350 employees), subvendors, many of them partsmakers, find the Apache program unappealing and eitherwithdraw corporate assets from it or have to raise partsprices substantially, or both. Either action makes inventoryreplenishment, and particularly surge production, extremelydifficult and costly.   M.P.W. Stone   Secretary of the Army   Washington</TEXT></DOC>