<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920320-0178</DOCNO><DOCID>920320-0178.</DOCID><HL>   Spy vs. Spy:   A Defector Describes   A James Bond Life   Inside the Soviet KGB   ---   Trying to Disrupt U.S. Policy,   He Mailed Phony Threats,   Bribed Local Officials   ---   Intense Training, Nice Perks   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/12/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)RUSSIA (RS)COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   &quot;You'll be a soldier of the Party,&quot; the KGB recruiter toldhim.   Mikhail represented the best and brightest of the SovietUnion. Intelligent and sophisticated, he was hand-picked froma top university and coerced into taking a job he had nevercoveted: He became an undercover agent for the KGB.</LP><TEXT>   At the Red Banner intelligence school, Mikhail learned theJames Bond-like skills of passing secret messages and shakingenemy agents in street chases. Then it was off to Third Worldassignments such as sending threatening letters to U.S.diplomats and bribing small-time officials to tattle on theU.S.   But Mikhail sensed his empire rotting months before lastAugust's KGB-aided coup attempt. So he defected to the U.S.&quot;I thought something was wrong with the KGB,&quot; says Mikhail,who won't allow use of his full name out of concern forfamily left behind in Russia. &quot;Reactionary forces were on therise, and the KGB's role in helping them is hard tooverstate.&quot;   On a recent day, Mikhail sits in an office at the CentralIntelligence Agency in Langley, Va., carefully watched by hisCIA guardians as he tells for the first time his story of howa Soviet student was chosen and promoted in a world-wide spyapparatus -- and how some KGB ghosts could return later tohaunt the new nation of Russia.   Defectors such as Mikhail are slowly pulling back thecover on the KGB behemoth that was the object of Americanfear and fascination for four decades. The CIA is benefitingfrom an unprecedented wave of such defectors.   In the two years since the Berlin Wall fell, the CIA hastaken in as many KGB defectors as it had in the previousdecade, a U.S. official says. The new defectors are soplentiful and of such high quality that the CIA now isgetting a bit picky about whom it will accept. &quot;I have theimpression that there are a great many more people beingasked to be recognized as defectors than anybody inWashington wants to recognize as defectors,&quot; says DonaldJameson, a former senior CIA official who worked withdefectors.   Some of these defectors are paying immediate dividends.Italy, for instance, just broke up a ring of 20 spies whowere engaged in industrial espionage, thanks to informationprovided by a Soviet who defected to the U.S., say Italianofficials. The Soviet, Sergei Illarionov, had served in aSoviet consulate in Italy before he began feeding informationto the CIA.   Defectors' stories are convincing U.S. officials that theKGB was focused intensely over the last decade on efforts tosteal technological and scientific secrets. But thedefectors' tales also paint a picture of an intelligenceservice that was declining in overall effectiveness, and onethat failed in its decades-long effort to penetrate the CIAwith moles.   The defectors also provide compelling evidence that theKGB -- ironically, the agency that first sensed the need forradical improvement in the Soviet economy -- came to opposereforms far more actively than was commonly realized.   Mikhail provides one startling revelation to buttress thatclaim. He says the splashiest business scandal to mar Sovietexperiments with free-market reforms was nothing but a KGBhoax, carried out to discredit the idea of capitalism.   The scandal involved ANT, a business &quot;cooperative,&quot; orprivate enterprise formed with government approval. In early1990, the KGB announced that its agents had descended on atrain at the Black Sea port of Novorossisk and impounded 12T-72 tanks that ANT was planning to smuggle abroad and sellfor millions of dollars. The illicit tank sale was just oneof several &quot;dirty&quot; deals planned by ANT, the KGB asserted.   But Mikhail says the whole story of the tank sale and thebust was a KGB &quot;active measure,&quot; or covert operation, stagedto discredit the mushrooming private business sector. &quot;It wasjust a big lie to illustrate the proposition that thecooperatives were damaging the society,&quot; he says.&quot;Restructuring the economy would kill the system&quot; in whichKGB leaders had lived and prospered, Mikhail says.   It isn't possible to confirm all of Mikhail's account, andto shroud his identity he won't reveal many details of hishistory. But CIA officials consider him a solid and valuablesource of information. And many of the broad points he makesare corroborated in talks with other departed KGB officers.   For instance, Amin Gadzhiyev, who fled a job in the KGB'sinternal security directorate and now is an entrepreneur inFlorida without ties to the CIA, agrees with Mikhail'saccounts of pervasive corruption. He says KGB officersresponsible for transporting precious commodities such asgold and diamonds from the republics to Moscow would skimgoods, then cooperate with KGB officers abroad to launderprofits. &quot;Corruption, that was the main problem,&quot; he says.   The KGB was an immensely important part of the Sovietsystem, the equivalent of the CIA and FBI combined, with bigchunks of the Pentagon thrown in. It employed roughly half amillion people in &quot;directorates,&quot; or divisions handlingintelligence, counterintelligence, domestic security,protection of borders and electronic eavesdropping.   Mikhail was recruited into the most elite branch of theKGB, the so-called First Chief Directorate. That was thedirectorate that gathered foreign intelligence and carried ona decades-long spy war with the CIA at outposts around theworld.   A dark-haired, bespectacled Muscovite in his early 40s,Mikhail doesn't match any of the Hollywood stereotypes ofbrutish, jowly KGB agents. And in fact, he never applied forspy work -- partly because Soviets such as him had to feignignorance of the very existence of the First ChiefDirectorate. &quot;An everyday person was not supposed to know,&quot;he says in flawless English.   The KGB came to him. He was in university in Moscow,earning good grades and studying foreign languages andpolitics, in vague pursuit of a career as a foreigncorrespondent. A year and a half before graduation, he wassummoned to the office of a college personnel officer.   The college official was, in fact, an undercover KGBrecruiter. He gently disabused Mikhail of his thoughts ofjournalism, finally saying the army might be the only placeMikhail could properly use his language skills. When Mikhailblanched, the recruiter jumped. He said there was analternative, the KGB. Mikhail could go to remote SakhalinIsland in the army, or have a shot at serving in the U.S. forthe KGB, the recruiter said.   &quot;It appeared I had no choice,&quot; says Mikhail, who wassurprised at the pressure. He was a lackluster Communist, amember of the Komosol youth organization but not very activein it. Down deep, &quot;I didn't believe in the system,&quot; he says.But his KGB bosses seemed more interested in competence thanideology -- and, Mikhail thinks, may have wanted a littlecynicism in their agents.   He signed an oath never to reveal the contents of hisconversation with the recruiter, and the KGB began a year ofphysical exams and thorough background checks. Any record ofcontacts or correspondence with foreigners, even from theSoviet bloc in Eastern Europe, would have disqualified him.   And though Mikhail felt trapped into joining the KGB, hesoon found it was a gilded cage. KGB officers got pay andbenefits most Soviets could only envy. &quot;It was considered tobe a good offer, one of the best at the time,&quot; he says. &quot;Itwas considered something very desirable.&quot;   After graduation from college, Mikhail was sent to the RedBanner Institute, a KGB training school on the outskirts ofMoscow. There he learned the practical aspects of spycraft:recruitment of agents, letter drops, detection ofsurveillance.   In one particularly intense phase of the training,intelligence recruits from the First Directorate such asMikhail were sent out onto the streets of Moscow, andrecruits from the Seventh Directorate, the KGB division thathandles surveillance of people inside the Soviet Union, weretold to follow them. The would-be spies were told to shaketheir followers, and the would-be trackers were ordered tostick with their targets. &quot;It was a very, very serious game,this surveillance and counter-surveillance,&quot; Mikhail says.Both the cat and mouse knew their grades &quot;could affect theircareers,&quot; he says.   Mikhail also was indoctrinated into the KGB's view of itsmission in the world. The agency's obsession was the U.S.Even in Third World posts, Mikhail says, agents spent theirtime searching for local officials who might pass on tidbitsthey had acquired from their contacts with the U.S. &quot;There isno way for me to over-emphasize the importance of the KGBbattling the CIA in those years,&quot; he says. &quot;The whole life ofthe service was directed toward this end -- on harming theU.S., checking its policy, getting information on it,penetrating its structure or discrediting it.&quot; The U.S., infact, was known inside the KGB as GP, Russian initials forMain Enemy, he says. (China, the next-biggest concern, wasknown as GP2.)   From the Red Banner Institute, Mikhail was sent to a deskjob in the Moscow headquarters. Then, using his knowledge ofEnglish and an Oriental language, he began a series ofoverseas posts, working undercover in Soviet embassies inwhat he calls &quot;capitalist countries of the Third World.&quot; Inthe Soviet view, he says, even Iraq with its centrallycontrolled economy fit into that category of &quot;capitalist&quot;countries.   In some embassies, he says, as many as half the Sovietdiplomats actually worked for the KGB. Jobs with Aeroflot,the Soviet airline, traditionally were used as covers for theGRU, the Soviet military intelligence organization, he says.   Above all, Mikhail says, he worked at scraping togethersnippets of information about U.S. foreign policy. &quot;It wasconsidered to be tough to recruit Americans,&quot; Mikhail says,and he never succeeded in doing so. &quot;Those cases wereconsidered to be rare world-wide.&quot;   Instead, the focus was on secondary sources. He wouldrecruit a local employee of a U.S. embassy, for example, andextract telephone directories or State Departmentpublications that were combed for information. He alsocultivated agents the KGB dubbed &quot;special unofficialcontacts&quot; -- officials of a foreign government who weren'tpaid but were befriended and persuaded to pass on informationabout their own contacts with the U.S.   If cash was needed to buy information, it was readilyavailable. He says he never paid more than a few thousanddollars, but even amid the recent Soviet economic crisis heheard a senior KGB official tell field officers that &quot;if youneed money for a worthy target, we will find it.&quot;   Though he felt no fervor for communism, Mikhail prosperedbecause he found the work intellectually stimulating. &quot;It wasdaily, routine work of gathering intelligence, which was allright with me,&quot; says Mikhail. &quot;It was something every countryneeded. It was normal.&quot;   Besides ferreting out information about the U.S., anotherprime KGB goal was simply to disrupt U.S. foreign policy. Indoing that, &quot;I tried to use more or less acceptable methods,&quot;Mikhail says. In one case, he attempted to disrupt the workof a U.S. diplomat by sending him concocted threateningletters in the name of a sinister national liberationmovement.   Mikhail's overseas jobs were alternated with stints atMoscow headquarters, and he rose to a management-levelposition in the KGB. But by 1990, Mikhail says, unsettlingtrends inside the KGB made him decide to get out. While Mr.Gorbachev was publicly working with the U.S. and talking of&quot;glasnost&quot; and &quot;perestroika,&quot; a series of directives from KGBheadquarters to the field sent opposing signals.   New restrictions were placed on agents' contacts with U.S.officials. One cable told spies to step up espionage effortsagainst the West because &quot;hostile&quot; forces were using thechanged international climate to &quot;undermine the socialistnature of the U.S.S.R.,&quot; Mikhail recalls.   At his last overseas post, Mikhail was ordered for thefirst time to carry out an operation against an Americanusing methods that &quot;could be harmful to his physicalwell-being.&quot; He argued with his superior and watered down theinstructions, then carried out the job. But he had decided tojump. He got in touch with an American friend and carefullyplanned a covert escape in 1990. He came under the CIA'swing, and the agency now is trying to help him establish anew life in the U.S.   Despite a housecleaning at the top, Mikhail says, the KGBspy bureaucracy lives on and has simply moved inside theRussian government. He estimates that &quot;90% to 95% of middlemanagement are still in the positions they had before thecoup.&quot; A senior U.S. official, in fact, says he has seen&quot;zero&quot; decrease in the number of Russian intelligence agentsworking in the U.S.   For now, U.S. analysts doubt that the remnants of the KGBpose an immediate threat to Russia's democratic and economicreforms. The KGB foreign intelligence division isn't much ofa political force right now. Meanwhile, the KGB's internalsecurity apparatus has been broken up, and Boris Yeltsin'sefforts to rebuild a big Russian internal security service sofar have been slowed by the parliament.   Oleg Kalugin, a former KGB general who bolted from theagency, says the spy service is struggling these days simplyto pay its spies, and was late in meeting its November andDecember payroll. Yet he worries that the remainingintelligence apparatus is &quot;perhaps the most reactionaryorganization&quot; in Russia.   Mikhail is more blunt: &quot;The old guard will be regrouping,&quot;he warns.   (See related letter: &quot;Letters to the Editor: FlawlessEnglish Is Difficult to Spy&quot; -- WSJ March 20, 1992)   920212-0036</TEXT></DOC>