<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900910-0075</DOCNO><DOCID>900910-0075.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   The Shifting Sands of Soviet Policy   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>09/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><CO>   FREST MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Yesterday's united Persian Gulf stand by Presidents Bushand Gorbachev was dramatic and historically important. Butone point deserves close attention. For the first time sinceWorld War II, the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. are making commoncause against a troublemaker who styles himself a&quot;socialist.&quot; Some Soviets may not find that palatable.   U.S. objectives when the crisis broke were clear. Itwanted Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait and out of power, and apermanent military presence in the gulf region to guaranteefuture stability. Yesterday, Mr. Bush promised Mr. Gorbachevthat the U.S. would withdraw when the Saudis are secure andthere are &quot;regional&quot; security arrangements.</LP><TEXT>   That is a slight softening, so it would appear, of initialU.S. thoughts of keeping forces in the region. Mr. Bush hadthen lost patience with attempts to come to terms with Arabsocialism and what it has spawned these last 40 years. Thatincludes Arab belligerence, vicious and wide-ranging bands ofterrorists and, at times, brutal tyrannies towards dissentersin the nations under Arab socialist control.   Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt was the standard bearer ofArab socialism in the late 1950s and 1960s, when his ArabSocialist Union came into being. As with Saddam, he toowanted to unite the Arab world under a single banner. To thatend, he conducted a short-lived merger with Syria, employedan extensive secret service in Arab countries, supported warsin Yemen and Algeria, gave the Soviet Union a foothold in theMiddle East and fought the Six-Day War with Israel, whichcost him and his principal allies, Syria and Jordan, dearly.His principal heirs today are Saddam Hussein and Hafez alAssad of Syria -- with their separate Ba'ath parties -- andYasser Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Theytoo have seen, and caused, more than their share of troubleand bloodshed. Egypt, under Anwar Sadat and then under HosniMubarak, has distanced itself from militant Arab socialistsand moved closer to the U.S. and the West.   This history does not lack relevance to the efforts by Mr.Bush and Mr. Gorbachev to find a common ground in dealingwith Saddam Hussein. If their efforts go forward, it will bethe first time that the Soviet Union has joined with the Westin punishing one of its own proteges. For years, the Sovietssaw Arab socialism as their passkey to important influence inthe Middle East. That hope was still alive just before SaddamHussein sent his tanks rolling into Kuwait on August 2. Itcannot be certain that the hope is dead even now among thegenerals and KGB operatives who have worked so long and hardto establish Soviet influence over Syria, Iraq and the PLO.Mr. Bush acknowledged yesterday that he and Mr. Gorbachev hadsome differences over use of military force against Saddam.   When Saddam dispatched his foreign minister, Tariq Aziz,to Moscow last week he no doubt hoped to dissuade Mr.Gorbachev from siding with Iraq's enemies, even though theSoviet leader already had condemned the rape of Kuwait.Surely, Saddam must have thought, socialist solidarity stillhas meaning.   But Saddam's problem is that both socialist solidarity andsocialism itself are rapidly disappearing, and particularlyin the Soviet Union. Members of the Communist Party of theSoviet Union are resigning in droves. Mr. Gorbachev stillheads the party but quite likely is coming to regard it asmore of a political liability than an asset. Under new,nationalistic parties, the separate republics are takingpower into their own hands.   Quite possibly, Mr. Gorbachev has decided that the Arabsocialists are a liability as well. They have never been anespecially tractable bunch. Someone in Moscow put out thestory that Mr. Gorbachev was furious about Saddam'sunilateral decision to invade. That, so it was said, was whythe Soviets were so willing to condemn the invasion anddemand Iraqi withdrawal.   That story may possibly be true. Yet another possibilityis that Mr. Gorbachev knew the attack was coming but made noattempt to stop it. A sharp rise in the price of oil has beenbeneficial to the Soviet Union, which exports oil and isdesperate for foreign exchange. There was a chance the Westwould not react and, since the arrogant Saddam was taking allthe risks, why interfere? Mr. Gorbachev had good reasons --his hopes for western economic aid -- for condemning theattack after he realized that Mr. Bush was furious. But hadthe attack not happened, he would have had less bargainingpower than he has now. There is a word for such tactics,duplicity. But then even Mikhail Gorbachev hasn't yet earnedhis Eagle Scout badge.   The final and most interesting possibility is that theSoviet generals who work closely with Saddam knew orsuspected that he was planning to make a move but didn'tbother to inform Mr. Gorbachev. Anonymous U.S. intelligencesources have been quoted as saying it would have beenimpossible for Saddam to have launched the attack withoutprior knowledge of either his Soviet military advisers, whonumber over 1,000, or the KGB, which has a pervasive presencein Iraq. If Mr. Gorbachev was not warned, he had good causefor anger.   It also would suggest a deepening split between the SovietPresident and some elements of the Soviet military and statesecurity elites (KGB). Soviet foreign ministry spokesmanGennady Gerasimov last week dismissed a suggestion by aSoviet military commander that an outbreak of hostilitiesover Kuwait might damage East-West relations. Yet, Mr.Gorbachev has not fully countermanded original assertions byhis military that its advisers in Iraq, who help operateSaddam's electronic air defense equipment, would stay put. IsMr. Gorbachev prepared to support an air strike against hisown radar technicians? In Helsinki, he suggested he wouldremove &quot;some&quot; advisers, but that presumably means not all.   As with so much in the Soviet Union these days, there canbe no certainty that anyone will salute when the Presidentgives an order. The KGB, after all, has been the &quot;sword andshield&quot; of the Communist Party -- not the Soviet state --throughout its history. The Soviet military also has beenunder party control. The party remains a hard-linerstronghold.   If Mr. Gorbachev gets static from the military and the KGBover the course he is following towards their importantclient, the present U.S.-Soviet unity could be in jeopardy.At some point, it might even force him to choose between theriches of the West and what remains of socialist solidarity.It is something that Mr. Bush and his advisers will want towatch closely.</TEXT></DOC>