<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910206-0019</DOCNO><DOCID>910206-0019.</DOCID><HL>   Bush Is Skeptical Air Strikes   Can Free Kuwait From Iraq   ---   Cheney, Powell to Confer   In Saudi Arabia on Need   To Launch Ground War   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush said he is &quot;somewhatskeptical&quot; that air power alone will force Iraqi troops toleave Kuwait, as new intelligence reports suggest Iraq'sability to resist a ground offensive is diminishing rapidly.   Mr. Bush also announced that he is dispatching DefenseSecretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of theJoint Chiefs of Staff, to Saudi Arabia at the end of thisweek to consult with local commanders. He strongly suggestedthat their findings will be crucial in determining whether heorders a ground offensive or sticks with the current aircampaign.</LP><TEXT>   In weighing his options, Mr. Bush is likely to relyheavily on intelligence reports indicating that the ferociousair campaign has cut off some Iraqi front-line units fromfuel supplies and communication with senior commanders. Thatmight make it easier for Mr. Bush to order ground actionbecause Iraqi ability to resist will have been reduced.   So far, according to one Pentagon official familiar withthe latest estimates, U.S. planes have destroyed more than20% of the oil and gas storage facilities and undergroundfuel depots Iraqi forces need for sustained ground combat.Military briefers in Washington and Saudi Arabia have talkedin the past few days about large secondary explosions at manytargets, which suggest ammunition or fuel facilities werehit.   But at the Pentagon, planners now say that the damage toIraq's military fuel storage and distribution system is sosevere that many of Saddam Hussein's troops in Kuwaitwouldn't be able to keep tanks and artillery rolling tocounter rapidly moving U.S. armored assaults.   &quot;We have destroyed a very, very significant portion oftheir refining and storage system, there isn't any questionabout that,&quot; said one high-level Pentagon official who hassat in on the most recent intelligence briefings. &quot;Suchtargets continue to be among the highest priority.&quot;   U.S. military officers said yesterday that, in anothersign of Iraq's worsening fuel shortage, the government hashalted most civilian sales of gasoline in Baghdad anddiverted available supplies to military uses.   More important, Pentagon officials said, the aerialbombardment has at least temporarily severed communicationsbetween senior Iraqi generals and several of their divisionsalong the Kuwaiti border. The better-equipped, moredisciplined Republican Guard forces can still contact seniorgenerals, according to one official. But he said otherdivisions no longer have dependable lines of communicationand may be unable to receive timely orders if a ground warerupts.   Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations for theJoint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters in a briefing here that&quot;at a minimum,&quot; Saddam Hussein &quot;is having difficulty gettingcomplete tactical information from the field.&quot;   President Bush, speaking at a White House news conference,said his decision to dispatch Secretary Cheney and Gen.Powell to Saudi Arabia doesn't mean a decision on whether toturn to a ground war is imminent.   Still, the president's remarks and his demeanor suggestedthat he has begun weighing whether to order a ground effortsoon to drive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait. The decision isshaping up as the toughest one Mr. Bush has faced sincelaunching the war, particularly because even some prominentmembers of his own party are urging him to avoid apotentially bloody ground war and stick to the bombingcampaign for months if necessary.   Asked whether it might be possible to avoid turning to aground war against Iraq, Mr. Bush replied: &quot;Well, I think oneof the things that I look forward to hearing from Gen. Powelland Dick Cheney is the answer to that question.&quot;   But in addition to voicing his own skepticism aboutwhether air power alone would force roughly half a millionIraqi troops out of Kuwait and nearby parts of southern Iraq,Mr. Bush seemed to imply that the U.S. and its allies arecarrying out a war plan that contemplates some ground actionand that he wouldn't deviate from that plan unless militarycommanders suggest he do so.   &quot;I said at the beginning I am not going to second-guess,&quot;Mr. Bush said. &quot;I feel rather calm about it, because we havea game plan, and we've stayed with the game plan, and we areon target. And unless I get recommendations from these men inwhom I have so much trust, we're going to remain on theplan.&quot;   Mr. Bush is buffeted by conflicting political pressures ashe ponders the question of a ground war. A growing tide ofsympathy for Saddam Hussein in the Arab world, even incountries whose governments are allied with the U.S., iscreating pressure to move quickly, before Arab allies startto face more serious domestic problems. On the other hand,many in Congress are urging Mr. Bush to go slowly to minimizeU.S. casualties.   Though some of Mr. Bush's political allies have expressedworries the president may move too quickly to a ground war,others say they are confident Mr. Bush won't move untilcasualties can be kept low. &quot;We're not here to see how manypeople can win the Purple Heart,&quot; says Sen. Alan Simpson, theRepublican Senate whip. &quot;We're here to dispose of a tyrant.&quot;   While leaving open his options in prosecuting the war, Mr.Bush gave little sign he thinks diplomacy can bring thefighting to an end. He was cool toward an Iranian offer tobroker a cease-fire, saying Iran hadn't told the U.S. of anyspecific proposal, and he said Iraq isn't giving anyindication it is willing to pull out of Kuwait. &quot;There'snothing to negotiate about,&quot; he said.   At the war front, U.S. commanders reported that 10 moreIraqi aircraft have flown to safety in neighboring Iran,raising to 110 the number of Iraqi planes the U.S. says havefled to Iranian air bases. But in a heartening sign for theWhite House, military officials said that Iranian militaryofficials and air traffic controllers repeatedly told theIraqi pilots to turn back and warned them against trying toland in Iran. No warning shots were fired, and the Iraqi jetssimply disregarded the instructions, military officials said.   In addition, commanders said that two Iraqi helicoptershave been shot down. It wasn't immediately clear whetherthose were the same two helicopters that U.S. officialspreviously said were trying to flee to Iran but were turnedback by Iranian air defense forces.   Meanwhile, Pentagon officials said they plan to continueflying 2,000 or more sorties a day against Iraqi targets forroughly the next two weeks, using everything from B-52bombers to carrier-based A-6 bombers and F-117 stealthfighters. As part of the psychological campaign intended tounnerve Iraqi troops and commanders, Army units increasinglyare using long-range tactical missiles, called A-TACMS, whichcan hit Iraqi command posts and other facilities more than 60miles away.   And in a battlefield development with potential politicalsignificance, Syrian forces aligned with the U.S. fired forthe first time on Iraqi troops. Saudi Arabian militarycommanders, who have control over Syrian and other Arabtroops in the international alliance opposing Iraq, saidabout 30 Iraqi soldiers fired small arms and rocket-propelledgrenades at a Syrian position in a bid to cross the Saudiborder Monday. The Syrians answered with artillery, drivingthe Iraqis back across the border.   The engagement could be significant because Syria, whileit has contributed troops to help protect Saudi Arabia, hashinted that it is reluctant to take any direct militaryaction against fellow Arab soldiers from Iraq.   At the same time, the Bush administration disclosed moredetails of financial contributions by the U.S.'s allies tothe war effort. White House Budget Director Richard Darmansaid the allies have pledged a total of $51.5 billion towardthe cost of deploying troops and fighting the war. If the warlasts beyond March 31, Mr. Darman said, the U.S. expectsadditional contributions.   The extra cost of deploying troops to Saudi Arabiaamounted to $11.1 billion through the end of December, Mr.Darman told the Senate Budget Committee. Allies have pledged$9.7 billion toward that, of which $6.6 billion has beenreceived so far. The figures include both in-kind and cashcontributions.</TEXT></DOC>