<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900412-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>900412-0012.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>04/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   GORBACHEV WARNED that changing internal borders wouldprompt unrest.   Amid a secession bid by Lithuania, the Soviet leader saidin televised remarks that redrawing the internal borderswould lead to &quot;bloody carnage.&quot; More than 100 ethnic groupsinhabit the Soviet Union, and many are clamoring for landsthat were historically theirs and for more freedom fromMoscow. He also accused a bloc of Communist Partyprogressives of wanting to restore capitalism, and theKremlin decided against an economic embargo on Lithuania.</LP><TEXT>   Bush met in Washington with Baltic-American leaders, andspurned their appeals to formally recognize the government ofthe republic of Lithuania.   ---   EAST GERMAN LEADERS REACHED agreement on forming agovernment.   After three weeks of talks, Prime Minister-designate deMaiziere announced a coalition of conservatives, SocialDemocrats, and liberal parties. The government is expected tobe endorsed by the legislature today, clearing the way forreunification talks with West Germany. The coalition accordappeared to be a compromise between the Social Democrats, whofavor a slow approach, and the conservatives, who want aquick merger.   The U.S. rejected a suggestion by Soviet Foreign MinisterShevardnadze that a united Germany temporarily be part ofboth NATO and the Warsaw Pact.   ---   ISRAEL'S PERES FAILED in an attempt to form a newgoverning coalition.   In a blow to prospects for early peace talks withPalestinians, two religious lawmakers defected from the LaborParty leader's coalition just as the Knesset was about tobegin a special session to approve the cabinet. IsraeliPresident Herzog gave Peres an additional 15 days to form agovernment to replace the coalition that collapsed March 15over Prime Minister Shamir's refusal to accept U.S. proposalsfor Mideast peace.   Herzog, in an apparent reference to Israel's electoralsystem, said recent political haggling raised &quot;questionsabout . . . our political culture.&quot;   ---   The FBI arrested a man wanted in connection with the 1976bombing death of former Chilean Ambassador Orlando Letelierin Washington. The bureau said Jose Dionisio Suarez, 51, wastaken into custody in St. Petersburg, Fla., and charged withconspiracy to murder a foreign official. He is the thirdperson arrested in the case.   ---   British officials impounded a shipment of suspected gunparts bound for Iraq. The officials said the consignment,which was being loaded onto an Iraqi-chartered ship innortheastern England, included a huge gun barrel capable offiring a nuclear shell. The seizure came two weeks afternuclear triggers headed for Baghdad were confiscated.   ---   A car bomb exploded on a highway bridge in the Colombiancity of Medellin as a police patrol was passing, killing atleast 14 people, authorities said. There wasn't any immediateclaim of responsibility for the blast, but cocainetraffickers have been recently killing police in retaliationfor a government crackdown on illegal drugs.   ---   A U.S. paratrooper was charged with premeditated murderand aggravated assault stemming from incidents that allegedlyoccurred during the Panama invasion, Army officials said. Thecharge is the most serious action taken against a soldierfollowing the Dec. 20 military operation.   ---   A study found that doctors at a for-profit health clinicchain increased the number of patient laboratory and X-rayexaminations when they were offered bonuses to increase theirclinics' revenues. Some health care experts have expressedconcern that such incentives can cloud a doctor's judgment inprescribing care.   ---   France insisted that it hadn't dealt with terrorists innegotiating the release in Lebanon of three hostages. AFrench woman, a Belgian man and their child were freedTuesday by Abu Nidal's Libyan-backed Palestinian extremistgroup. Amid mounting criticism, Paris also denied paying aransom of three warplanes to Gadhafi.   ---   Walesa denied that he had decided to run for president ofPoland, backing away from remarks attributed to him Tuesdayby the official PAP news agency. He said the campaign thatmost concerns him is winning re-election next week asSolidarity chairman.   ---   Mother Teresa resigned as superior general of her order ofnuns, which operates more than 400 shelters for the world'sdestitute, the Vatican announced. The 79-year-old Nobel PeacePrize winner cited ill health, saying the Calcutta-basedcharitable organization &quot;needs to be run efficiently.&quot;   ---   The Census Bureau reported that about 31.5 million people,or 13% of the U.S. population, lacked health insurance in thelast quarter of 1988. The report found that young adultsbetween the ages of 18 and 24 were the most likely to lackhealth insurance, and that Hispanics are more likely to beuninsured than either whites or blacks.   ---   China has closed several towns along the old Silk Road inits northwestern frontier region amid unconfirmed reports ofclashes between ethnic Moslem minorities and Chinese, aregional official said. As many as 50 people reportedly werekilled by troops.   ---   South Africa's de Klerk met in Cape Town with AnglicanArchbishop Tutu and other church leaders to discuss endingblack factional fighting in Natal province. Details of thetalks weren't immediately disclosed. As many as 400 peoplehave been killed in the past two months in the region.   ---   Kashmiri secessionist violence spread to the Indian cityof Bombay with a bomb attack that wounded at least 34 people.In reaction to the incident, the latest in a Moslemindependence campaign for the disputed region, Pakistanitroops were placed on alert and India's leader talked of war.   ---   Died: Harold Ballard, 86, owner of the National HockeyLeague's Toronto Maple Leafs, in Toronto, of diabetes-relatedheart problems and respiratory failure.</TEXT></DOC>