<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910807-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>910807-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Oil's Maverick:   Atlantic Richfield Co.   Is Winning the West   By Breaking the Mold   ---   It Sells Gasoline Dirt Cheap,   Peddles Burgers, Concocts   New Low-Emission Fuel   ---   Big If: Future Source of Crude   ----   By Frederick Rose   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   ARC RCM</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)ENERGY (ENE)</MS><IN>CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><RE>ALASKA (AK)CALIFORNIA (CA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   LOS ANGELES -- A smoggy city intersection here marks abattleground in the gasoline war in this car-mad part of thecountry.   On two corners, dust swirls where Chevron and Exxonstations have fallen. On a third, Shell is offering unleadedgasoline at $1.08 a gallon. But on the fourth, cars jam anAtlantic Richfield Co. station selling 50% more gasoline thanits rival. The price for unleaded: $1 a gallon. And to top itoff, the station's small AM/PM convenience store is sellingmore than $1 million a year in food and drink.</LP><TEXT>   Arco is king of the pump in the West, winner on cornerafter corner in the nation's largest gasoline market. Here,every fifth gallon sold is from Arco, at prices fewcompetitors can touch. Now, in a significant step, Arco maychange the industry's principal product: It recentlyannounced successful tests of a low-emission gasoline thatother refiners deemed almost impossible to create only monthsago.   The nation's eighth-largest oil company has flourished bybeing different. Based in Los Angeles, far from thetraditional Texas and East Coast homes of Big Oil, it hasemerged as a swift and noisy maverick in a trade dominated byquiet competitors and slow trends.   Arco has been in the forefront in revamping the fillingstation, packing in customers with low-priced gasoline. ItsAM/PM outlets at stations were some of the first to peddlecheap hamburgers, soft drinks and beer instead of tires andoil. Costly gasoline credit cards were tossed and replacedwith a debit card system that takes the payment straight outof the customer's bank account -- and makes Arco money.   &quot;We don't set out to break ranks with the industry,&quot; saysChairman and Chief Executive Officer Lodwrick Cook, in hislight Louisiana drawl. &quot;But on occasion, we do thingsdifferently.&quot;   It seems to work. By some analysts' reckoning, thecompany, which also produces natural gas and makes chemicals,is the nation's most profitable oil company, with a five-yearaverage annual return of 21.5% on shareholder equity, morethan double the industry average.   Even so, questions arise about the company's future. Itsrapid growth in market share of gasoline sales may be nearingthe limit, pinched by refinery capacity and environmentalcontrols. But most important, industry analysts worry aboutArco's long-term supply of oil: Its vast and enormouslyprofitable Alaskan reserves are dwindling.   In six years as chief executive, the 63-year-old Mr. Cookhas fostered a freewheeling chain of command, pushingmanagement discretion down the ranks but closely monitoringresults. Tank-truck drivers set their own routes. A drillingdirector at Prudhoe Bay in Alaska is told simply to &quot;make oiland don't mess up.&quot; A refinery engineer recently was given a$100 million budget to test and install new environmentalequipment that may -- or may not -- save the companyconsiderably more in the long run.   That free-flowing style sparked Arco's gasoline research.Two and half years ago, two mid-level executives concludedthat California environmental regulators would eventuallyorder a move to an alcohol-fuel blend for cars, known asM-85. Such a shift would gravely wound not only Arco but theoil industry generally.   After a brief consultation with top Arco officers, half adozen scientists gathered within two days at the company'stechnical center near Disneyland, with orders to make agasoline that burned and stored as cleanly as M-85.   They bucked both industry practice and common researchprocedures, says Daniel Townsend, head of the clean fuelsgroup. Instead of doing a careful in-house analysis ofvarious gasoline components, they took newly emerging datafrom outside sources. They then assembled a computer programthat &quot;blended&quot; gasoline on paper, adding equations tosimulate the workings of an Arco refinery and calculate thecost of elaborate new facilities that would be needed.   A personal computer chewed through the information,suggesting certain mixtures that could be made economicallywith conventional refinery procedures. To speed things up,Mr. Townsend's crew changed several elements of the gasolineat once, not a usual scientific practice.   The result was a major surprise. By removing chemicalscalled olefins and cutting down on sulfur, tests showed thatMr. Townsend's group sharply lowered nitrous oxide emissions,something other research groups thought couldn't be donewhile cutting carbon monoxide and other toxic fumes.   The total cost for developing the experimental newgasoline, called EC-X, was a few million dollars spent overabout two years. And, along the way, Mr. Townsend's teamdeveloped two new low-emission fuels that Arco is marketingsuccessfully today.   But the cost to bring EC-X to the public would beenormous: perhaps $1 billion to scrap and rebuild nearlytwo-thirds of Arco's Los Angeles refinery alone. At the pump,the fuel would cost 16 cents a gallon more than currentproducts. Arco, which says it won't make EC-X unless allrefiners are ordered to meet similar standards, could readilyfinance the refinery work. And as market leader, it couldspread the spending over a greater volume of gasoline,resulting in a lower cost per gallon than competitors have.   Competitors say that, if they must make a new gasoline,the pressure will be on to make one as clean as but cheaperthan EC-X. &quot;That's going to be the challenge of the firsthalf of the '90s in this business,&quot; says Alfred Jessel, aChevron Corp. planner.   Not long ago Arco was hardly in a position to rattle theindustry. The amalgamation of three regional oil companies inthe 1960s (Atlantic Refining Co., Richfield Oil Corp. andSinclair Oil Co.), it was an also-ran in the gasolinebusiness. But in 1968 a drilling consortium struck oil atPrudhoe Bay, the biggest field ever found in the U.S., andArco had a 22% share. Nine years later, when a pipeline wasbuilt, oil began flowing south.   With riches from Prudhoe, Arco went on a spending spree.It spent half a billion to buy Anaconda Co., the miningcompany. It diversified into solar panels. And it launched abig program of charitable works. Robert O. Anderson, the CEOthrough these years, was an adviser to U.S. presidents and alover of modern art.   Mr. Cook took charge in 1985. As down-to-earth as Mr.Anderson is cerebral, he has overturned traditions, sellingparts of the corporate art collection and putting a huge Arcosign atop the headquarters building, a step Mr. Anderson hadopposed on aesthetic grounds.   In the mid-1980s, Mr. Cook continued a process Mr.Anderson began just before retiring: shrinking Arco. Arcorepurchased almost a quarter of its shares, sold all refiningand marketing operations east of the Mississippi and wroteoff over $2 billion of unprofitable investment in mining,metals and other businesses. Shareholder equity plunged byalmost half, and revenue more than a third. Debt, taken on tofinance the stock repurchase, nearly doubled.   The strategy worked. Profits at the leaner Arco have morethan tripled since 1986 to a record $2.01 billion last year.Arco's stock price has fluctuated but is currently about 50%higher than it was two years ago. In composite trading on theNew York Stock Exchange yesterday, Arco closed at $122.125,up $1.875.   Mr. Cook hasn't stopped there. He has declared that Arcowill replace declining reserves only when it is clearlyprofitable to do so -- heresy in a trade where companiesusually aim each year to replace the crude they pump. Thoughthe company is searching widely to replace the decliningAlaskan production, Mr. Cook cautions that &quot;people can getcaught up in the romance and joys of looking for oil; thepurpose of this business is to make money.&quot;   And so, Arco continues to squeeze. In coming months, itwill reduce by 7% its 20,000 U.S. employees, reacting to anindustry-wide slump this year in natural gas prices and a bigoversupply of gasoline in West Coast markets. The slump hasresulted in depressed earnings at Arco, which analystsbelieve will continue through this year before turning upagain in 1992.   The greatest effect of the longer-term pruning has been onthe marketing side. In little over a decade, the company hasslashed the number of Arco service stations to 1,500 from7,400, keeping only the best outlets. The result is thehighest per-station gasoline sales in the country and thelowest per-gallon overhead. Arco outlets sell an average ofabout 225,000 gallons monthly, double the industry average.And instead of 10 cents a gallon in overhead, the industryaverage on the West Coast, its stations run five cents orless. &quot;That is the key to our strength, and we protect itlike Samson's hair,&quot; says George Babikian, president of ArcoProducts, the refining and marketing arm.   &quot;They're perceived even by their competitors to be in atotally different league,&quot; says Frederick P. Leuffer Jr., ananalyst at C.J. Lawrence. For one thing, top brass listens toodd concepts. A few years ago, Mr. Cook sat down to anunusual lunch. Munching on a special prepackaged hamburger,he cross-examined Roger Smith, an Arco executive who waspitching the burger for the company's convenience stores. Howwas the burger made? Could it really be heated without anexpensive kitchen? How many could be sold -- and at whatprofit?   &quot;He bought the idea right then and there,&quot; says Mr. Smith,who developed the oven and special warming display case forArco's 49-cent flash-frozen burgers. Soon, Mr. Smith wasinstalling $20 million worth of the equipment in hundreds ofthe company's AM/PM gas-station stores. Billboards sprouted:&quot;Move over McDonald's . . . Sorry Wendy's.&quot; Mr. Cook posedfor newspaper photos, munching more burgers.   Focusing on buyers 18 to 34 years old with modest incomes,Arco sells more than $500 million a year of food andconvenience items at its AM/PM stores. Racks of cheap candiesnear the registers have made it the world's biggest vendor ofReese's Peanut Butter Cups.   If the image is 7-Eleven, the base of the business stillclearly is oil. The Alaskan reserves are the key to Arco'sworld: The company sends some 445,000 barrels a day southfrom the fields and last year earned more than a third of itsprofit from the operations.   But by the year 2000, Arco estimates the fields will yieldonly 280,000 barrels a day despite its efforts to sustainoutput. So for years now, Arco has searched for &quot;the big one&quot;that would replace Prudhoe Bay. It holds the most explorationleases in Alaska. It has gone overseas, with disappointingresults so far.   Such thoughts aren't far from John Decker's mind as heascends a small cliff above a chilly creek, 200 miles northof the Arctic circle. Mr. Decker, an Arco geologist, skirtsan outcropping of purple and white wildflowers and crouchesnear a rock face. He points out a layer of dark-gray rock toa visitor. &quot;These were deposited 190 million years ago, whilethese,&quot; he says, pointing to a somewhat lighter, brownishsandstone, &quot;were put here 130 million years ago.&quot;   What happened in the years since is vital to Arco andother oil companies exploring here. If, as Mr. Deckersuggests, a giant layer of sea bottom, rich in marinematerials, was folded and squeezed just right, the brownishsandstone may hold billions of barrels of oil below thetundra, not unlike the Prudhoe Bay field 100 miles to theeast. The most desirable tract for exploration is a 1.5million-acre coastal section of the nearby Arctic NationalWildlife Refuge, but that's closed to development.   Even so, Arco's greatest hopes for the huge oil find itneeds focus on this coast, where it has spent years examiningclues outside the refuge for hints of what lies inside.Perhaps no oil company has a greater stake in the high-riskventure.   As a fellow geologist listens, Mr. Decker describes intechnical terms factors that convince him that rich oildeposits are buried below the tundra. Mr. Decker pauses andlooks up for agreement. &quot;It's a nice story,&quot; the othergeologist replies. &quot;But can we be sure it's right?&quot;</TEXT></DOC>