<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910131-0140</DOCNO><DOCID>910131-0140.</DOCID><HL>   Iraq Launches First Big Ground Assault;   12 U.S. Troops Are Killed, 2 Wounded   ---   Enemy Forces Repulsed   From All the Areas   But One Saudi Town   ----   By Bob Davis   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia -- U.S. troops suffered their firstcasualties in major ground combat with Iraq, even as thecommander of U.S. forces in the war said allied forces haveestablished air and naval supremacy over Iraq.   Iraq launched five ground attacks against U.S. and alliedforces Tuesday night and early Wednesday. Gen. NormanSchwarzkopf, the U.S. commander, said 12 U.S. Marines werekilled and two wounded and two American light armoredvehicles destroyed in the Iraqi attacks. He said Iraqi troopsand equipment were heavily damaged and the Iraqi forces wererepulsed everywhere by Wednesday morning except the town ofKhafji, about six miles south of the Kuwaiti border.</LP><TEXT>   Early today, Saudi-led allied forces were still trying toregain Khafji, which previously had been abandoned because itwas within reach of Iraqi artillery.   The attacks followed a series of probes by U.S. forces inrecent days and an incident Monday in which an Iraqi armoredunit was largely destroyed by U.S. forces. In that incident,according to intelligence sources, the Iraqi troops becameeasy targets because they were caught in their own minefieldand unable to find their way out.   Some intelligence analysts said the incidents representedvictories for U.S. tactics, though they cautioned thatTuesday night's attacks might indicate Iraqi troops have morecapability to fight at night than many thought. Moreover,intelligence photographs indicate that B-52 strikes so farhave inflicted very little damage on Iraqi Republican Guardunits.   Meanwhile, the administration scrambled to preventdiplomatic damage from a joint U.S.-Soviet statement on thewar. The statement, issued Tuesday by Secretary of StateJames Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister AlexanderBessmertnykh, said that the fighting could end if Iraq makesan &quot;unequivocal commitment&quot; to leave Kuwait. It also promisedthat the U.S. and the Soviets will address the &quot;Arab-Israeliconflict&quot; after the war.   The statement was widely seen as a slight softening ofU.S. conditions for ending the war. Israeli officials wereupset because they feared the U.S. was going back on itspledge not to link Iraq's occupation of Kuwait with thePalestinian problem.   White House officials were angry that Mr. Baker and theState Department didn't tell them about the statement beforeit was issued. Officials said the episode generated frictionbetween Mr. Baker and National Security Adviser BrentScowcroft.   White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Mr. Bushhimself didn't know of the statement until after it wasreleased, though the spokesman insisted the statement didn'treflect any change in policy and didn't upset Mr. Bush. Andthough Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir publiclyprotested that he hadn't been told in advance about thestatement, U.S. and Israeli officials said that Israeliconcerns had been eased by the end of yesterday.   Despite the U.S. casualties, the commander gave his mostupbeat and detailed overall assessment of the war so far.   Using a blizzard of favorable war statistics and ahalf-dozen videotapes showing U.S. bombing prowess, Gen.Norman Schwarzkopf said in a session with reporters thatallied forces had largely destroyed Iraq's infrastructure,including its bridges, electric generating capacity,communications and transportation facilities. In addition, hesaid the U.S. had reduced a Baghdad nuclear research facilityto &quot;rubble&quot; and destroyed 11 storage facilities for chemicaland biological weapons. &quot;We're inflicting continuous damage.&quot;   Gen. Schwarzkopf seemed confident that the U.S. war planis working, and he almost taunted the Iraqis for their lackof firepower. The U.S. destroyed a major munitions dump innorthern Kuwait, he said, claiming that the blast from theexplosion was more potent than a volcanic eruption. With thedamage done to Iraqi transportation, he added, Iraqi troopsin Kuwait will face monumental problems getting resupplied.Moreover, with the skies open to U.S. fliers, he contended:&quot;Every time an Iraqi airplane takes off from the ground, it'srunning away.&quot;   It wasn't immediately clear why the Iraqis launched theirfirst significant ground probes of the war. The ground combatbegan late Tuesday night, when Iraqi mechanized battalionscrossed into Saudi Arabia at two points and were met byelements of the First Marine division. During those battles-- described by Marine Lt. Col. Cliff Myers as &quot;hellacious,&quot;according to pool reports -- the U.S. said it destroyed 14Iraqi tanks using A-10 attack planes, Cobra helicopters andTOW anti-tank missiles.   The Iraqis launched three different assaults on Khafji,which residents had fled earlier because it is withinartillery range of Iraqi gunners. Yesterday morning, in thelast of the assaults, the Iraqis advanced with 40 tanks andwere met by Saudi and U.S. Marine forces, Gen. Schwarzkopfsaid.   Ten Iraqi tanks were destroyed in the fighting at Khafji,he said. A spokesman for the Saudi armed forces said that theIraqis had been &quot;stopped&quot; at Khafji but that fighting wasstill continuing.   Retired Col. Harry Summers, a military historian, said hethought the ground action indicated that the Iraqis were&quot;trying to draw us into prematurely launching our grandcampaign.&quot; But he doubted the tactic would work, and said theU.S. would continue with its air campaign for some time.   Gen. Schwarzkopf said the Iraqis may have been trying tostop the Marines from launching artillery barrages at them,or they simply might have had their fill of being pounded byU.S. warplanes. &quot;Sometimes the best defense is a goodoffense,&quot; he said.   The U.S. general played down the significance of Khafji,which has been in the news recently for the oil spill that iswrecking its beaches. But the attack could boost the moraleof beleaguered Iraqi troops. It also serves as a harbingerthat any major ground combat will turn what has seemed to bea surgical war -- for the U.S. at least -- into a bloody one.   Last night, according to pool reports, Marines werejubilant at the outcome of the battles. &quot;It felt reallygood,&quot; said Capt. Bill Wainwright, who spent most of Tuesdaynight calling in air strikes on Iraqi positions.   While viewed as a victory for U.S. tactics, the series ofincidents this week involving Iraqi armor demonstrate thecost of a ground war. For all the success, more troops werekilled in a single night than in the entire air war.   U.S. units themselves have been probing along theSaudi-Kuwait border; in one such undertaking last weekend,Marines suffered casualties when vehicles collided at night.Intelligence sources indicate that the Iraqi units stillappear in a defensive posture and that the battles yesterdayand Tuesday represent an effort by the Iraqis to feel outallied forces that have moved substantially nearer to them inthe past week.   The skirmishes coincide with heavy allied bombardment ofIraqi front-line troop positions in Kuwait and RepublicanGuard units being held in reserve to the north. Though muchattention has been paid to the tonnage of bombs dropped byB-52s on these forces, intelligence and military officialscaution that the direct impact on Guard units has beenlimited.   Wary of the Guard's defense network, the bombers had towork their way in gradually before being able to target theunits fully in recent days, and the bombardment continuesfrom high altitudes. Satellite photographs show tanks leftintact amid numerous bomb craters, and one major question iswhen the allied forces will be prepared to risk a loweraltitude, more targeted bombardment.   Though intelligence assessments indicate that thebombardment has disrupted supplies of materials, food andwater for the Iraqi forces, efforts to destroy thecommunications network built up by Saddam Hussein haveproduced mixed results. The Iraqi forces show greatdiscipline in their use of communications to avoid beingintercepted, and the system is both more redundant andsophisticated than was widely known before. The Iraqis useportable generators. And, with the help of European concerns,they invested heavily in a cable and fiber optics system thatis less visible and more protected than older systems.   Meanwhile, a new oil spill is adding to the complicationsposed by the enormous spill allied officials say Iraqunleashed last week.   Gen. Schwarzkopf confirmed that an Iraqi offshore oilterminal at Mina al Bakr, north of Kuwait, has been leakingfor several days, but he didn't estimate the size of thespill. Pentagon officials said they didn't know whether Iraqis intentionally releasing the oil, or if the spill wascaused inadvertently by allied attacks on Iraqi vessels inthe northern Persian Gulf.   Also, an Israeli diplomatic source said that the U.S.agreed to share with Israel so-called &quot;real time&quot; satelliteintelligence. The Israeli source said the informationsharing, which began this week, enables the Israeli militaryto know exactly where Iraqi Scud missile attacks are comingfrom and exactly what the U.S. is doing to remove the threat.   The diplomatic source said the arrangement was made in arecent visit to Israel by Lawrence Eagleburger, deputysecretary of state.   The sharing of such information, which Israel previouslydenied, is part of the U.S. effort to persuade Israel tocontinue its policy of not responding to Scud missile attacksfrom Iraq. In exchange, Mr. Shamir tacitly has agreed tocontinue Israel's policy of restraint as long as Iraq doesn'tlaunch an unconventional missile attack on Israel.   ---   Gerald F. Seib and David Rogers in Washington contributedto this article.   (See related story: &quot;Allied Forces Are Preparing ForProspect of Chemical And Biological Warfare&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 31,1991)</TEXT></DOC>