<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900427-0040</DOCNO><DOCID>900427-0040.</DOCID><HL>   The Troika:   Three Free-Marketeers   Shape Bush's Domestic   And Economic Policy   ---   Sununu, Darman and Boskin   Often Slow Cabinet Plans   For Federal Intervention   ---   Ex-Im Bank Gets the Word   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and David Wessel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- One by one, cabinet officials have shuffledthrough the heavy wooden doors leading to the West Wing ofthe White House to learn, sometimes painfully, about thetroika that really controls domestic policy in the Bushadministration.   These power brokers are the Bush administration's threefree-marketeers: John Sununu, the rumpledengineer-turned-politician who is White House chief of staff;Richard Darman, the consummate Washington operator who isbudget director; and Michael Boskin, the professorialeconomist who is chairman of the Council of EconomicAdvisers.</LP><TEXT>   Together, these three have effectively shaped a social andeconomic philosophy for George Bush, a president whose truepassion is foreign policy. They have been able to do so bothbecause they are in sync with the president's generalinstincts on domestic affairs and because they know that theway to please the gentlemanly Mr. Bush is to win debatesquietly, without allowing them to become public spectacles.   Under their approach, economic growth is the holy grail,free markets are sacrosanct and free trade is the Americanmantra. They constitute a powerful &quot;blocking coalition&quot; thatswats down proposals at odds with this philosophy, saysWilliam Niskanen, an economist in the Reagan White House whonow heads the Cato Institute, a libertarian think-tank.Together they have thwarted Commerce Department schemes toaid the high-definition television business, curbed theTransportation Department's interest in restricting foreigninvestment in airlines, and been instrumental in steering theadministration away from again formally citing Japan thisyear as an unfair trader.   Yet in an important twist on Reagan-era conservatism, thetroika isn't reflexively anti-government. The three endorsegovernment intervention in selected cases; to help workingparents with child-care costs and to expand rights of thedisabled, for instance.   &quot;These are people who believe problems can be fixed andbelieve government can be brought to bear to fix them . . .that all it takes is the right brains and right politicalskills,&quot; says Deborah Steelman, a former Bush campaign policyadviser who is now a Washington lawyer.   And for all their hand-wringing about the budget deficit,Messrs. Sununu, Darman and Boskin also agree that governmentshould spend more on basic research and development that istoo esoteric or expensive for the private sector.   A few weeks ago, for instance, Energy Secretary JamesWatkins and Deputy Secretary Henson Moore were called to Mr.Sununu's office to meet with him and Mr. Darman to discussestimates that a giant new atom smasher in Texas probablywould cost $8 billion, $2 billion more than previouslyestimated. At the meeting, Mr. Sununu asked lots of questionsabout the design. Mr. Darman, his budget knife sheathed,volunteered that the &quot;supercollider&quot; didn't crowd outspending for other research. Their verdict was to plungeahead. &quot;Pure science has to be provided for,&quot; Mr. Sununuexplains.   But the troika's priorities sometimes appall someDemocrats. Rep. Richard Durbin of Illinois was taken aback ata congressional hearing when Mr. Darman flatly declared thathe would rather take budget cuts in housing than in spaceprograms. &quot;As far as I'm concerned, the Bush rhetoric aboutkinder and gentler hasn't translated into the shifts offunding I'd like to see,&quot; Rep. Durbin says.   The Sununu-Darman-Boskin axis first formed during Mr.Bush's presidential campaign, when they were among a selectgroup called to his Maine home for a June 1988 brainstormingsession. They had lunch together, found themselvesphilosophically attuned and stayed in touch. &quot;Campaigns tendto bind,&quot; Mr. Sununu says. &quot;People go through a tough timetogether.&quot; These days, the informal axis accomplishes much ofits work in the dozens of unpublicized meetings and informalhallway conversations in which the Bush administration makesimportant decisions.   The three aren't absolute equals. Messrs. Sununu andDarman, whose jobs give them levers to control day-to-daydecisions, wield more raw power. Mr. Boskin stands out as thefirst chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers to havethe president's ear since Alan Greenspan in the Ford years.They also differ in temperament. Mr. Darman is often ruthlesswith his staff; Mr. Sununu is considerate to his staff butcan be nasty to others; Mr. Boskin is relentlessly polite.   The three share an academic background that each cites inexplaining their relationship. Mr. Sununu was an engineeringprofessor at Tufts University before he became governor ofNew Hampshire. Mr. Darman taught at Harvard between stints inthe Ford and Reagan administrations. Mr. Boskin is on leavefrom a teaching job at Stanford. Academia instilled in them acommon love for verbal jousting that they find stimulating,but that colleagues sometimes find grating or arrogant.   Mr. Darman's debating techniques were particularly evidentduring internal arguments over the new Clean Air bill, whichhe considered grossly expensive. One official recalls Mr.Darman reading aloud from a government report on healtheffects of smog: &quot;Prolonged exposure can result in . . .,&quot; heread, then paused dramatically. &quot;. . . Coughing.&quot;   The Export-Import Bank got a vivid lesson in how the threeoperate earlier this year when it prepared a plan to helpexporters by subsidizing interest rates on commercial bankloans already guaranteed by the federal government. Mr.Darman was appalled at what he considered to be anunwarranted dollop of government aid for business. He alertedMr. Sununu, Mr. Boskin and Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady,whose personal friendship with the president makes him avaluable ally on occasion.   When Ex-Im Bank Vice Chairman Eugene Lawson formallyproposed the plan at a cabinet-level meeting at the WhiteHouse, Mr. Darman pounced. He delivered a withering critique,objecting both to the concept and to what he saw as atransparent scheme to circumvent restraints on the federalbudget. Mr. Boskin chimed in, echoing the Darman arguments.Others at the table whose departments had once supported thescheme quickly backed away. Mr. Lawson was sent back to theEx-Im Bank with orders to reconsider.   The bonds between Mr. Sununu and Mr. Darman areparticularly tight. Mr. Sununu clearly is Mr. Bush's closestaide, seeing him at the start and close of every business dayand often personally negotiating with Congress on sensitivelegislation.   Mr. Darman, in turn, is Mr. Sununu's closest ally. The twomeet informally at about 7:15 every morning in Mr. Sununu'soffice, and then talk as frequently as two dozen times a day.Their collaboration is so constant it sometimes spills intotheir social lives. Mr. Sununu was unhappy several weeks agowith remarks the Environmental Protection Agency had preparedfor a presidential speech on global warming, fearing theysuggested that Mr. Bush was willing to force drastic cutbacksin American use of coal and petroleum products to cut carbondioxide emissions.   So Mr. Sununu rewrote sections of the speech himself. At abirthday party that night for Vice President Dan Quayle, heslipped a copy of the edited version to Mr. Darman at thedinner table. The budget director penciled in a few changesof his own, and their version was sent to the president.   Mr. Boskin, meanwhile, has transformed his post, which hadatrophied into irrelevance, into a potent force, largely bycultivating close ties to President Bush himself. Mr. Boskinsends the president a personal memo on some aspect of theeconomy virtually every night, and Mr. Bush sometimesresponds with a handwritten note or by calling Mr. Boskin athis Georgetown home. When the president invited tennis starsJohn McEnroe and Andre Agassi to his private quarters at theWhite House, he made a spur-of-the-moment call to Mr. Boskin,a regular Bush tennis partner, to come over.   Mr. Boskin shares with his partners a strong dislike forgrand government plans that they think smack of the kind ofcentralized planning that socialist economies now areabandoning. Recently, he learned through an aide of a reportthe Energy Department was drafting on public hearings it hadheld as it draws up a national energy policy. He concludedthat, among other things, the draft Energy Departmentdocument didn't adequately stress the Bush administration'sdetermination to rely mainly on market forces rather thanregulatory schemes or subsidies to ensure energy supplies.   So he raised a red flag at one of the daily meetings Mr.Sununu holds for senior White House staffers. Mr. Darman andMr. Sununu shared his worries, and the three ordered aides torevamp the opening section of the report, ensuring that theword &quot;market&quot; appeared three times in one early paragraph andstriking entirely seven &quot;action items&quot; declaring a nationalconsensus behind policies the administration hadn't yetdebated.   Of course, the Sununu-Darman-Boskin trio isn't always inagreement. Mr. Darman battled more vigorously than the othertwo against parts of the administration's Clean Air bill; heand Mr. Boskin also argued that Mr. Bush should criticize thebill passed by the Senate for deviating from an agreed-tocompromise.   Mr. Sununu brokered a solution. Posing for photos withSenate leaders, Mr. Bush made a little-noticed statementcongratulating the Senate leaders for &quot;a major step forward,&quot;but pointedly termed their bill &quot;only a first step&quot; towardstriking a balance between environmental benefits andeconomic costs.   Conservatives generally applaud troika philosophies butsometimes are unhappy with the willingness to negotiate atall in such cases. On issues such as clean air, &quot;what happensis, the Bush proposal becomes the bottom line for bargainingwith Congress,&quot; and the outcome is inevitably more expensive,says Mr. Niskanen.   Combined, the Sununu-Darman-Boskin axis is more powerfulon domestic issues than any single cabinet officer, even anold presidential friend such as Commerce Secretary RobertMosbacher. On high-definition TV, for instance, Mr. Mosbacherwanted government help for manufacturers so they couldcompete better against the Japanese. But after being summonedto a meeting in Mr. Sununu's office, the secretary backeddown. Under the policy consensus that emerged, theadministration supports removing obstacles to privatebusinesses in general but opposes &quot;the government picking outa specific industry or different firms for favors,&quot; Mr.Boskin says.   While the troika's authority hasn't been formalized, ithas by now been noticed by many cabinet officers, who try toavoid proposals that run afoul of the gospel. TransportationSecretary Samuel Skinner, for instance, unintentionally setoff alarms in the White House last fall when he forced acutback in a planned foreign investment in Northwest Airlinesand seemed to say he wanted more power over debt-financedairline mergers. After a series of meetings with the troika,though, Mr. Skinner did an about-face, rejecting proposedlegislation on airline mergers that he once appeared toendorse.   He also seemed to learn from the experience. Later, whenMr. Skinner's department was drafting a nationaltransportation plan, most differences with the White Housewere carefully resolved to Mr. Darman's satisfaction at lowerlevels -- and Mr. Skinner now is considered a solid &quot;teamplayer.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>