<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900615-0051</DOCNO><DOCID>900615-0051.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>06/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE JUSTICES RULED police may set up roadblocks to catchdrunken drivers.   The Supreme Court, by a 6-3 vote, said checkpoints inwhich police stop every car don't violate the FourthAmendment's protection against &quot;unreasonable searches andseizures.&quot; In an opinion written by Chief Justice Rehnquist,the court upheld a Michigan checkpoint set up in 1986. Whileuse of checkpoints has become widespread, dissenting justicessaid there isn't any evidence to show that checkpoints aremore effective than using police manpower for trafficpatrols.</LP><TEXT>   The court ruled that hospitals and nursing homes may suestate officials under federal law to force them to giveadequate Medicaid reimbursements.   ---   ROMANIA'S ILIESCU MOBILIZED thousands of miners to putdown protests.   Responding to two days of violence in which his securityforces clashed with anti-Communist demonstrators inBucharest, the president-elect summoned the miners, whostreamed into the capital to club people and ransackopposition party offices. Few police and soldiers werevisible in the city, and the miners were apparently left tomaintain order. Health Ministry officials said five peoplewere killed and 277 injured in this week's violence. State TVsaid the nation's interior minister had been replaced.   The Bush administration condemned &quot;in the strongestpossible terms&quot; what it described as &quot;the government-inspiredvigilante violence&quot; in Romania.   ---   The Soviet parliament ordered a two-month delay for aproposed threefold increase in bread prices, a centerpiece ofGorbachev's plan to overhaul the economy and transform itinto a market system. Legislators voted 319-33 to have thegovernment produce another version of the plan.   ---   The Senate sent to the White House landmark legislationguaranteeing workers as much as 12 weeks annual unpaid leavefor childbirth, adoption or family illnesses. The action setsthe stage for a potential veto confrontation with theadministration, which is allied with business interestsopposed to the legislation.   ---   Louisiana's House passed the nation's harshestanti-abortion bill, providing up to 10 years hard labor andfines of up to $100,000 for doctors who perform abortions.The bill, which would not penalize women who receiveabortions, passed on a 73-27 vote and moved to the stateSenate.   ---   Colombian police killed the purported mastermind of aMedellin cocaine ring's 10-month-old war against thegovernment, authorities said. A car bomb later went off neara police post in the Bogota suburb where the leader of thecocaine ring was slain. A radio report said the bomb killedat least two people and injured 20.   ---   The Soviet defense minister said the Kremlin could agreeto a united Germany only if it joined a European securitysystem replacing NATO and the Warsaw Pact. His remarks seemedto backpedal from prior Soviet comments that didn't disputeGermans' right to unification, only to which group Germanyshould belong.   ---   The FAA disclosed plans to order installation ofmore-sensitive airport X-ray machines and metal detectorsthat could reduce the threat of terrorist air attacks.Meanwhile, the Transportation Department said it created anOffice of Intelligence and Security to develop aviation andmaritime security policy.   ---   As many as 60 boats attacked a spreading oil slick fromthe burning supertanker Mega Borg in the Gulf of Mexico.Officials in Galveston, Texas, estimated that the slick fromthe leaking vessel was 30 miles long and as much as 10 mileswide and said they couldn't determine where or when the oilmight begin washing ashore.   ---   Thousands of protesters marched through Monrovia, chanting&quot;Stop the killings&quot; and urging the U.S. to help end Liberia's5 1/2-month tribal war. The Liberian Council of Churchesasked the U.S. to send a peacekeeping force to the Africannation. Talks between the government and rebels showed littlesign of progress in Sierra Leone.   ---   Bush and Thai Premier Chatichai vowed to work together tofight narcotics and bring peace to war-ravaged Cambodiathrough &quot;free and fair elections&quot; under the U.N.'s auspices.The two leaders also discussed investment and trade issuesduring their meetings at the White House.   ---   Sri Lanka rushed troop reinforcements to besiegednortheastern areas, where about 800 policemen have beenseized by Tamil guerrillas in a four-day offensive. Thegovernment said it was willing to negotiate an end to theconflict, in which more than 200 people have been killedsince Monday.   ---   The State Department said widespread intimidation ofvoters may have plagued last Sunday's balloting in Bulgaria'sparliamentary elections. The party of former Communists wonthe opening round, with a runoff election scheduled thisSunday.   ---   Central American presidents gathered in Guatemala todiscuss creating a regional common market to boost theireconomies, which are emerging from years of politicalconflict. Secretary of State Baker will arrive Sunday nightto attend the final day of the meeting, where he is expectedto be queried on dwindling U.S. aid to the region.   ---   A bomb exploded outside a Peruvian army barracks, killingtwo soldiers and a civilian. Separately, police said MaoistShining Path guerrillas had murdered 20 peasants earlier inthe week. The blast was the second fatal car bombing inPeru's Andean highlands since Alberto Fujimori wonpresidential elections last Sunday.   ---   Israeli workers participated in a one-day strike. Laborleaders termed the walkout a success, announcing that a totalof 800,000 people stayed away from their jobs. The Histadruttrade federation organized the work stoppage to demand higherpay and measures to curb unemployment.   ---   The Netherlands launched a multi-billiondollaranti-pollution plan a year after a similar effort broughtdown the government. The plan, devised by the center-leftleadership that took office last November, aims to doubleannual spending on the environment to $8.4 billion annuallyby 1994.   ---   Britain said Hong Kong will have to forcibly return toVietnam more boat people unless the U.S. agrees to houseabout 9,000 of the refugees on the island of Guam.</TEXT></DOC>