<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900521-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>900521-0089.</DOCID><HL>   U.S.-Soviet Summit to Yield Arms Pacts;   No Agreement in Sight on Europe, Trade   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Next week's U.S.-Soviet summit meeting herewill feature a partial agreement to reduce the superpowers'arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles and a treaty todestroy most of their chemical weapons.   But, after four days of tough preliminary talks in Moscow,no summit accords are in sight on the more pressing questionson the future of post-Communist Europe. And a U.S.-Soviettrade pact, once expected to be signed at the summit, seemslikely to be put on hold because of Moscow's campaign againstLithuanian independence.</LP><TEXT>   During the talks, Secretary of State James Baker andSoviet President Mikhail Gorbachev were able to agree ontreaty language covering nuclear cruise missiles -- thehighly accurate, hard-to-detect weapons that had proved amajor sticking point in crafting the Strategic Arms ReductionTreaty. And they readied for signing a pact that would, overtime, eliminate 98% of their vast inventories of poison gasweapons.   That makes it likely that Mr. Gorbachev and President Bushwill be able to declare the missile treaty substantiallycomplete and the summit a political successeven though allremaining treaty issues won't be worked out for months, andthe cruise missile deal announced Saturday is loaded withloopholes and exemptions.   However, Mr. Baker and his advisers reported no progressat Moscow on much touchier superpower negotiations. Thesetalks, on conventional arms control and German unification,could lead to the formal demise of the already disintegratingarmed Soviet empire in Eastern and Central Europe. Thenegotiations have supplanted the long-dominant nuclearmissile talks as the highest foreign policy priorities of theBush administration.   Despite new American concessions, no movement was markedin the separate conventional arms-control talks, where Moscowhas dug in on terms for dismantling the huge Red Armypresence in Eastern and Central Europe. And U.S. officialsreported that Mr. Gorbachev remained adamantly opposed to theentry of a reunified Germany into the Western Alliance.   &quot;We had come with ideas designed to push this processforward, but our counterparts weren't able to respondmeaningfully at this time,&quot; an exhausted Mr. Baker said at aMoscow news conference Saturday evening.   &quot;It seems clear the Soviets are just not ready to movemuch on these issues at this summit,&quot; said one seniorAmerican negotiator who participated in the five hours oftalks with Mr. Gorbachev and dozens more with Soviet ForeignMinister Eduard Shevardnadze, his top aides, and an array ofSoviet generals. The U.S. negotiator added: &quot;Unlike strategicmissile talks, issues like conventional troop pullbacks andletting Germany go Western pose big domestic politicalproblems in the Soviet Union. And Gorbachev has enoughtrouble at home without taking these on now.&quot;   In addition, it was said that the Soviet president firmlyrejected independence anytime soon for Lithuania and the twoother small Baltic nations incorporated into the U.S.S.R. byforce in 1940.   Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Baker met with Lithuania's primeminister in Moscow last week. But the Kremlin leader toldboth that the small country must suspend its March 11declaration of independence -- a step it has so far refusedto take -- before he will begin a lengthy &quot;dialogue&quot; thatcould lead to secession. Meanwhile, Moscow has kept in placean economic blockade of Lithuania.   Mr. Baker made it clear that if the Lithuania standoffcontinues, chances are poor that next week's summit willfeature the signing of a new U.S.-Soviet trade treaty and thewaiver of trade restrictions -- even if Moscow completes workon an emigration law that formerly had been the solecondition for American trade liberalization. That law isscheduled for a vote in the Soviet Parliament May 31.   Only a month or so after the May 30-June 3 summit, theSoviet leader will convene the most critical Communist PartyCongress in years, a meeting at which he aims to purge hishard-line opponents and force the party to give up much ofits power to government agencies.   Mr. Baker and his advisers believe Mr. Gorbachev wants togo into the party's congress boasting of arms control&quot;progress&quot; with the U.S. and a popular reception inpost-summit visits to Minnesota and California. But theysense he wants to avoid tackling issues that remind partyhardliners and the Soviet public of the country's recentretreats.   As a result, Mr. Bush could face a tough Mr. Gorbachevnext week and find it hard to push his European politicalagenda, especially German unification within the NorthAtlantic Treaty Organization.   During his Friday meeting with Mr. Baker, the Sovietleader showed flashes of anger and complained that someAmerican actions, such as opposing a greater Soviet role in anew European development bank, were making it hard for him tofend off opponents of reform. On Lithuania and other matters,he repeatedly told Mr. Baker that he is under intensepressure from hardliners in the military and elsewhere todrop his conciliatory stand toward the West and internaldissenters.   The cruise missile agreements basically grant Americandemands to exempt large quantities of those weapons from thelegal limits of the START treaty. Nuclear sea-launched cruisemissiles are excluded from the treaty altogether. They arecovered only in a side document that isn't legally bindingand doesn't include verification. That document limits eachside to a maximum of 880 of the naval missiles, over 100 morethan the U.S. Navy currently plans to build.   On air-launched nuclear cruise missiles, the U.S. won theright to place 20 of the weapons on certain bombers but countthem as only 10 against the treaty limits. And an advancednew conventional U.S. cruise missile called Tacit Rainbow wasexempted from the treaty's range limits in a last-minutecompromise that saved the Moscow talks.   The two presidents will be able to claim political creditfor other portions of the START treaty settled earlier,including a 50% cut in heavy Soviet land-based missiles. Butseveral important issues, including how to count mobilemissiles, still must be decided. Soviet negotiators will flyto Washington this week to work on those issues.   Overall, the START treaty would cut total superpowerstrategic missiles by about 30%, with most cuts coming fromthe Soviet side. While it will be the first arms pact toactually reduce long-range missiles, it falls short of itsoriginal goal of an overall 50% reduction. It is expected tobe formally signed late this year, after technicalities arecompleted.   Under the chemical weapons treaty, the U.S. and U.S.S.R.will immediately cease poison gas production and destroy allbut 5,000 tons each of their existing stocks-a roughly 80%cut for the U.S. and a 90% cut for Moscow. Then, after amultination pact is completed, the superpowers will furthercut their stocks to 500 tons each over eight years,completing a 98% reduction for the U.S., 99% for the Soviets.The remaining stocks would be held until the most dangerouscountries holding poison gas, such as Iraq and Libya, signthe multinational accord.   Other, less significant treaties are also expected to besigned at the summit. These include pacts curbing atomictests, setting maritime boundaries, regulating air and seatransport, and expanding student exchanges and culturalcenters.</TEXT></DOC>