<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900511-0108</DOCNO><DOCID>900511-0108.</DOCID><HL>   Acting Presidential:   A Miami Businessman   Is Angling, Some Say,   To Succeed Castro   ---   Mr. Mas Canosa Denies That,   But He Is a Major Figure   In the Cuban-Exile Lobby   ---   A `Bomb,' a Threat and a Duel   ----   By Jose de Cordoba   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><LP>   MIAMI -- The TV newsman asks Jorge Mas Canosa a questionthat is hotly debated all over this exile capital.   Is it true, the commentator asks, that Mr. Mas Canosa, awealthy 49-year-old telephone-company contractor, plans tosucceed Fidel Castro?</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I am not running for president of Cuba,&quot; snaps Mr. MasCanosa in his heavily accented English. Later, appearing onlocal Spanish-language radio, Mr. Mas Canosa, a volatilefellow who once challenged a Miami city commissioner to aduel, lashes out at people who would ridicule him forpolitical ambitions he denies having:   &quot;The only thing Jorge Mas aspires to is the liberty ofCuba.&quot; (Like some kings and presidents, he has a tendency torefer to himself in the third person.)   Until lately, few would have cared one way or the otherabout Mr. Mas Canosa's political future, even though thebusinessman is also chairman of the Cuban American NationalFoundation, a powerful Washington-based exile lobby, to whichhe devotes most of his time. The Castro succession has beenbeside the point for the 31 years Fidel has been unassailablyin power. But suddenly, in the bright glare of perestroika,the 63-year-old Mr. Castro is looking increasinglyvulnerable. If change can come to the Communist bloc inEastern Europe, then why not to a Soviet satellite off thecoast of Florida?   Mr. Castro's overthrow may prove to be just the latestexile pipe dream but, in Miami at least, the struggle forpower in post-Castro Cuba is going at full tilt.   And of the many would-be &quot;Senores Presidentes&quot; who liveand scheme in this conspirators' heaven, Mr. Mas Canosa -- aslight, extraordinarily energetic man with connections inWashington, not to mention a penchant for hot rhetoric and ablue, bulletproof Mercedes-Benz -- is widely seen as the mostambitious of them all.   &quot;People of my generation don't talk about being president,they act like the president,&quot; says a director of thefoundation, who suggests that Mr. Mas Canosa, despite hisprotestations to the contrary, really is after Mr. Castro'sjob and is, therefore, trying to act the part. Like manyothers interviewed for this story, the director didn't wantto be identified.   On April 28, Mr. Mas Canosa excoriated Fidel and lavishlypraised Ronald Reagan for 16 minutes before 20,000flag-waving Cuban exiles gathered at the Orange Bowl to heara speech by Mr. Reagan, decked out for the occasion in his&quot;guayabera&quot;, a shirt typical of the Caribbean. &quot;Americans andCubans together again will gain the liberty and independenceof Cuba,&quot; Mr. Mas Canosa told the excited crowd, in a speechthat was broadcast to Cuba on the U.S. Information Agency'sRadio Marti.   In the past few months, Mr. Mas Canosa has toured EasternEurope, meeting with presidents and prime ministers. He wasaccompanied by Armando Valladares, a former Cuban politicalprisoner and author, who, though he barely speaks English, isU.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Human Rights Commissionin Geneva.   Florida's governor, Bob Martinez, recently named Mr. MasCanosa chairman of the state's &quot;Free Cuba&quot; commission, whichis to advise the governor on the economic and social impacton South Florida of Mr. Castro's prospective fall.   Mr. Mas Canosa and the foundation have been busy writing aconstitution for a hypothetical Cuban provisional government.Mr. Mas Canosa says he has hired Nobel laureate economistMilton Friedman, at a fee of between $100,000 and $150,000,to draw up plans for the Cuban economy post-Castro. (Mr.Friedman denies that rather emphatically: &quot;They asked me if Iwould be willing to head up the study, and I said no. . . . Ihaven't received a penny, nor do I have any expectation ofreceiving a penny. . . .&quot;)   In a small broadcast booth crowded with supporters, Mr.Mas Canosa tells a talk-show audience that Arthur Laffer,&quot;the guy who invented the Laffer curve,&quot; is also on the team.Mr. Laffer confirms that he is. His mission: to draw up alist of Fortune 500 companies eager to invest in a free Cuba.The exiles take it for granted that Cuba after Castro will befree and that it may well find its new leader in Miami. Witha confident sweep of his arm, Mr. Mas Canosa explains thatCuba will need little U.S. aid, as he and the foundation haveplans to raise maybe $19 billion in the international bondmarket.   Some anti-Castro exiles accuse Mr. Mas Canosa ofmachinations in Washington fostering his presidentialaspirations in Havana. Ernesto Betancourt, the former head ofRadio Marti, says, in particular, that in March Mr. MasCanosa cost him his job.   Mr. Mas Canosa heads President Bush's advisory board onRadio Marti and is ardent about the new TV Marti operation,which broadcasts to Cuba. Mr. Betancourt was opposed to thevery idea of it, arguing that Cuba could turn it to itsadvantage in its propaganda war with the U.S. by jamming thesignal. And so, Mr. Betancourt says, Mr. Mas Canosa plottedto have him removed. Actually, Mr. Betancourt was offered ajob transfer that he refused to take. He quit instead.   He says Mr. Mas Canosa wants to use the broadcastoperation to hype his presidential aspirations with the Cubanpeople. Mr. Betancourt believes, he says, that his removal&quot;was a &quot;coup d'etat&quot; to get control of transmissions, withMas being in the background.&quot; Mr. Mas Canosa strongly deniesthe characterization, and the USIA says its offer of a jobtransfer to Mr. Betancourt had nothing to do with Mr. MasCanosa.   In Miami, Mr. Mas Canosa is admired for his relentlessdedication to the anti-Castro cause. But many exiles, andeven some close associates of his, see in Mr. Mas Canosaauthoritarian, anti-democratic impulses. In his radioappearances, he bitterly attacks opponents, using the samesort of strident rhetoric -- albeit from the right -- thatMr. Castro employs to intimidate. Recently, he denounced agroup of university professors in Miami with whom hedisagreed as &quot;close to Castro,&quot; despite their weakness for&quot;McDonald's hamburgers and Burger King.&quot;   One measure of the fear in which Mr. Mas Canosa is held isthat many people who condemn him roundly in private areunwilling to criticize him on the record. Some people comparehis personality to Mr. Castro's. Raul Masvidal, a founder ofthe foundation who quit in 1985, says Mr. Mas Canosa as aleader is &quot;paternalistic and authoritarian. That's what wehave with Castro.&quot;   Mr. Mas Canosa rejects the comparison. He says that he isopposed to dictatorships of all sorts and that he has spenthis whole career fighting for democracy. He notes, however,that when attacked, he is combative.   Cubans are &quot;absolutists&quot; who consider leaders either weakor dictatorial, he says. &quot;I am in the middle.&quot; And as for thefear of criticizing the foundation, he admits that some dothink twice before speaking out. &quot;People fear the socialpressure because the foundation has a great deal of respectin the community.&quot;   At his office desk in a warehouse-district building here,a fat stack of phone messages has piled up during a two-dayabsence. He says he spends about 90% of his time on Cuba, 10%tending to his business, which specializes in layingtelephone cable for Southern Bell. (He also has a tractordealership.) &quot;The main objective of the Cuban government isto defame the foundation and my person,&quot; Mr. Mas Canosa tellsa visitor darkly. &quot;There is a conspiracy against thefoundation and against me.&quot;   Mr. Mas Canosa's power lies in his close control of theCuban American National Foundation, which has an associatedthough legally distinct lobbying group, and apolitical-action committee that in the 1988 election gave$182,897 to 56 U.S. House and Senate candidates, Democrats aswell as Republicans. The foundation's board is top-heavy withMiami's newly rich Cuban business elite. &quot;It's a businessoligarchy, which has delegated political decisions to Jorge,&quot;says Jose Antonio Font, a former executive director of thefoundation.   The group has more than 50 directors, who each pony up atleast $10,000 a year in order to serve. Trustees, about 40individuals, pay half that. And in the past three years, toshed its elitist image the organization has signed up some6,000 individual members, contributing as little as $5 permonth each.   The foundation has scored a number of coups in Washington.It got Radio Marti on the air. Then lobbying by thefoundation was instrumental in lifting a congressional ban onU.S. aid to Jonas Savimbi's anti-Communist guerrillas, whowere fighting Cuban troops in Angola. The foundation hasbrought to the U.S., with the blessings of the Reagan andBush administrations, 2,400 Cubans who had been stranded inthird countries. And, in March, TV Marti (whose broadcastsignal Cuba promptly jammed) began its trial run. Thefoundation (in other words, Jorge Mas Canosa) powerfullyinfluences U.S. Cuba policy.   Mr. Mas Canosa himself left Cuba as a student in 1960. Hetrained for the failed, 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion but hisboat never reached the beach. He worked as a milkman in Miamiand some customers still remember him today, for hispunctuality and because he was always talking about Cuba.   Mr. Mas Canosa was commissioned a second lieutenant in theU.S. Army, but resigned his commission and joined ananti-Castro group. As the exiles' activity waned, Mr. MasCanosa worked at various jobs before establishing himself ina business career. Ultimately, he bought an electricalcontracting company, which today has about 600 employees andis a major subcontractor for the local unit of BellSouthCorp.   Although Mr. Mas Canosa sometimes affects the image of asuave Washington mover, he is still in many ways theprototypical, fiery exile politician with streetfighterinstincts.   To wit: In 1986, Mr. Mas Canosa in a radio appearancechallenged Miami's city commissioner at the time, JoeCarollo, to a duel. His choice of weapons: firearms. Mr.Carollo had torpedoed a $130 million real-estate developmentdeal involving Mr. Mas Canosa, former U.N. Ambassador JeaneKirkpatrick and others.   &quot;I am going to prove to the Cubans that you are a clownand a coward,&quot; Mr. Mas Canosa pledged on the air. &quot;Yourbullying in Miami has ended because you have encountered aman, with a capital M, a very big M.&quot;   Mr. Carollo replied that Mr. Mas Canosa might cool off ifthe duel were held with water pistols. No duel was fought,but Mr. Mas Canosa believes that his challenge served itspurposes, tarnishing Mr. Carollo's macho image withCuban-American supporters. Whatever the truth of that, Mr.Carollo was defeated in the next election -- by a candidatebacked by foundation directors' money.   At times, Mr. Mas Canosa seems still to be part of thesecretive world of exile conspiracies. In 1988, for instance,he told the Federal Bureau of Investigation that leaders of arival Cuban exile group were planning to kill him. Thatcharge was groundless, says Hubert Matos Jr., one of the menhe accused. Mr. Matos says he immediately requested andpassed an FBI polygraph test. &quot;He {Mr. Mas Canosa} had noreason to go to the FBI,&quot; Mr. Matos asserts. &quot;It's a way ofhurting a person's reputation. All he had to do was to callme on the telephone.&quot;   In 1987, Mr. Mas Canosa received a mysterious manilaenvelope in the mail, which a Miami police dog agreed wassuspicious. Mr. Mas Canosa took to the airwaves to say hesuspected that agents of Mr. Castro had sent him a bomb.(Indeed, another prominent Cuban-American had recently beensent an explosive device.) The Miami City Commission quicklyoffered a $25,000 reward for information. But the bomb squadeventually defused the effort. The package contained avideotape, nothing more, no bomb.   Does Mr. Mas Canosa still feel he is in danger? &quot;Ofcourse,&quot; he says, &quot;When you hurt an assassin like Castro, youhave to be careful.&quot;   Mr. Mas Canosa says that in the matter of theassassination threat he reported to the FBI, he acted on whathe thought was good and sufficient information. &quot;I have onlyone life,&quot; he says.   Over the years, Mr. Mas Canosa has fought a running battlewith the Miami Herald over its coverage of the foundation,and of Cuban affairs generally. He has considered trying tostart a competing newspaper. In 1987, the foundation took outa full-page ad in the Herald criticizing the Herald.   Last year, at the foundation's annual Washington meeting,there was a discussion about condemning the Herald, or evenof boycotting it. Armando Codina, a director, objected.Suddenly, Mr. Mas Canosa grabbed the microphone, shouting,&quot;No more discussions]&quot; Then, according to someone present,Mr. Mas Canosa moved to condemn the Herald, saying that allthose who agreed should stand up. Everyone stood except Mr.Codina, who confirms that the incident took place. &quot;I had adifference of opinion, and it was discussed,&quot; says Mr.Codina.   Mr. Mas Canosa says a boycott was never suggested and thatwhile a resolution condemning the Herald was considered, itdid not pass.   ---   In Miami, some suspect Mr. Mas Canosa is hoping that bloodwill be shed in Cuba and that the U.S. will intervene. Atthat point, they believe, Mr. Mas Canosa would maneuver to beinstalled president by the force of U.S. arms. &quot;Jorge isdesperately looking for the Marines,&quot; says Mr. Masvidal.   Not so, insists Mr. Mas Canosa. He wants no U.S.intervention and a nonviolent solution to the Cuban problem.As he puts it, it doesn't seem to be much of a problem:&quot;Castro is a dead man,&quot; he confidently tells a college classon leadership. &quot;We are negotiating now what kind of funeralhe will have.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>