<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911227-0046</DOCNO><DOCID>911227-0046.</DOCID><HL>   The Power of Russia Alone   ----   By Mark Helprin</HL><DATE>12/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION, NATO (NTO)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   Only months ago in the deserts of the Middle East theUnited States led a world-wide coalition into one of thelargest battles in history. Shortly thereafter, war returnedto Europe for the first time since 1945, and as this civilwar continues in Yugoslavia atrocity by atrocity, half adozen nationalities of the former Soviet Union are engaged inlow-intensity conflict or are building up their armies, fromthe militias of local warlords to the projected 500,000-manforce in the Ukraine.   Borders, governments and names change every day in theformer Soviet Union, enmity between the U.S. and Japan hasshot to the fore, the global economy is mired in doubt anddebt, and openly fascist elements claim roughly 10% of theEuropean electorate. Nonetheless, the sages of Americanforeign policy agree that the developed world has crossed thethreshold of universal peace. It will be necessary henceforthto retain only a few gunboats for dispatch to those primitivecountries stubbornly wed to the old ways of war, this despitethe fact that it took formations configured to do battle onthe plains of Europe to defeat the Iraqi army.</LP><TEXT>   The cause for mistaking galloping instability for thetriumph of a new world order is the almost universal reliefthat the Soviet Union is on its knees, and will not riseagain. But this judgment ignores the agony of the peoples ofthe former union, and underestimates their capacity torecreate something very close to what they had.   In regard to what they feel, imagine that the U.S.government has been dissolved and the American flag hasdisappeared. Each state is independent, with some uneasilyallied to others, and a tentative confederation stretcheshaphazardly from Maine to California. The average Americancitizen must live on $5 or $6 a month; hospitals have nomedicine; inflation, already raging, promises to hit thecountry like a tidal wave when prices are decontrolled.   In the midst of an unprecedented crime wave, rulingrepresentatives of the Black Panthers, the Socialist WorkersParty, and newly converted mainstream politicians are busytaking down statues of Washington and Lincoln and revisingthe curricula of the schools.   After the dissolution of NATO, Northern States FederationPresident Ramsey Clark demonstrates interest in joining theWarsaw Pact. Delegations of Russians and East Germans emergefrom luxury hotels to teach democratic centralism, advise thePentagon on the destruction of its nuclear warheads, andweigh the purchase of formerly secret technology. EastGermany pays for the repatriation of American troops, whoreturn to tent cities, and at airports around the countryhuge Soviet military transports, the red star prominent upontheir tails, touch down laden with emergency aid.   That the Soviet system was a monstrosity does not alterthe dangers of its passing. Just as a humiliated Americawould eventually transform its defeat into an angryreconstitution, so might the former Soviet Union. AWeimar-like metamorphosis can be prevented only by democracyand prosperity: Without them, any nightmarish scenario ispossible. What of their prospects?   Their prospects are dim. Confident advice from Westerneconomists cannot fix the wreckage of 70 years of centralcontrol. Never has anyone ever attempted to resuscitate sovast and weak an economic creature as the Soviet Union. Theinfrastructure, incentives, expectations and habits of asound economy are not merely missingthey are unknown except,in the abstract, to a small band of office-bound academics inMoscow. This same group that was sure glasnost andperestroika would benignly reform the Soviet Union withoutendangering its survival now believes that its affectionatelyheld theories can bring an economy back from the dead.   The institutional memory that allows developed states tofunction economically has been purged from the former SovietUnion, which is neither small nor homogenous. Its manycomplex, gigantic and inefficient structures will have to beundone completely. This, ironically, will require autocraticcontrol. So much for democracy, which, despite Americanintimacy with its principles, was threatened even in the U.S.during the Great Depression by economic conditions that werea joy compared to what now is confronting Russia and itshinterlands.   The centrifugal forces that only recently wereinsufficiently credited in most analyses of the Soviet Unionare still vigorous, and the Commonwealth of IndependentStates may be nothing more than a mechanism soon to beabandoned by the individual republics after they have used itto destroy the center. And if indeed the CIS is not merely avehicle of opportunism, it is the first instance of the riseof centripetal forces.   Whether or not Boris Yeltsin is a democrat, an autocrat,or the Easter Bunny, if he is to save Russia he will rule bydecree. Whether or not he is a Russian nationalist, theRussian imperative, both strategically and economically, hasbeen to control the areas that have now broken away, and heor his successors will honor it. For it is a tide of history,thousands of years in the making, and it cannot be dismissedin favor of reformist pronouncements that are but minutesold.   Miracles are known to happen. But if they don't, thecourse of events may take many forms. The immense number ofvariables and the limitless time frame make prediction almostimpossible except in the broadest terms, which is to say thatall of history suggests that degeneration is followed byreconstitution.   Had the leadership been murdered, the telephone lines cut,and machine guns used against crowds as in the standardoperating procedure, the August coup might not have failed.The Soviet people were probably ready to be thrown back intothe night whence they had come. But they were saved by heroicaction and for the want of a nail. As conditions worsen,however, the chances of another coup increase, as do those ofits success. Democracy in Russia, not being a habit, caneasily be misplaced.   Perhaps more likely than a coup is conflict between Russiaand its former imperial realm. The CIS is unworkable: If itdoes not disappear of its own accord, Russia will simply haveto eat it, or, at the very least, dominate it as of old. Thisis not the British empire falling, but a collection of mainlylandlocked, highly interdependent, contiguous states ruled byoverweight martinets. No computer will be able to track theirByzantine alliances and intrigues, and no force will deterthem from mobilizing in response to border disputes, ethnicwars and irredentism.   If push came to shove between Russia and the Ukraine,costs and casualties would be immense, and nuclear weaponscould be drawn in if the military reverts to Brezhnev-eradoctrine. It is not impossible that the victor -- Russia --might attempt to regain strategic depth lost under MikhailGorbachev. If by then NATO had stood down, which is thedirection in which it appears to be heading, and the formersatellites were in chaos, how much of a risk would it be forRussia, after nuclear war on its own soil, to march intoPoland and Czechoslovakia?   Main elements of the Soviet order of battle lie ready tobe seized by whatever authority emerges from the crisis ofdisintegration. Though the readiness of Soviet echelons hassuffered, the organization, experience and knowledge to putthem in high gear still exist.   For example, the telling signal that Pacific Fleetsubmarines have stayed hard by Vladivostok in the pastseveral years could easily be reversed by a simplereallocation of resources or a command decision. The vastarsenal stored east of the Urals to evade conventionalarms-limitation agreements could be reloaded once again onflatcars, this time to be sent west. Missiles taken off alertcould be put back on alert. None of this would take very longor be exceptionally difficult.   In the former Soviet Union, political evolution has faroutrun military reality, but if the political evolution isreversed, military reality will be waiting. A NATO that hasdisarmed in synchrony with Soviet political developments mayfind that, in response to a new situation, it must build upmore rapidly than it is able. And even if it were able toprepare suddenly an adequate defense, in Russian eyes itsvelocity would be nothing but provocative. NATO's responsemust therefore be tailored not to erratic politicaldevelopments in the former Soviet Union, but to militarypotential. Contrary to conventional wisdom, this potentialhas not evaporated.   The raw strength of what was once called the Soviet Unionhas not been drained from it so much as the many changes innomenclature might suggest. In the Russian Civil War theBolsheviks were pushed into a small area that barely includedMoscow and St. Petersburg. All the world thought they werefinished, but they burst from their confinement and reclaimedthe former empire. Napoleon and Hitler, too, compressed thesame spring, and were thrown back -- by the power of Russiaalone.   ---   Mr. Helprin, a novelist and contributing editor of theJournal, is a fellow of The Hudson Institute.</TEXT></DOC>