<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900716-0127</DOCNO><DOCID>900716-0127.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   The Deification of Nelson Mandela</HL><DATE>07/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   AFRIC</CO><LP>   As a white South African with an M.A. in politicalscience, I would like to respond to your June 19 editorial&quot;Mr. Mandela's Friends.&quot; America's reception of NelsonMandela has been magnificent, but also, I fear, fatallyflawed. Americans forget that when Mr. Mandela left prison hediscarded more than his shackles. Sloughed off too was hisinfallibility, a purity bred of 27 years in living martyrdom.And speaking his first post-prison words into a microphone inCape Town, he willingly embraced a new and far more potentrole -- that of politician.   This is being forgotten in his American deification, andthe oversight could prove costly. When a politician is givenadulation to the degree Mr. Mandela is receiving, anabridgment of the political dynamic occurs: No longer are thepolitical hustings the field upon which a man is measured;instead, in Mount Sinai-like fashion, pronouncements becomeinvested with a value that is more a product of their loftyorigin than their critical content.</LP><TEXT>   It might also be prudent for Americans to consider theeffect their welcome is having on the rest of South Africa,and especially on the white community. By according Mr.Mandela statesman-like recognition, the inference to whiteSouth Africa is tacit: You have been discounted. You may havede jure standing, but de facto we'd rather speak to Mr.Mandela. We'll let you know what we decide next week.   And this is a big mistake. No meaningful settlement willever grace South Africa unless all parties are involved. Andif you alienate the most powerful of these -- the whites --you will find South Africa an impossibly difficult equation.   Nelson Mandela may well be the answer, but let him do theproving. In the game that is South Africa he remains a player-- not a referee.   Mike J. Hoare   Waco, Texas   ---   Mr. Mandela's visit understandably generated muchattention and discussion. The effervescent, but respectfulacclaim he received came from all points on the demographicspectrum with few exceptions. The breadth and intensity ofhis enthusiastic reception by Americans transcend theincreasingly general acceptance of the urgent causes heespoused.   Why? Why this uncommon, public adulation -- even from someindividuals who had not been especially concerned aboutapartheid, or sanctions, or politics, or civil rights inSouth Africa? It's because we were in the presence of aphenomenon.   Here before us (either at public gatherings or on live TV)was a political leader who passionately believes in a cause,who spoke directly, reasonably, unambiguously, forcefully andtactfully. He said what he believed; and, because of how heexpressed himself, many believed what he said.   For too long in the U.S. we have endured (and encouraged)politicians on national, state and local levels who tell uswhat they perceive the public wants to hear. We tolerateincumbents and candidates who avoid tackling the manyproblems existing in our society and who prefer to occupythemselves -- and us -- with fluff and puff. Rather thanconfronting reality, our politicians seem to recoil from it.   The criteria for a successful political speech, or TV spotannouncement, continue to be: 1) Say nothing, but appear tosay something; 2) don't offend or antagonize anyone; 3) playupon people's emotions and feelings; and 4) collect campaigncontributions so that you can buy more TV time in which you:1) Say nothing, but appear to say something; 2) don't offendor antagonize anyone; 3) play upon people's emotions andfeelings -- and, of course, 4) collect campaign contributionsso you can buy more TV time.   Is it any wonder that fewer and fewer Americans arevoting?   Is it any wonder that we celebrate the forthrightness of aMandela?   Charles Spencer   New York   ---   Your editorial was most welcome. One would think that Mr.Mandela's identification with the African National Congressqualifies him for sainthood. If the South African problem isresolved without a significant input from Chief GatshaButhelezi and his moderating influence, some form ofcommunism may ultimately result.   Norman MacDonald   Needham, Mass.   ---   You do not understand the political thinking in the ThirdWorld. The fact is, irrespective of any impressions drawnfrom some of the so-called &quot;responsible, moderate&quot; leaders,Third World countries do not share any common interest withthe Western world, particularly, the U.S. To you, MoammarGadhafi and Yasser Arafat are terrorists. In Third Worldcountries they are nationalist leaders and freedom fightersof their people. You will never understand the thinking ofthe Mandelas, because to do so will be in conflict with yourpolitical culture.   By the way, who is Mr. Buthelezi? The Western press alwaysknows about leaders in Africa whom the Africans themselves donot know about. How can somebody who was a favorite of formerPresident Reagan be a genuine African leader?   Except in the U.S. nobody in Africa knows Mr. Buthelezi asa leader of any kind. He is a chief among the Zulus, and hissupporters among his tribesmen are fighting other members ofthe Zulu tribe who are opposed to him. The Western pressalways looks for stooges in Africa. Currently, Mr. Butheleziand Jonas Savimbi are your favorites.   Back in the days when Zimbabwe was known as SouthernRhodesia, there was also a &quot;responsible, moderate&quot; Africanleader named Bishop Musorewa. Whatever happened to him andthe millions of his followers in Southern Rhodesia now knownas Zimbabwe? He went the way of all stooges -- into oblivion.   Have you forgotten that like Yasser Arafat, Mr. Mandelawas also once branded a terrorist because he stood for thefreedom of his people. History is the greatest equalizer.   Jeff Williams   Alhambra, Calif.   ---   We have visited South Africa twice and can compare itsaccomplishments with the profound poverty in Kenya, Tanzaniaand Mozambique. In 1981 we were surprised to see integrationbeing established in many unexpected areas. Although we abhorapartheid, we felt honest, constructive attempts were beingmade to abolish it.   This spring we returned to see if we might havemisinterpreted what we thought we saw earlier. But we werereassured by the loving concern of so many blacks and whitesfor their homeland. We also saw many changes in the easing ofrestrictions on blacks. It was very apparent that the ANCrepresents only a minor segment, if a very vocal one, of theblack population and that many stories appearing in ourpapers are of incidents taken out of context.   We ask why, if South Africa is such a terrible country, doso many blacks pour into it from all over Africa and so fewleave?   Mrs. George D. Leydic   Birdsnest, Va.   ---   The recitation of Mr. Mandela's praise for terrorists is asad reminder that this courageous and intelligent man isprobably not the national black leader that South Africa andthe world need on the road to peace. His consistent calls forthe violence of sanctions and sabotage continue unabated, andhe seems unable to grasp that he must reach out to all SouthAfricans if a new society is to be created.   A rereading of his eloquent statement at his early-1960strial gives an eerie sense that time has stood still for Mr.Mandela while he was behind bars. Though those bars are gone,nothing has really changed in his mind. Tragically, he isstill a captive of his own creation, the terrorist AfricanNational Congress, with his radical wife guarding the gates.Let us pray that he can break out.   Jack Hood   Wilmington, Del.   ---   While on the other side of Los Angeles Mr. Mandela wassurrounded by 80,000 disciples, mostly black, cheering&quot;Mandela, Mandela,&quot; I looked down from my hotel room and sawa ghastly example of a decaying democracy. Do those cheeringthousands know what tragedy there is in their own back yard?Are they giving their money and performing their nativedances on behalf of the black, brown and white adults andchildren sleeping on the streets in the City of Angels?   The previous night, before retiring, I had looked down tosee rows of coffinesque cardboard boxes in the Bank ofAmerica parking lot. I assumed they were there to be gatheredby trash haulers in the morning. But come morning, a tragicscene greeted me: One by one the cardboard boxes beganshaking, then the flaps opened and from each, like a hatchingpupa, a man emerged and stepped out. But these men,predominantly black, were not hatching into a world ofbeauty. Instead, they wandered over behind a dumpster toanswer calls of nature.   As these men had slept in their cardboard cocoons, Mr.Mandela had slept with dreams of making South Africademocratic. As these men wandered in their desolate world,80,000 souls with their new Mandela T-shirts and buttons,with their hero's face shining before them, had satisfiedtheir consciences by performing and providing Mr. Mandela thefunds to right the wrongs of apartheid.   Have they dared to look at the tragedy on the streets ofAmerica? Do they acknowledge how democracy has treated itsvery own? Did Los Angeles Mayor Thomas Bradley drive Mr.Mandela past the Mission on Main Street and hold his headhigh and say, &quot;Look what we have accomplished&quot;? Wake upAmerica] Look behind the facade of Beverly Hills and NorthRodeo. Throw your Mandela money to your black brothers, withtheir festering sores. Someday they may turn your palaces andgaudy shops into furnaces. Mayors of American cities andnewspaper editors, look to yourselves. Don't wait for apresident or for representatives in Congress to help. Theyare too far away and think only of their own welfare andre-election.   Norman E. Mann   San Diego, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>