<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910227-0036</DOCNO><DOCID>910227-0036.</DOCID><HL>   How Iraq Attempted   To Kill a Dissident   In the United States   ---   A Diplomat Arranges the Hit;   FBI Runs Into Problems,   But Breaks Up the Plot   ----   By William M. Carley   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Early last year, an Iraqi diplomat in New York telephoneda man living in Modesto, Calif. He was trying to recruit anassassin.   The assassin, the diplomat explained, was to kill an Iraqidissident -- opposed to Saddam Hussein -- who was living inCalifornia. The pay: $50,000. Would the Modesto man beinterested? He was.</LP><TEXT>   As it happened, FBI agents in New York had tapped thediplomat's telephone for another investigation. Theyoverheard this conversation. In cooperation with police inModesto and the nearby town of Ceres, they launched aninvestigation.   At times, it did not go smoothly. The FBI worried for awhile that the whole thing was a hoax. Agents recordedconversations in Assyrian that they couldn't understand. Andthough the would-be killer was arrested and later indictedfor the murder plot in federal court in Sacramento, he gotaway. The Iraqi official in New York couldn't be prosecutedbecause of his diplomatic status, though he was declaredpersona non grata by the State Department and expelled fromthe U.S.   The assassination, however, was foiled, an accomplishmentagainst a regime that routinely has used murder to get rid ofdissidents living abroad. In 1988 an Iraqi agent in Khartoum,capital of the Sudan, walked into a hotel and -- in themiddle of the lobby -- shot to death a dissident who wasattending a political convention. An Iraqi diplomat whohelped arrange that murder was later expelled from the Sudan.The same year Iraqi agents succeeded in murdering anotherdissident living abroad, this one in Norway.   The story of the Modesto murder plot was pieced togetherin interviews with the FBI, local police and Sargon Dadesho,the intended victim.   In 1965, at age 14, Mr. Dadesho came to the U.S. with hisparents. Like many Iraqi immigrants, the Dadeshos settled inCalifornia's Central Valley, partly because the climate issimilar to Iraq's. Eventually Sargon attended the Universityof California at Davis, getting a master's degree inphysiology. Now 41 years old, he owns a small firm that makesshampoo.   But his first passion is politics. Mr. Dadesho is anAssyrian, who like the Kurds are an ancient people but aminority in Arab-dominated Iraq. Through radio and TVprograms he produces for an Assyrian association based inCeres, and in videotapes mailed around the world, Mr. Dadeshochampions the Assyrian cause. He has advocated that anautonomous state for Assyrians be carved out of Iraq. And hehas harshly criticized Saddam Hussein's regime for atrocitiesagainst Assyrians.   In the current crisis, &quot;Saddam should be killed,&quot; Mr.Dadesho says in an interview. &quot;It's a golden opportunity totake him out.&quot;   In New York, when the FBI agents overheard plans for anassassination of a dissident on the tapped telephone, theyquickly traced the call. It was from the Iraqi diplomat,Hamid Ahmed al-Amery, the first secretary of the IraqiMission to the United Nations, to the Modesto man. TheModesto man turned out to be a house painter named AndriKhoshaba, a tall, mustachioed 46-year-old. An Assyrianhimself, Mr. Khoshaba worked for the Iraqi Mission in NewYork for years as a driver and handyman before moving toModesto.   FBI agents now knew the identity of the would-be assassin.But they didn't know who was to be the victim.   Months before, Mr. Khoshaba, using the name &quot;AndriShamdanani,&quot; happened to visit the Assyrian TV studio inCeres. There, apparently by coincidence, he briefly met Mr.Dadesho. Fancying himself a singer, &quot;Mr. Shamdanani&quot; sang afew songs, some of which were videotaped in the studio. Thestudio also was given a previously produced record of hissongs, along with an album jacket bearing his photo.   Later on, after being assigned to kill Mr. Dadesho, Mr.Khoshaba decided he would need some help, particularly agetaway driver. He recruited another Assyrian in Modestowhose identity is still a secret but who is referred to as&quot;Peter.&quot; But secretly, Peter went straight to Mr. Dadesho totell him his life was in danger. The would-be assassin, itturned out, was the aspiring singer who had visited thestudio.   &quot;At first I didn't believe it,&quot; Mr. Dadesho recalls. SoMr. Dadesho lent Peter a tape recorder. A few days laterPeter returned with a recording of Mr. Khoshaba discussingkilling Mr. Dadesho.   With tape in hand and Peter in tow, Mr. Dadesho went tothe Ceres police. That small department then turned the caseover to Modesto police, who after questioning the pair calledthe FBI. For the first time, the FBI learned the identity ofthe intended victim.   But at this point, investigators also became confused. TheFBI's assassin suspect was Andri Khoshaba. But in Modesto, hehad been going by the name &quot;Andri Shamdanani,&quot; and that wasthe name that Peter and Mr. Dadesho gave to the FBI.Seemingly, there now were two Modesto assassins.   FBI agents suspected a hoax. &quot;How often do you havepolitical murders in the little town of Modesto?&quot; asks oneFBI agent. The FBI agents gave lie-detector tests to Peterand Mr. Dadesho. Both passed.   Then Mr. Dadesho showed the FBI the photo of &quot;AndriShamdanani&quot; on the record album jacket. The FBI already hadobtained a copy of Andri Khoshaba's California driver'slicense, which included his photo. The two photos matched.   About this time the FBI learned, apparently from thetelephone tap in New York, that Mr. Khoshaba also had beenassigned to kill a second man, a Kurdish leader who was thenliving in England but who was to visit California.   Neither the FBI nor local police, however, knew when theassassinations were to take place. To prevent the crimes,finding out the timing would be crucial.   To answer this question, the FBI enlisted Peter, who stillwas pretending that he would help Mr. Khoshaba in theassassination plot. FBI agents concealed a tiny radiotransmitter under his clothing. While he talked with Mr.Khoshaba, agents nearby could pick up the conversation andrecord it.   The tapes haven't been made public, but according to twosources familiar with them, Mr. Khoshaba proved to beloquacious. He had been instructed to shoot Mr. Dadesho&quot;between the eyes&quot; if he could manage it, he told Peter. Inany case, Mr. Khoshaba added, &quot;I'll kill him with just oneshot -- he's not an elephant.&quot;   FBI agents, who by this time had set up a command centerin the Modesto police station, couldn't understand a word ofthe tape-recorded Assyrian conversation. Needing a quicktranslation to corroborate Peter's version of it, theytelephoned higher FBI officials, asking for an agent whocould understand Assyrian. But that was misunderstood as&quot;Syrian.&quot; Syrians speak Arabic, a different language.   An FBI agent in Los Angeles who spoke Arabic flew toModesto, but she couldn't understand the conversations. FBIagents in Modesto, frantic because they feared someone mightbe murdered while they searched for the right translator,finally reached an Assyrian speaker at the Defense LanguageInstitute in Monterey, Calif. To get a quick translation,they played some recordings to him over the phone; later heflew to Modesto. Meantime, as a last resort, FBI agents alsobent some of their own procedures and allowed Mr. Dadeshohimself to listen to some of the tapes so he could help untilthe translator arrived.   As the plot gathered momentum, Mr. Khoshaba told Peter hewould be traveling to New York. Knowing that, FBI agentsarranged to tail him on Feb. 9 last year from Modesto to SanFrancisco, where Mr. Khoshaba caught a plane to New York.Then they tailed him to the Iraqi Mission on New York's UpperEast Side. There he was to discuss the murder plot with Mr.al-Amery, the Iraqi diplomat, the subsequent indictmentstates.   The next day, still tailed by the FBI, Mr. Khoshabareturned to Modesto. On Feb. 15, Mr. Khoshaba traveled to NewYork again, this time to discuss details of the plot and pickup $25,000 of his payment. The next day, Mr. Khoshaba againreturned to Modesto, as before tailed by the FBI.   Mr. Khoshaba told Peter he planned to shoot Mr. Dadesho atnight as he walked out of the TV studio building and into theparking lot, in a secluded neighborhood of Ceres. If Mr.Dadesho didn't emerge from the studio building quicklyenough, Mr. Khoshaba added, he would enter the studio, feigninterest in getting a copy of his videotaped songs and thenshoot Mr. Dadesho on the spot.   As time for the murder approached, a getaway plan wasdeveloped. After the killing, Mr. Khoshaba told Peter, hewould travel to San Diego, where he would cross into Mexicoand then travel to the Iraqi Embassy in Mexico City. Oncesafely there, he would be paid the second $25,000. The Iraqiregime, Mr. Khoshaba bragged to Peter, &quot;was like the Mafia,only much more efficient.&quot;   At last, FBI agents got a hint of the assassinationtiming. &quot;After the 15th,&quot; Mr. Khoshaba told Peter. When Mr.Khoshaba returned from New York on Feb. 16, Modesto policeshadowed his every move around the city, says Modesto Det.Richard Fernandez. The FBI guarded Mr. Dadesho.   On Saturday night, Feb. 17, Peter was once again talkingwith Mr. Khoshaba, this time on a sidewalk outside Mr.Khoshaba's apartment. To gain information, FBI agents hadbeen feeding questions to Peter, which he had been posing toMr. Khoshaba. But he wasn't a good actor, asking questionsawkwardly and sometimes repeating them two or three times toget an answer. Finally, on that Saturday night, Mr. Khoshabawas overwhelmed with suspicion.   &quot;You're recording me, you son-of-a-bitch,&quot; Mr. Khoshabasaid. He punched Peter in the chest. Then he grabbed Peter,trying to feel any recorder hidden under his clothes. Peterbegan screaming. Modesto police and FBI agents, hidden in apolice surveillance van a few yards away, poured out of thevehicle. Two other FBI agents, a man and woman pretending tobe necking in a car, also jumped out. Shouting &quot;FBI,&quot; theagents wrestled Mr. Khoshaba down and then arrested him.   A search of Mr. Khoshaba's apartment turned up a.32-caliber pistol. Earlier, Mr. Khoshaba also had beenshopping for a rifle, according to FBI Special Agent ThomasGriffin in Sacramento.   After his arrest Mr. Khoshaba was jailed. Some FBI agentsbelieved there was enough California evidence to hold him.But in Washington, Justice Department lawyers felt evidencealso was needed from the tap of the diplomat's telephone inNew York, according to two persons familiar with the issue.   The FBI didn't want to disclose the New York tap. The sametelephone tap was yielding information for anotherinvestigation, this one into an Iraqi plot to buy U.S.equipment used to trigger nuclear bombs. (Later, thisinvestigation proved to be a stunning success: On March 29,the Justice Department unsealed an indictment in San Diegocharging several Iraqis and the export manager of a Londoncompany with smuggling the nuclear triggers. In Britain,police arrested several people and confiscated theequipment.)   But in February, with the FBI then unwilling to disclosethe New York tap, the Justice Department ordered Mr. Khoshabareleased. Again FBI agents tailed him to the Iraqi U.N.Mission in New York. FBI agents never saw him again.   Later, according to an FBI official, the agency learnedthat Mr. Khoshaba was provided with false identificationpapers by the Iraqis. Using them, he bought a ticket from NewYork to Belgrade and on to Jordan on JAT, the Yugoslavairline. Mr. Khoshaba did fly to Belgrade, but then switchedhis route and flew to Baghdad.   In Modesto, Mr. Dadesho believes he has good reason tohope for Saddam Hussein's overthrow. &quot;If he survives,&quot; Mr.Dadesho says, &quot;his men will try to get me again.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>