<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900507-0083</DOCNO><DOCID>900507-0083.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   Soviet Joint Ventures Riding on Troubled Waters   ----   By Keith A. Rosten</HL><DATE>05/07/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FREST PEP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   In the light of mounting U.S. pressure against Sovietactions in Lithuania, the trade bill recently negotiated withthe Soviets is in jeopardy. But even if the bill were signed,it is unlikely to reassure American investors, actual orpotential; the reports of Soviet joint ventures gone sour arebecoming legion. The magnitude of the failures has alreadyprompted the Soviets to initiate a wholesale overhaul oftheir joint venture legislation. But the draft legislationnow circulating in Moscow may well deter further foreigninvestment.   In the three years since the Soviets adopted legislationpermitting joint ventures with foreign partners, hungryWestern companies have swooped down into Moscow, hoping topenetrate this market of 285 million potential consumers. Butfinding a partner, negotiating an agreement and registeringthe venture takes an average one year. Few Western companieshave the resources or stamina to survive the arduousundertaking. Maria Aronson, of the U.S. Commercial Office inMoscow, told me of numerous invitations to ceremonies to signletters of intent to enter into joint ventures -- but wondersaloud why she rarely hears anything from the parties afterthe signing.</LP><TEXT>   Of about 10,000 letters of intent signed so far betweenSoviet organizations and Western companies (about 1,000 ofwhich are U.S. companies), only about 1,500 (about 150 U.S.companies) have produced registered joint ventures -- andonly about 140 joint ventures have commenced operations(about 35 of which are U.S. companies).   Once operating, joint ventures face an unforgivingbureaucracy, supply shortages and a severe lack ofinfrastructure. A study I did on Soviet joint venturesalready operating found that 43% of those sampled have notperformed to the expectations of the parties. A Ministry ofFinance official told me that the Soviets are also deeplydisappointed with the results of joint ventures.   STIM, a Soviet-U.S. joint venture specializing inchildren's toys, for example, was supposed to earn hardcurrency by countertrade -- until the Soviets proscribedcountertrade for joint ventures, leaving the joint venture&quot;dead in the water,&quot; according to its general director,Stephen S. Moody.   A major subject of disagreement between the Soviet andWestern partners is the strategic direction of the jointventure. The Western partner generally wants to confine thejoint venture's activities to a discrete area. The Sovietpartner, in contrast, wants to expand into activitiesunrelated to the strategic competence of the Western partner.(Although not a joint venture, the PepsiCo deal with theSoviets might cause one to ask what PepsiCo's competitiveadvantage is in selling shipssomething Pepsico has now agreedto do in exchange for Soviet market share.)   The personnel of the Soviet partner view themselves asexperts in the Soviet system, rather than in a particularindustry. They sincerely believe that the joint venture iswell-positioned to capitalize on emerging opportunities evenin unrelated industries.   One joint venture, Intermedbio-I.M.B., formed to producepharmaceuticals, started sponsoring television productions.Not surprisingly, the activities of the venture are &quot;frozen,&quot;and the U.S. partner is seeking to withdraw, according toCharles Rudd, a member of Intermedbio's board of directors.   And there are other &quot;cultural&quot; problems. To assure itsguests of high quality food, INFA-Hotel, a Finish-Soviethotel joint venture, imports food directly from Finland. Butthere is a Russian proverb that, &quot;if you don't steal, youwon't survive.&quot; The Soviet employees of the hotel are rumoredto be substituting Russian fare for the imported food.   Even success may bring complications. One joint venture inthe automotive industry has reportedly done so well that themanagement is concerned that the Soviet government will closethe venture down on charges of profiteering.   The vagaries of the Soviet marketplace exact a heavy tollfrom even the most persevering companies. Western companiesentering simple purchase agreements are increasinglydemanding letters of credit, because the Soviets have beenunable to make their hard-currency payments. Also, thepolitical climate changes almost daily. Those companies thathave entered into joint ventures with Soviet organizations inone of the Baltic republics or one of the republics in theCaucasus should consult their political risk assessmentteams.   The legal climate fares no better. University of Illinoislaw professor Peter B. Maggs, an expert on Soviet law,reports that legislation on joint ventures is &quot;unstable,unpredictable and largely unpublished.&quot; In December, forexample, without any advance warning, the Soviet governmentpushed through new legislation imposing further export quotasand licensing requirements. On the same day that the decreewas adopted, an unwary joint venture in the food industryattempted to ship goods worth hundreds of thousands ofdollars. Soviet customs officials refused to allow the shipto sail. Only after several days of intense negotiations didthe authorities allow the ship to leave.   Some joint ventures -- such as Dialog, which developscomputer software -- have recently received hopefulattention. But these cases are the exception. The Sovietshave proposed a comprehensive new joint venture law. Butinstead of reaching out for foreign investment andtechnology, in March of 1989 the Soviets forbade jointventures to engage in countertrade, one of only a fewmechanisms by which a joint venture can generate hardcurrency. The draft law would reinforce this prohibition.   A widely leaked unpublished portion of the current jointventure legislation established an exception to hard currencyself-sufficiency requirements. But the draft law would revokethis exception, requiring joint ventures to generatesufficient hard currency to cover their expenditures.   The draft law also gives short shrift to smallentrepreneurial ventures. It would require the Westernpartner to contribute a minimum of $100,000, 25% of which theWestern partner must deposit in cash in a Soviet bank beforethe Soviets will register the joint venture. It whollyignores the 1,500 joint ventures that have already beenregistered; the Soviets have omitted any grandfather clause,thereby potentially placing these joint ventures intolegislative limbo.   The Soviet market presents tremendous opportunities,offering a wealth of natural resources, inexpensive labor,areas of advanced technology and a market of 285 millionconsumers. As Western companies seek to capitalize on theseopportunities, they should recognize that penetrating thismarket is a tortuous road fraught with uncertainty andinstability.   ---   Mr. Rosten is an attorney and consultant on Soviet tradeand law for Accord Consulting Group, Mountain View, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>