<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920113-0152</DOCNO><DOCID>920113-0152.</DOCID><HL>   Tense Times:   Cash Pinch Leads Macy   To Delay Paying Bills   And Plan Other Steps   ---   It Won't Rule Out Asset Sales   As Holiday Business Sags   And Debt Weighs Heavily   ---   CEO Hopes for `Lucky Break'   ----   By Jeffrey A. Trachtenberg and George Anders   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/13/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LES MZ</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CLOTHING AND FABRICS (CLO)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)SPECIALTY APPAREL RETAILERS (SAP)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCING AGREEMENTS (FNC)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   NEW YORK -- Suppliers to R.H. Macy andamp; Co. who expectedpayment last Friday got a nasty surprise when they called theretailer's San Francisco accounts payable department. Atape-recording informed them that Macy wouldn't send out anychecks until Jan. 25 -- two weeks late.   The news spread quickly through Seventh Avenue and thefinancial community. Prices on Macy's junk bonds plunged asmuch as 20% by late in the day, to less than half of facevalue, amid doubts on Wall Street whether Macy would makeinterest payments due later this year. A mix of bankers,trade creditors and other lenders -- owed in total more than$3.5 billion -- began expressing anxiety about Macy'snear-term prospects.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;This isn't a typical situation,&quot; says Lee Abraham,chairman of Associated Merchandising Corp., a supplier ofoverseas manufacturing and marketing information to majorU.S. retailers. &quot;It may mean a significant problem.&quot;   The payment moratorium is the latest in a series ofsetbacks for Macy, which incurred a record $155 million lossfor the quarter ended Nov. 2. Now, Macy is caught in itsworst cash squeeze since the giant retailer went private in aleveraged buy-out in 1986. It is an ominous turn of eventsfor a 133-year-old retailer whose sponsorship of the New YorkThanksgiving Day Parade has made it a national institution,whose sales territory stretches from Florida to California,and whose flagship store on Herald Square in Manhattan is oneof the world's largest.   Macy's difficulties are another grim reminder that bigdebts and department stores don't mix. In the past two years,a host of retailing groups that borrowed heavily in the 1980shave been unable to pay their bills. Among them are FederatedDepartment Stores Corp., Allied Stores Corp. and CarterHawley Hale Stores Inc., all of which ended up in Chapter 11bankruptcy proceedings.   Responding to growing concerns, Macy Chairman EdwardFinkelstein said in a Saturday interview that &quot;we'redetermined to meet our obligations and stay the course.&quot; MacyVice Chairman Myron Ullman added that the company is workingon a &quot;comprehensive plan&quot; with its investment bankersGoldman, Sachs andamp; Co. to shore up the retailer's finances.   Dismissing periodic rumors that Macy might have to filefor bankruptcy protection, Mr. Finkelstein said: &quot;I don'tthink it's in our interest to file for Chapter 11. It runsagainst our grain. We think we know what we have to do. Wehave a comprehensive game plan.&quot;   The 66-year-old executive, however, opened the door to thepossibility of selling some Macy stores to raise cash. Mr.Finkelstein has in the past always strongly insisted that hewouldn't sell major properties. Industry executives point toMacy's I. Magnin specialty-store chain as a logical salecandidate.   Mr. Finkelstein also signaled a somber new direction forMacy in other areas, including cutting advertising costs,renegotiating bank loans and seeking new equity investors inthe company. Macy must make more than $500 million ofprincipal and interest payments on its debts by Dec. 31,1992, an amount well beyond its current annualcash-generating rate.   A Chapter 11 filing, of course, would be the worst-casescenario. Companies that do seek bankruptcy protection,however, typically end up shrunken but stronger. Federatedand Allied are expected to emerge from Chapter 11 as a singlecompany in February having shed much of their debt and weakerstores. Despite the stigma of bankruptcy protection,retailers are often able to arrange new bank financing, sincenew lenders are given preferred status for repayment.   Macy's precarious position stems from a series ofmanagement missteps and an unexpectedly weak economy. Macy's$1.1 billion acquisition of the I. Magnin and Bullock'schains in 1988 has proved to be a serious drain on financialresources. And Macy's longtime knack for smart merchandisingappears to have deserted it in recent seasons, leaving thecompany plagued with excess inventory.   A sharply disappointing Christmas season has compoundedMacy's woes. Macy hasn't yet reported Christmas-period sales,but Mr. Finkelstein says business faltered in early Decemberand then nosedived. Low consumer confidence levels &quot;cost us alot of business,&quot; he said.   Macy for years seemed to be the one large retailer thatwas thriving after a buy-out. Its well-regarded managementcontinued to expand Macy even after the company went privatein 1986. At one brief stage, Macy even showed a post-buy-outprofit despite its large debts. The privately held companyalso has benefited from the backing of blue-ribbon largeshareholders, including General Electric Co., Loews Corp. andthe Mutual Shares mutual fund.   Many of Macy's current hopes center on further supportfrom its investors, which stand to lose significant sums ifthe company is forced into bankruptcy. Some of the ownersindicate they are ready to take one more step with Macy, asthey did in late 1990 when they invested an additional $119million in the company. &quot;There's a lot more flexibility herethan people realize,&quot; a top official at Loews said late lastweek. &quot;I think they're going to make it.&quot;   Last Thursday, Macy's financial predicament wasspotlighted when First Boston Corp. analyst Meredith Adlerpublished a bearish report that predicted the company willhave to announce a debt restructuring in the first half ofthe year. She also advised investors to sell Macy bonds.&quot;Macy's biggest mistake has been to be constantly overlyoptimistic, and then buying inventory to meet thoseexpectations,&quot; Ms. Adler added in an interview.   Macy bonds began tumbling once Ms. Adler's report becamepublic. Within hours, a Macy spokesman issued a statementdenying rumors that the retailer planned a Chapter 11bankruptcy-law filing. But the bonds continued falling inprice Thursday, stabilized briefly Friday morning, and thenplunged further on news of Macy's payment moratorium.Analysts at Shearson Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.have echoed Ms. Adler's concerns.   Within Macy last week, executives faced a difficultdecision of whether to ask their 40-member bank group ortheir suppliers for more forbearance. Macy borrows from itsbanks primarily through a $588 million revolving-creditfacility, which is used to buy new inventory. Ordinarily,that credit line is used heavily in the buildup to theChristmas selling season; after that, the debt must be paidoff almost to zero in January or February.   In December, Macy favorably renegotiated its bankagreement, devising a repayment schedule it felt it couldmeet. Terms called for Macy to reduce its revolving-creditborrowing to $75 million for one week, and to $150 millionfor 30 days at any point between Dec. 16 and Feb. 15. Macyreasoned that its Christmas revenue would be enough to allowit to reduce bank borrowings and keep paying vendors.   It didn't work out that way.   Part way through last week, Mr. Ullman realized that Macywouldn't have sufficient funds both to pay vendors and reduceborrowings, as promised. Macy executives thought for severaldays about seeking another amendment from their bank group.It would have been Macy's 24th amendment since going private.But seeking such an amendment on short notice would have been&quot;disruptive,&quot; Mr. Finkelstein said.   So instead, Macy decided to delay payments to itssuppliers. Messrs. Ullman and Finkelstein said Macyexecutives personally told as many vendors as possible aboutthe moratorium. But with more than 20,000 suppliers, Macy hadlittle hope of contacting most of them in time.   To avoid further disruptions, Macy will have to find somemeans of reassuring both its vendors and factors that itremains a good credit risk. Factors buy retail payables frommanufacturers at a discount, thereby absorbing the risk ofwhether bills ultimately will be paid. Mr. Finkelstein saidSaturday that &quot;the factors are more nervous than the banks,but we've established some level of credibility with them. Wethink reason will prevail.&quot;   Although Macy won't suffer significantly if it doesn'treceive extensive shipments in January, the retail chain willneed fresh spring goods in February and March. Many small andmidsized manufacturers will probably be willing to ship toMacy after they have been paid for bills due Jan. 10. Onemajor supplier, Leslie Fay Cos., said it is so confident inMacy's future that it intends to continue shipping to Macyits full complement of spring goods.   However, the factors may not be so accommodating. Factorshandle about 15% of Macy's business, but their actionsinfluence other vendors as well. In recent weeks, mostfactors have tightened their position on shipments to Macy.&quot;We were told on Thursday that our check would be overnightedto us on Friday,&quot; said one irate East Coast factoringexecutive. &quot;Macy needs to pull an ace out of the hole.&quot; Healso expressed surprise that Macy renegotiated its bankagreement only a month ago: &quot;To make a bank deal in Decemberand then have to do this now is mind-boggling.&quot;   Vendors on both coasts expressed concern upon learningthat they wouldn't be paid Friday. Laney Thornton, chairmanof Eileen West Inc., a San Francisco-maker of women's dressesand lingerie, said he was owed &quot;money in the six figures.&quot;Mr. Thornton, who said he has already manufactured asubstantial amount of spring merchandise for Macy, said,&quot;We'll end up doing whatever the other vendors do. Don'tforget, we've been through this before with other retailers.The real problem at Macy is its leverage. The company justisn't making money.&quot;   In New York, Steve Stoller, president of Karin StevensApparel Group, a maker of women's apparel, also expressedreservation. &quot;I'm at risk right now for 50% of everythingwe've shipped to Macy in the last month,&quot; said Mr. Stoller.&quot;If my factoring company tells me to go ahead, I will. Wehave goods ready to ship for spring. But if our factor saysthey aren't willing to take the risk, it would be difficultfor me to ship considering the small size of our company.&quot;Mr. Stoller noted that he has often been paid late byretailers.   Even if manufacturers decide to send new goods to Macy,however, it is likely that many will reduce their shipments.Virtually every major apparel manufacturer has been hurt byretailer bankruptcies in the last two years; during arecession there is a limit to what they can absorb.   &quot;I've done business with Macy for a lot of years, andafter I get my check I'm sure I'm going to ship again,&quot; saysHoward Bloom, president of Chetta B Inc., a maker ofexpensive women's apparel. &quot;I'm rooting for them. But I willhave to ship them in a prudent manner.&quot;   Macy's high-debt existence began in July 1986, when Mr.Finkelstein and other top management led a $3.5 billionleveraged buy-out of the company, ostensibly because Mr.Finkelstein feared that eventually an outsider would make arun at the company. At the time of the buy-out, Mr.Finkelstein predicted that Macy's sales would rise more than9% a year, allowing the company to steadily shrink its debtand show net income of $69 million in the year ended July 28,1991. Instead, Macy has fallen far short of its projection.For fiscal 1991, sales fell 7% to $6.76 billion, and thecompany had a $150 million net loss.   Analysts attribute much of Macy's current difficulties toMr. Finkelstein's decision in 1988 to make a run at archrivalFederated Department Stores. Although it first appeared hewould be successful, Mr. Finkelstein eventually acquired onlyFederated's California-based I. Magnin and Bullock's chainsfor $1.1 billion. Canadian developer Robert Campeau acquiredthe rest of Federated.   If the economy had remained strong, Macy's acquisition maywell have made sense. Instead, consumers turned away fromdepartment stores to specialty stores such as Limited Inc.and Gap Inc., and the recession struck. As a result, Macy'shopes of shrinking its debt and then selling stock to thepublic were thrown off course.   In late 1990, Macy announced two steps that won it moretime -- at a price. It sold its prized credit-card businessto General Electric, lopping more than $1 billion in debt offits books and getting about $100 million in proceeds. And itraised more than $200 million from existing and newshareholders, using the proceeds to retire more than $550million of its junk bond debt at a discount. That lightenedMacy's debt load, but diluted the stakes in Macy held bymanagement investors such as Mr. Finkelstein, who didn't putup additional cash.   But even these steps haven't been enough to let Macycomfortably ride out the recession. Macy's bank debtcurrently is quoted at just 65 cents on the dollar by LoanPricing Corp., a research firm that follows the bank-lendingmarket. Those loans are made by a wide cross-section of U.S.,European and Japanese banks; no single bank is believed tohave unusually large Macy exposure. Executives at one of thecompany's two lead lending banks, the Manufacturers Hanoverunit of Chemical Banking Corp., declined to comment;officials at the other lead bank, Bankers Trust Co., weren'tavailable for comment.   Macy's 14.5% junk bonds due 1998 were quoted at just 48cents to 50 cents on the dollar by the end of trading Friday,down nearly 20% on the day. Other issues of the retailer'stotal $1.3 billion face value of junk bonds fell even more inprice. Those bonds are owned by a wide range of mutual funds,insurance companies and &quot;vulture fund&quot; speculators indistressed securities. Several mutual-fund investors in Macysay they believe the company would be best off turning overmajority ownership to its bondholders, in return forforgiveness of $1 billion or more in debt. If Macy doesn'ttake steps to reduce debt, contends Dan Harmetz, a portfoliomanager at Fidelity Investments in Boston, it will be leftwith &quot;a permanent liquidity crisis.&quot;   Meanwhile, the usually ebullient and combative Mr.Finkelstein struck a subdued note Saturday. &quot;It's been along, tough Christmas season,&quot; he said. &quot;We'd like to get alucky break. It hasn't happened so far.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>