<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900508-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>900508-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Can Anything Stop Los Angeles?   ----   By William Fulton</HL><DATE>05/08/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A24</SO><LP>   As Southern California has grown rapidly over the pastdecade, so has the so-called &quot;slow-growth&quot; movement. A decadeago, virtually no one in the Southern California megalopolislived under growth restrictions. Now most people in theregion accept them as a way of life.   Although the slow-growth movement can win elections, itdoes not seem able actually to slow growth. The best evidencefrom Southern California is that even within a singlegeographic region, anti-development activism shuffles growthfrom one place to another not far away. When new houses arerestricted in one area of metropolitan Los Angeles, theysimply pop up somewhere else nearby, usually on inexpensivevirgin land, a little more distant from the urban core. Then,the political pressure to stop development grows in thesenewer communities. So the developers move out a littlefarther again.</LP><TEXT>   Nowhere has this occured more dramatically than in theareas ringing the San Fernando Valley, northwest of downtownLos Angeles. Once the ultimate suburb, the San FernandoValley, like many postwar suburbs, has emerged as acommercial employment center. It is now spawning suburbs ofits own, farther and farther away -- in the Conejo, SantaClarita and Antelope valleys.   One of them is Thousand Oaks, located in the Conejo valleyjust a few miles to the west. It looks like a suburbanite'sdream; low and broad, with no tall buildings and astateliness rare for an auto-oriented community. Even theparking lots are handsome. Median household income exceeds$60,000. A third of the city's 52 square miles are set asidefor parks and open space.   For a decade, Thousand Oaks has tried to maintain itssuburban tranquility by restricting residential constructionto 500 units per year. (Subsidized housing is exempt.) Whencity officials talk about their growth-control ordinance,though, they rarely speak about the actual benefits of havingfewer houses constructed. Rather, they talk about theleverage it gives the city in the planning process. Eachdevelopment proposal is rated according to aesthetics andimpact on public services. The projects with the highestrating receive some of the city's 500 housing &quot;allocations&quot;each year.   The growth-control ordinance has enabled Thousand Oaks toobtain parks and trails, save precious oak trees and acquireother community benefits. But the point system encouragesdevelopers to build larger and more expensive homes in orderto pay for all the amenities. Median home price in ThousandOaks is now $325,000.   The growth-control law kept Thousand Oaks affluent andattractive throughout the 1980s. No one can argue seriously,however, that it has changed the basic growth dynamics in theConejo Valley. Despite high land prices, home buyers andbusinesses continue to stream west out of the San Fernando inhuge numbers. The Southern California Association ofGovernments predicts that over the next 20 years, the ConejoValley will witness a doubling of both population and jobs.   Twenty-five miles northeast of Thousand Oaks, across theSan Gabriel Mountains from the San Fernando Valley and theLos Angeles border, lie several communities that bandedtogether two years ago to become the city of Santa Clarita.Virtually unknown a decade ago, Santa Clarita has more than150,000 residents today and could have as many as 270,000 bythe year 2010. The area has been invaded by middle-class homebuyers fleeing the increasingly expensive and crowded SanFernando Valley to the south. An estimated 40% of itsresidents commute south along the Golden State Freeway intothe Valley each day. Despite a boom in home building, SantaClarita home prices are skyrocketing -- from an average of$160,000 when the city was incorporated two years ago to$230,000 today.   Local streets are choked with traffic much of the time.Many areas suffer from water runoff problems, inadequatesewer systems and a lack of parks. Voters here approvedincorporation two years ago in hopes of gaining more controlover growth in the Santa Clarita Valley. But many of thepolitical tools they need to limit growth still belong to theLos Angeles County government, 35 miles south in downtownL.A.   The county board of supervisors is controlled byfree-enterprise advocates who prefer not to intervene inprivate development. Before cityhood arrived in 1987, thecounty controlled all development in the valley; even today,most land in the valley remains under the county's rule.   Unable to persuade the developers or the L.A. Countygovernment to pay for the cost of rapid growth, the residentsof Santa Clarita have made it clear they do not plan to taxthemselves either. Two years ago, to win voter support for aschool construction tax, local school districts decided toimpose the tax only on future residents. And last November, aproposed property tax increase to improve roads got only 20%of the vote.   While Santa Clarita revolts against paying the costs ofcongestion, however, developers are planning to bring inmore. The county is considering 45 proposals to build 38,000more houses in the hilly, unincorporated territory outsidethe Santa Clarita city limits.   Last year, Santa Clarita sought an expansion of its&quot;sphere of influence&quot; -- an area over which it has some butnot all control -- from the 40-square-mile city limits to a200-square-mile area. The county turned the request down lastNovember.   From Santa Clarita, it is a 40-mile drive up Highway 14 toa place that home builders and home buyers now consider thepromised land: the Antelope Valley. At more than 2,000 feetabove sea level, this is the high desert -- virtually endlessplateau where the weather is sizzling in the summer, freezingin the winter and windy all the time.   With growth restrictions limiting their activitieselsewhere, L.A. home builders arrived here in the early '80s,attracted by the cheap land. They threw up huge subdivisionsaround the country towns of Lancaster and Palmdale, andstarted selling houses for under $100,000, mostly to youngfamilies tied to jobs in the San Fernando Valley. These newresidents drive 50, 60, even 70 miles each way to work. TheAntelope Valley is expected to grow from around 150,000 todayto more than a half-million people over the next 20 years.   Local political leaders have generally welcomed theinflux. The commuters, as well as the construction industry,have given the Antelope Valley an economic stability the areararely enjoyed in the past, when it was highly dependent onthe aerospace industry. There are some hints of comingconflict. At meetings of the Lancaster Planning Commission,the big-name developers who come to plead for zoning changesare sometimes joined by longtime residents who complain thatthe developers are crowding too many homes on small lots. Infact, lot size is such a sensitive issue that one commissionmember lost his seat for daring to tell residents of oneneighborhood that their rural lifestyle is a thing of thepast.   Antelope Valley residents fear nothing more than becoming&quot;another San Fernando Valley,&quot; but, in fact, the area's powerstructure is pushing quite deliberately toward the futurethat the San Fernando Valley represents. Local business andpolitical leaders have tried very hard to push the AntelopeValley past the bedroom stage and make it into a center foremployment, just as the San Fernando Valley is. The twocities have undertaken a joint commercial marketing effortthat includes advertisements in this newspaper. Already, onelarge company, Anderson-Barrows Metals Corp., has been luredout of a business park in Santa Clarita.   It took the San Fernando Valley four decades to evolvefrom a semi-rural suburb to a crowded and economicallypowerful urban center. The Antelope Valley is rolling throughthe same cycle in only a few years. This fact is reflectedmost dramatically in home prices. The average home price hasrisen from $80,000 in 1984 to somewhere between $130,000 and$150,000 today. As the Antelope valley economic developmenteffort takes off, the area could take on all the unwelcomecharacteristics that the locals associate with the SanFernando Valley.   Just north of Lancaster along Highway 14 lies what hasconstituted, up to now, the northern terminus of the L.A.metropolitan area: the Kern County line. Across the line liecommunities such as Rosamond and Mojave -- tiny, poor deserttowns that originally existed because of the railroads andhave barely survived for decades. Political control lies inthe county seat of Bakersfield, 60 miles northwest.   Some of L.A.'s biggest home builders have been bankingland in Rosamond, and have their eyes on Mojave as well. LastNovember, the Kern County board of supervisors approved a newcomprehensive plan for Rosamond, whose current population isaround 11,000, that will permit a population of 80,000 by theyear 2000. And just a few miles northwest of Mojave, in themountain town of Tehachapi, real estate developers whocontrol thousands of acres are talking about building &quot;newtowns&quot; with thousands of jobs and tens of thousands ofpeople.   The outward push of metropolitan Los Angeles, which began40 years ago when suburban development hit the San FernandoValley, may soon reach communities close to a hundred milesaway. And while those communities may welcome the economicbonanza at first, soon they too may be faced with thequestion of how to accommodate growth while maintaining therural way of life that the new residents left places likeSanta Clarita and Lancaster to pursue. And so they willprobably engage in micro-solutions that don't do much tosolve a very macro problem.   ---   Mr. Fulton is editor of California Planning andamp; DevelopmentReport, a monthly newsletter in Ventura, Calif. This is basedon an article in the April issue of Governing magazine.</TEXT></DOC>