<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910221-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>910221-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Civil Strife:   Soviet Georgia Is Torn   By Groups Competing   In Independence Drive   ---   They Fail to Unite in Fight   To Break With Moscow   And Stem Internal Unrest   ---   An Ex-Con Rallies the Troops   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   TBILISI, U.S.S.R. -- For months, the new paramilitarygroup had used a former Communist recreation center here inSoviet Georgia as a training ground for its independencestruggle.   Where Party youth members once frolicked around a lake,anti-Communist Georgians negotiated an obstacle course. Theold swimming hall was turned into a shooting range. And 30Red Army trucks, stolen or bought from demoralized Soviettroops, stood at the ready outside.</LP><TEXT>   This was the domain of Djaba Ioseliani, a charismaticformer bank robber turned university professor, who claimedhis illegal army numbered 2,000 troops, with a reserve of4,000 more.   But in the predawn hours last Monday, Mr. Ioseliani'smovement became the latest casualty of Moscow's hardline,internal crackdown. Soviet Army tanks and armored personnelcarriers stormed the training ground, catching part of Mr.Ioseliani's fledgling militia off guard. Two were wounded and20 arrested. The training ground was closed down.   What followed demonstrates the measure of chaos sweepingthis Soviet republic. Mr. Ioseliani took to the streets onMonday to blame the betrayal not on the Soviets but on hisformer ally in the dissident movement, Zviad Gamsakhurdia,Georgia's president. Mr. Gamsakhurdia, who is leading his ownindependence movement, responded in kind: He had the62-year-old Mr. Ioseliani arrested and thrown in jail.   The worsening dispute among Georgians and the ever-presentthreat from Moscow are two of the many reasons why peoplehere fear their country is fast becoming a Soviet Lebanon --a lawless republic where ethnic violence and crime isspreading. Though the West has focused on the Sovietcrackdown in the Baltics, experts believe civil war is morelikely to erupt in Georgia, a republic of 5.5 million that,but for a short period of sovereignty from 1918 to 1921, hasbeen under Russian or Soviet control for two centuries.   Weapons are more plentiful in Georgia, draft dodging ismore rampant, and tempers seem to run hotter. Suspicion ofthe Soviet central government has poisoned attitudes:Memories are still vivid of the day in April 1989 when Soviettroops killed 19 Georgian demonstrators with toxic gas andsharpened shovels.   &quot;The Kremlin wants to create a situation where there willbe bloodshed and then it can intervene as the peace-maker,&quot;says Mr. Gamsakhurdia. &quot;Lebanon is already here.&quot;   The once bucolic streets of Tbilisi are now peopled by mentoting pistols and Kalashnikovs. Crime has risen sharply: Therepublic now has an average of three murders a day. Localstalk about a new car &quot;kidnapping&quot; ring that demands a ransombefore it will return vehicles to their owners. &quot;We havereached that dangerous divide beyond which society will slideinto the abyss of violence, chaos and lawlessness,&quot; says thegovernment's Russian language newspaper Zarya Vostoka.   For President Gamsakhurdia, dissent (and the threat ofchaos) seems to be coming from all quarters. There is Mr.Ioseliani's still-present paramilitary group to consider.There is the Kremlin to contend with. And there are yet moreinternal independence movements among Georgia's minoritygroups to put down. Georgians make up only 69% of therepublic's population. The rest is composed of Armenians,Azerbaijanis and up to 100 other ethnic and national groupsleft behind by migrations, invasions and changing borders.Georgians, in fact, call their republic a museum of nations.   Ethnic tensions are particularly bad in South Ossetia,which was created by Lenin in 1922 after Ossetians sided withthe Bolsheviks against the Georgians. South Ossetia declareditself independent last September. Mr. Gamsakhurdia respondedin December by sending in the Georgia militia and cancelingthe region's autonomy. Yesterday, the Soviet legislatureentered the fray. It said it would impose a state ofemergency on Georgia unless Georgian leaders put an end tocontinued dissent in South Ossetia within three days.   Thus, South Ossetia's problem has come to mirror theproblem of Georgia as a whole: how to break away from adominant, and more powerful, parent. Recent polls show that90% of the republic's people want independence from theSoviet Union. Unlike the residents in many other Sovietdomains, Georgians have never totally lost their independentspirit. They are considered more individualistic andentrepreneurial than Russians. Even their landscape is moreflamboyant. A mountainous region that was part of the Colchiskingdom where Jason and the Argonauts are said to have sailedin quest of the Golden Fleece, Georgia today is replete withrotting castles hanging from sheer cliffs and rivers slicingthrough slate escarpments.   Tbilisi, the capital, is a confusion of private shops,19th century boulevards and brightly colored wooden balconiesresting precariously on stilts over the Kura River. Residentslike to say they never took their occupiers seriously. Onlyafter the army attacked demonstrators nearly two years agodid the independence movement take on a dark and absolutistpassion.   But now people here wonder what form the splinteringmovement should take, and who should lead it. They worrythat, with mounting economic problems sapping the republic'sspirit, internecine feuding has kept Georgians from facingdown the Soviets with a united front.   &quot;The problem isn't only to break something old, but it isalso to start something new,&quot; says Lana Gogoberidze, aGeorgian film maker. &quot;We are watching things turn sour beforeour eyes.&quot;   She sits in front of her living room fireplace, whichprovides blessed heat during an electricity shortage, andapologizes for not being able to offer the usual Georgianhospitality; food is scarce in Tbilisi's staterun shops, andprices are often prohibitive in the private markets. For thefirst time since World War II, Georgians wait in bread lines.   Mrs. Gogoberidze dates the start of Georgia's decline tothe 1989 demonstration, when she was among tens of thousandsof protesters dispersed by Soviet troops. Even when the tanksrolled up Rustavelli Prospect, the main boulevard, Georgianscouldn't believe they would do more than try to intimidatepeople.   &quot;For the first time in my life I saw the real occupiers,&quot;she says. Now she sees the events as the beginning of the endof reform in the U.S.S.R., although she still believesGeorgians will avoid civil war. &quot;We were never fanatics; wehave always been a reasonable people who like fine wine,beautiful art and the good life.&quot;   Today, much of the independence drama continues to takeplace within the movement itself. One leading role is beingplayed by President Gamsakhurdia, a 52-year-old formerdissident who came to symbolize the fight against Soviet ruleand was elected president in November. His enemies brand hima Georgian Mussolini, a populist dictator who is controllingthe press and impeding the free market. In one inflammatorystatement last summer, he called mixed marriages &quot;a threat tothe survival of the Georgian nation.&quot;   Yet his backers consider him a sort of modern-day St.George slaying the Soviet dragon. Friends of the presidentsay he has indicated he sees himself in this role, somethinghe denies. Yet he has chosen St. George to replace the hammerand sickle as the state symbol. &quot;I am convinced the dragon --the symbol of the threat to Christianity -- will bedefeated,&quot; he says.   The President's popularity grows out of his father's roleas the most notable Georgian novelist of this century andfrom his own early opposition to Soviet rule. At age 17, hewas jailed for dissident activities. In 1977, he wasimprisoned as the leader of Georgia's monitoring group forthe Helsinki human rights agreements. It was the manner ofhis release that divides Georgians: It came only two yearsinto a fiveyear term and followed his televised confessionand repentance.   &quot;For my political activity, it was necessary to get myselfout of prison,&quot; he says today. &quot;It was a trick.&quot;   Another leading player in the Georgian drama, GeorgyChanturia, claims that Mr. Gamsakhurdia was released becausehe was cooperating with the KGB. He accuses the Georgianpresident of canceling South Ossetian autonomy to triggerviolence that, in turn, may give the Soviet military apretext for intervening.   Mr. Chanturia, a 32-year-old historian who spent two yearsin prison for dissident activities and was released in 1985,is one of the leading figures of the National Congress, analternative legislature elected in September from partiesthat refused to participate in parliamentary elections inNovember. The National Congress doesn't recognize PresidentGamsakhurdia or his parliament because they remain a part ofMoscow's official power structure.   The entrance to Mr. Chanturia's office in central Tbilisiis unmarked except for six bullet holes in the plywood door.They missed their mark, but about a month later anothergunman shot and wounded Mr. Chanturia. In his office, Mr.Chanturia grinds out a Camel cigarette in an ashtray, takes adrink from a green can of Heineken beer and crushes the can.&quot;We know not only that Gamsakhurdia is a fascist, but thatfor 13 years he has worked for the KGB,&quot; he says.   President Gamsakhurdia dismisses Mr. Chanturia's chargesout of hand. Yet he does view Mr. Chanturia as a threat,partly because the National Congress is allied with Mr.Ioseliani's private army.   Mr. Ioseliani, the third leading figure in the drama, isgrowing in popularity and power. Between 1943 and 1966, hewas in jail on a variety of criminal convictions, and fellowprisoners came to view him as a leader. He readily admits hisparamilitary group is made up of many ex-cons, along withathletes, draft dodgers, former Soviet soldiers and membersof street gangs. &quot;From my time in prison, I learned what Ineeded to know about training men and disciplining them,&quot; hesays. &quot;You become a leader among such men through honesty,strength and fearlessness. And these men feel a solidaritytoward each other that one finds in few sectors of society.&quot;   Mr. Ioseliani originally called his organization theSurvivor Corps, which he patterned after the Peace Corps. Oneof its first tasks was providing disaster relief in Iranfollowing an earthquake there last summer. The corps soonsprouted a militia which he calls &quot;Mkhedrioni,&quot; or the armedknights. The Mkhedrioni meets in a building downtown, andrecruits wear medallions of St. George spearing the dragon.   Thus far, Georgians have praised the group for using itsforce to stop factional fighting in the region. Some, though,worry that the private army doesn't answer to any politicalleadership. And now they fear Mr. Ioseliani and his troopswill seek a violent revenge for this week's crackdown. Mr.Ioseliani this week said he will form a new political partyto oppose President Gamsakhurdia.   As if all the internal problems weren't enough, PresidentGamsakhurdia says the Kremlin, burdened by its own economicproblems, is withholding goods, electricity and fuel from therepublic. Georgia gets all of its natural gas and most of itsoil, grain and sugar from other parts of the U.S.S.R. Most ofGeorgia's large factories have already closed for lack ofelectricity. Hotels are operating with skeleton staffs,offices are empty, and many university classes have stoppedmeeting.   &quot;No one works here anymore,&quot; says Akaki Bakradze, aliterary critic. &quot;People worked better before because it wasa dictatorship and they went to their jobs out of fear. Butnow they are no longer slaves, and no new incentive has beengiven to encourage work.&quot;   President Gamsakhurdia says little will change in Georgiauntil bigger changes take place in Moscow and theindependence movements in Soviet republics are grantedlegitimacy. For that to happen, he contends, the West mustintervene by imposing sanctions against Moscow and sendingeconomic aid directly to republics. &quot;The West must take theside of the oppressed and not the oppressors,&quot; he says. &quot;TheSoviet Union doesn't exist anymore. There exist only slavesin this prison of nations.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>