<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900522-0127</DOCNO><DOCID>900522-0127.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Stanley Arkin Solo Practice to End   As He Joins Chadbourne andamp; Parke   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   WNEWS LATAM KRI</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Stanley S. Arkin, the brash trial lawyer who made his nameas a defense attorney in insider-trading cases, is abandoninghis small practice to join the New York law firm ofChadbourne andamp; Parke.   Mr. Arkin's decision to join the 251-lawyer firm afterbeing on his own for 21 years reflects the growing pressureson small firm practitioners, particularly in thecriminal-defense arena where Mr. Arkin has become aswell-known as many of his clients. It also reflects largefirms' increased interest in handling such work.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Ten years ago the large so-called silk-stocking firmswouldn't dirty their fingers on criminal cases,&quot; says PlatoCacheris, a criminal-defense lawyer with the six-lawyerWashington, D.C., firm of Cacheris andamp; Towey. &quot;Now the largefirms have decided it's remunerative to retain those cases.&quot;   In part, that change in attitude stems from thegovernment's increased emphasis on prosecutingsecurities-related crimes, as well as other white-collarcases. Conservative law firms can still spurn the &quot;dirtier&quot;drug or organized-crime cases while cashing in onwhite-collar criminal-defense work.   Chadbourne andamp; Parke had been looking for a litigator with awhite-collar defense background since it discovered two yearsago that the firm &quot;had to turn down matters because we didn'thave that kind of expertise,&quot; says Jerome C. Katz, a partnerwith the firm.   Mr. Arkin, 52 years old, came to prominence in the fieldin the late 1970s when he represented a financial printernamed Vincent Chiarella, who was accused of trading oninformation he garnered while assembling tender-offerdocuments. Mr. Arkin took the case to the U.S. Supreme Court,where the conviction was reversed. In a ruling that has madeit more difficult for the government to pursue such cases,the court limited the definition of who can be guilty ofinsider trading.   Since then, Mr. Arkin has represented a wide range ofclients, including Richard Wigton, the Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co.executive who faced insider-trading charges that were laterdropped by federal prosecutors, and D. Ronald Yagoda, thehead trader at Marcus Schloss andamp; Co. who was acquitted ofinsider trading as part of the so-called &quot;Yuppie Five&quot; case.Currently, he is representing entertainer Johnny Carson andSimon andamp; Schuster chief executive officer Richard Snyder intheir respective matrimonial cases.   Despite Mr. Arkin's strong reputation, some defenselawyers have said he and the Chadbourne firm make an oddmatch. Chadbourne is considered somewhat stodgy, preferringto do its work quietly and stay out of the public eye. Mr.Arkin, in contrast, is widely available to reporters and hasgenerated controversy for the aggressive public stands he hastaken on behalf of his clients.   Mr. Katz says that the firm doesn't expect Mr. Arkin toabandon his somewhat unorthodox style. &quot;We don't want him totone down. We want to let Stanley Arkin be Stanley Arkin. Wedo not intend for him to change his style or his personalityto suit us,&quot; Mr. Katz says.   At Chadbourne, Mr. Arkin will specialize in criminal andregulatory investigations and prosecutions, as well ascomplex civil and matrimonial matters and corporate internalinvestigations. Mr. Arkin, along with his two partners andtwo associates, will join the Chadbourne firm effective July1.   Mr. Arkin says that as his cases have grown morecomplicated so has the need for the kind of resources andback up that a large firm offers. &quot;You cannot handle a hugelitigation in a small firm and service other clients,&quot; hesays. &quot;A trial kills your practice, it takes so much time.&quot;   Mr. Arkin says that being at a large firm will also easethe pressures of having to generate and service his clientswhile serving as the office manager as well. He won't besuffering financially. People familiar with the situation sayMr. Arkin will earn at least $1 million in his first year atthe firm. Mr. Arkin says he received no financial guaranteesand that his income will reflect the profits of the entirefirm. For the fiscal year ended Dec. 31, Chadbourne had grossrevenue of $95 million and profit per partner of $505,000,according to people familiar with the firm's revenue.   Some defense lawyers working at small firms say theyprefer the collegiality and independence of their practices.&quot;My experience at a large firm wasn't unpleasant but I preferthe unstructured existence of a small firm,&quot; says Mr.Cacheris. &quot;You get less involved in administrative mattersand firm meetings, which I find boring.&quot;   Mr. Arkin, who admits to some anxiety about the move, sayshe weighed the benefits and drawbacks of joining a large firmand decided that he wanted to develop himself &quot;as an adviseras opposed to a guerilla-warfare team leader.&quot;   ---   NORIEGA'S LAWYERS are likely to have their fees paid bythe U.S.   At a hearing in Miami before U.S. District Judge WilliamM. Hoeveler, federal prosecutors said the government agreedto pay the fees, adding that U.S. officials want to seedeposed Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega receive a fairtrial.   In late April, Mr. Noriega's defense team, led by FrankRubino, asked the court to be allowed to withdraw from thedrug-racketeering case. They complained that the U.S. hadstopped the flow of their fees by freezing Mr. Noriega'sassets.   The tentative agreement stems from Mr. Noriega's decisionto sign an affidavit stating he will reimburse the governmentfor his lawyers' fees if and when his assets are unfrozen.Moreover, a provision in the Criminal Justice Act concerning&quot;complex&quot; cases involving court-appointed lawyers will allowJudge Hoeveler to award higher-than-normal fees.   Judge Hoeveler set a Thursday hearing to rule on theagreement and to determine what a reasonable fee might be forMr. Noriega's defense team.   ---   NEWS REPORTER must give testimony in criminal trial,Florida court rules.   The Florida Supreme Court ruled that a newspaper reportercan be compelled to provide a pretrial interview, known as adeposition, in a criminal trial about events witnessed whileworking on a story.   The decision, handed down unanimously last week, creates anarrow exception to Florida court rulings that protectedreporters in many circumstances from divulging the source oftheir information or the content of unpublished work.   In this case, Miami Herald reporter Joel Achenbachwitnessed a drug search in 1986 while working on a storyabout Miami International Airport. Police, using a drugprofile, singled out a suspect on a public concourse,searched his luggage and found four kilograms of cocaine. Thesubsequent account in the Herald's Tropic Sunday Magazinediffered slightly from what police said about whether thesuspect, a Cuban, was fluent enough in English to consent tothe search.   When the Dade County public defender's office subpoenaedMr. Achenbach for a deposition, lawyers for the Herald, aunit of Knight-Ridder Inc., argued that reporters have an&quot;across-the-board&quot; qualified privilege against compelleddisclosure. The privilege can only be overcome, the paperargued, if it can be proved that the information is relevant,that it can be obtained no other way and that there is acompelling interest in its disclosure.   But five Florida Supreme Court justices ruled that noFirst Amendment privilege exists when reporters are asked totestify only about &quot;eyewitness observations.&quot;   &quot;Ordinary citizens would not be excused from testifying asto what they observe, and the First Amendment should not beinterpreted to make journalists' testimony privileged simplybecause they made their observations while on duty as areporter,&quot; five of six justices ruled. A sixth justiceconcurred with the result but argued that First Amendmentconsiderations should be weighed against society's interestin compelling disclosure on a case-by-case basis.   The decision is in line with similar rulings in Maryland,New York and Texas. Herald lawyers complained that it forcesreporters to become participants in events rather thanindependent observers.   &quot;I just think it puts the press in the wrong role,&quot; saidSanford L. Bohrer, a Herald First Amendment lawyer.   ---   RASTAFARIAN PRISONERS can't be required to cut their hair,court says.   A federal appeals court in New York affirmed a lower courtdecision that prevents state correctional authorities fromrequiring haircuts of prisoners who adhere to Rastafarianism,a religion that forbids followers to cut or comb their hair.But the court refused to require the state to provide aspecial diet for the Rastafarians, to permit them to weartheir religious headgear or to allow them to congregate forprayer in the absence of clergy from outside the prison.   The prisoners, represented by Prisoners' Legal Services ofNew York, argued that prohibiting informal group prayer andrequiring new Rastafarian inmates to have their hair cut forphotographs violated their First Amendment right to freeexercise of religion. Ruling in favor of the prisoners on thehaircut issue but not on group prayer, the court said itbalanced the prisoners' constitutional rights against thesecurity needs and administrative requirements of the prison.   The Rastafarians also contended that because New Yorkstate makes allowances to Muslim and Jewish prisoners forreligious headgear and special diets, the state violatedtheir rights to equal protection under the Constitution. Butthe court said the Rastafarians hadn't adequately definedtheir dietary needs and that Jewish yarmulkes and Muslimkufis were smaller than the Rastafarian religious hats --called tams -- and posed less of a security threat.   Robert Selcov, a lawyer for the prisoners, criticized thedecision for relying on &quot;extremely fine differences&quot; betweenindividual religions and particular religious practices. Buthe said that by not requiring haircuts of the Rastafarians,the opinion &quot;shows that the federal courts are not totallyturning their backs on prison inmates' constitutionalrights.&quot;   The New York attorney general's office hasn't yet decidedwhether it will seek U.S. Supreme Court review on the haircutissue.   ---   Glenn Ruffenach and Edward Felsenthal contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>