<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910205-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>910205-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Academic Freedom or Ideology?</HL><DATE>02/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A23</SO><LP>   In response to your Jan. 4 editorial &quot;PC at HampshireCollege&quot; concerning two faculty reappointment decisions:First, you declare that Hampshire's administration is&quot;apparently willing to leave no stone unturned . . . toassert its political values and purge those who don'tconform.&quot; The suggestion that the administration applies apolitical litmus test to faculty reappointments is simplyuntrue. Our policy explicitly limits reappointmentconsideration to three criteria: quality of teaching, qualityof research, and quality of community service. Conformity toany particular political values has no relevance to thereappointment process, either as a matter of policy or fact.In that respect we are in total agreement with the Journal.This is not the first time, however, nor will it be the last,at this institution or others, that the failure of a facultymember to pass peer review spawns claims that inappropriatecriteria were used.   The principles of academic freedom and our openreappointment process mean that no one can prevent any givenindividual from introducing any material, comments orsuggested criteria. The question is whether the reviewprocess remains guided by the principles of academic freedomand focused on the three review criteria, which it was inthese two reappointment decisions.</LP><TEXT>   You suggest that the comments included on several of theschool ballots and quoted in your editorial unfairlyinfluenced the reappointment determinations. On the contrary,as the procedures require, the dean of the school did notfurther disclose those brief comments. The confidentialballots, which are advisory only to the dean of the school,were not seen by me or by the all-college committee thatrecommended against the reappointments until after ourrespective decisions, and, therefore, the comments quoted hadno influence on the outcome.   Your statement that the administration made &quot;extraordinaryefforts&quot; to &quot;block&quot; the reappointments is also incorrect. Asthe college's written procedures make clear, the presidentalone is responsible for making recommendations to thetrustees about reappointments. The on-campus steps in theprocess exist to provide recommendations to the president.The evaluation process specifically charges the presidentwith the responsibility to seek the advice of an all-campuselected committee in any reappointment cases he believesrequire further faculty review.   In these two cases, where disagreement clearly existed andthe school dean had raised questions, my decision to involvethe all-college committee was appropriate, and had ampleprecedent. Indeed, it was a necessary step to ensure that theprinciples of academic freedom for all faculty were upheld.In the reappointment process, academic freedom flows in manydirections and protects both those who must exercise theresponsibility of peer review as well as those who must bejudged.   You were wrong when you asserted that Jeffrey Wallen'sappeal, based on infringement of his academic freedom, was&quot;unanimously agreed to by the academic freedom panel.&quot; Thisis not true. Mr. Wallen raised 19 questions about proceduralerrors and violations of his academic freedom. The academicfreedom panel supported him on only four procedural errorsoccurring in the initial steps of the process, and on thatbasis alone it recommended restarting the process. It did notsustain Mr. Wallen's claim that his academic freedom had beenviolated.   What happened in these two reappointments, then, clearlywas not based on ideology, or on questions of academicfreedom. A group of faculty colleagues and students on theall-college committee, as well as the president, determinedthat these individuals would not raise the level of qualityof Hampshire's faculty to an extent sufficient to justifyreappointment, and in so doing overruled a school vote, whichitself is only advisory and not determining.   At Hampshire, &quot;school&quot; is analogous to &quot;department.&quot; Theoverruling of department votes by institution-wide committeesis quite common at Hampshire as well as at other academicinstitutions. The checks and balances of a campus-widecommittee are necessary to ensure the level of quality weseek, especially where there is disagreement among thecandidate's departmental peers.   There is no denying that Hampshire College has aprogressive outlook in a number of areas -- its commitment tosocial responsibility, the responsibility it places onstudents, its requirement for community service, and itswillingness to engage in intellectual experimentation. Butthat can exist only if Hampshire College embraces a widevariety of views and pedagogies.   Gregory S. Prince Jr.   President   Hampshire College   Amherst, Mass.   ---   Your editorial exploits Hampshire College's decision todeny reappointment to two assistant professors to furtheryour view that Western culture is under attack at America'scolleges. Although not close to the specific cases, we knowthat reappointment decisions are often difficult, frequentlycontentious, and sometimes painful. Ironically, however, yourextraordinary indictment of Hampshire's comprehensive facultyevaluation process fails to address whether either of the twoassistant professors has any demonstrated talent as a teacheror scholar -- the basic criteria for reappointment.   Since its founding 20 years ago, Hampshire College hasbecome a symbol for academic freedom and intellectualchallenge. It has pioneered significant innovations in highereducation, explicitly designed to train students in theanalytic skills that are especially important in a democraticsociety. At Hampshire we were not taught what to think buthow to use the tools available in a wide variety ofdisciplines to think for ourselves.   The record of Hampshire's first 5,000 alumni demonstratesthe results of its innovative approach. To illustrate, 15% ofHampshire graduates have become entrepreneurs; 18% arepursuing careers in public service. Moreover, unlike mostcolleges in the U.S., Hampshire draws significant numbers ofits women students into the sciences, and as a result isproviding leadership in an area where our country needs itthe most.   The challenges and opportunities for faculty and studentsat Hampshire are unique in undergraduate education. Insteadof compartmentalizing knowledge in 30-some departments andmajors, the college is organized into four schools -- SocialSciences, Natural Sciences, Humanities and Arts, andCommunications and Cognitive Sciences -- in each of whichstudents are required to complete a significant project.Hampshire students progress toward graduation not byaccumulating course credits, but by a series of examinationsto demonstrate competence in using research, analysis andarguments to arrive at sound conclusions and assert them.   Ken Burns ('75)   Walpole, N.H.   (The letter also is signed by Amy Hines '78, a HampshireCollege alumni trustee, and Michael Mann '75.)   ---   Your editorial is a sign that Hampshire College finally isbeginning to receive nationally the recognition andreputation it deserves.   The notion of &quot;political correctness,&quot; which is rather newto the national press, is quite old to Hampshire College. Fornearly 15 years the college has engaged in a concerted andruthless though well-concealed campaign to rid itself ofanything or anyone who would foster freedom of intellectualinquiry and expression among its faculty and students. In theplace of intellectual freedom as an institutional valueregulating both inquiry and action, it has substitutedpolitical indoctrination as its pedagogical principle, andpetty but vicious power politics as its behavioral norm.   Indeed, petty and amoral power politics itself has becomethe institutional standard for the determination not only ofproper action but of proper belief. For in the declaredabsence of any intrinsic values or truths -- such values andtruths as are the substance of the classical liberaltraditions not only of Western but also of non-Westernreligions, philosophies, politics and literatures -- thedetermination of the very meaning of such notions as &quot;value,&quot;&quot;truth&quot; and &quot;meaning&quot; has been left to the winners of thepolitical power game to decide. And those who have won atHampshire are those whose actions have been regulated andruled by no moral or religious or social norms of rightaction and true belief, but rather only by the recklessstriving to rule, to regulate and to win.   The cases of Norman Holland and Jeffrey Wallen, which youdescribe, are only among the latest in a long history ofcases wherein faculty members of the highest caliber andintegrity have been persecuted within and expunged from thecollege because they represented an intellectualist traditionof the free pursuit of truth and meaning. I was a member ofthe Hampshire College faculty, teaching philosophy, religion,theology and literature; I resigned for reasons directlyrelated to the political environment. I witnessed internalpressures to conform to the college's doctrinaire agenda thatwere characteristic of dictatorial and oppressive politicalregimes. I saw individual faculty members in the collegesenate vote contrary to their conscience on important policymatters, in the knowledge that a vote in accord with theirconscience certainly would result in their elimination fromthe faculty.   Educators who are tempted to follow a politicallydoctrinaire course, whether at the primary, the secondary, orthe collegiate level -- which Hampshire already has pursued-- should come to Hampshire to witness the bloody remains ofwhat once was an educational institution of enormousvitality, now long gone mad.   In closing, let me recognize and affirm here that veryselect number of faculty members and the many students atHampshire who over the years have not submitted to thepressures to conform to the college's doctrinaire politicalagenda, but rather have maintained their intellectual andpersonal integrity, at times at great expense to theirwell-being.   R. Kenyon Bradt Jr.   Amherst, Mass.</TEXT></DOC>