<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910214-0114</DOCNO><DOCID>910214-0114.</DOCID><HL>   Hidden Heritage:   Some Older Poles Now   Discover That They   Were Born Jewish   ---   Secret Orphans of World War   Learn Truth About Past,   Not Always So Happily   ---   Living Amid Anti-Semitism   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><LP>   WARSAW -- The 70-year-old Polish woman strained to tellher daughter a secret she had concealed since the worst daysof World War II. &quot;Listen, we have one more thing we need totalk about . . . about your childhood. . . ,&quot; the daughterremembers her stammering over and over for the five weeks shelay on her death bed. But the words always trailed off.   After her mother's death, Jadwiga Asendrych turneddetective. Mrs. Asendrych had no siblings to question, andher father was also dead; so she pored through her mother'scorrespondence and address book and questioned her mother'sfriends. Finally, one of her mother's correspondents told herthe truth. &quot;Your mother was not your real mother, and you areJewish,&quot; she said.</LP><TEXT>   This woman, a Polish Jew living in Sweden, had befriendedMrs. Asendrych's mother after the end of World War II; sheoften sent packages of clothing for the child but reluctantlyagreed to keep the secret of the child's Jewishness. She toldJadwiga this story.   Jadwiga Asendrych was born Barbara Zajdler in a smallhospital in the village of Garwolin in 1942, after herpregnant mother had been spirited there from the WarsawGhetto. Mrs. Zajdler left the hospital, and her newbornchild, to search for her husband. The Nazis had already senthim, a doctor at the hospital, to the Treblinka exterminationcamp.   Before she left, she had arranged to have her childadopted by a Polish Catholic woman, whose baby had beenstillborn the same week. The woman was to give the Jewishinfant her baby's name and documents, for a generous fee.   Mrs. Asendrych's first reaction to these revelations wasshock. Then came the memory of her adoptive mother'santi-Semitism, leveled against her. &quot;If I didn't wring outthe laundry properly, my mother said I was doing it like aJewess,&quot; she recalls. &quot;If I asked too many questions, shetold me to quit acting like a Jew.&quot; But these sorts ofanti-Semitic comments were common in Poland; Mrs. Asendrychhad no reason to doubt that she was the daughter of the womanwith whom she shared dark hair and olive skin.   Jadwiga Asendrych is only one among hundreds ofJewish-born Poles known as &quot;hidden children.&quot; More often thannot, their parents were among the estimated three millionJewish Poles killed in Nazi extermination camps. The childrensurvived only because their parents stashed them forsafekeeping with Polish families, hoping someday to reclaimthem. Few ever could.   The Poles often raised the children as their own. In manycases they concealed from them their Jewish heritage. Butwith the opening up of Eastern Europe and the aging of theWorld War II generation, many of these children, now in their40s and 50s, are learning their true identities.Disconcertingly, in a country where anti-Semitism remains apotent force, the discovery is rarely happy.   &quot;It is not an easy thing to be a Jew in Poland,&quot; saysRabbi Chaskel O. Besser, who is trying to revive Jewishculture in Eastern Europe in his role as president of theRonald Lauder Foundation. &quot;No one around you will every treatyou the same again.&quot;   Oddly, Poland has anti-Semitism despite having few Jews.Today, only 10,000 Jews are registered in Jewishorganizations and synagogues, though it is assumed thatthousands more do not state their religion openly due tofears of prejudice.   Greater democracy has only made such prejudices moreevident. In Poland's recent presidential election, formerPrime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a Roman Catholic whom somebelieved to be Jewish, faced crowds at campaign rallies whojeered, &quot;We are ruled by Jews.&quot; Lech Walesa apparently foundit helpful to proclaim at campaign rallies: &quot;I am not a Jew.&quot;   For many of the hidden children, being a Jew is anunwanted and unfamiliar burden. Mrs. Asendrych's life hasbecome distinctly more difficult. She says her husband'sfamily visits less frequently now, and often makes commentsabout how they usually don't like Jews, adding &quot;but you aredifferent.&quot; At the same time, she says, the cliquish Jewishcommunity often balks at accepting outsiders who areunfamiliar with their traditions.   &quot;I have lost one identity without gaining another,&quot; shesays. &quot;I don't feel like a Pole any more, but I haven't anyidea what it means to be Jewish.&quot;   Too few hidden Jewish children have come forward toprovide a complete picture, but some patterns are evident.Most of them in Poland were from well-off families who couldafford the protection payments. Most of the protectors werepoor Poles for whom the reward was worth the risk.   The protectors were a mixture of opportunists and goodsouls who had long been friendly with Jews, or had worked forthem. Whatever their motives, all knew that the cost of theiractions could be their lives; in some villages, those whohelped Jews were hanged in the central square.   ---   &quot;It was pure and simply a business, and I was a productthat was so undesirable that my parents had to pay someone totake me,&quot; says Barbara Gruberska, a physician in a villagenear Warsaw.   Dr. Gruberska refers to a contract she recently unearthedbetween her mother, who was using a false name, and a cobblercouple. The contract stipulated that Barbara was to be hiddenby the couple for three months, at 700 zlotys ($140, in 1942dollars) per month. The deal was arranged by a broker, whoalso collected a fee.   If the mother didn't return after three months, the couplewas to give the child to an orphanage, saying it was a Germanor a Polish baby and handing over documents that provided thebaby with a false name. Dr. Gruberska never landed in anorphanage; but the documents helped her survive the war. Evennow, after piecing together some of her early life, she stilldoesn't know her true name or birthdate.   From the contract, Dr. Gruberska eventually found thecobbler. He told her that her true mother came back only onceduring the war -- a dangerous mission in the middle of thenight -- to get a glimpse of her child. Rumors circulatedthroughout the city that the mother had been a spy and thatthe Nazis had hanged her in the forest.   The cobbler says his fear for the child and for himselfmade him seek another broker. He didn't want to take her toan orphanage because officials there might take one look atthe emaciated baby and assume she was from the Warsaw ghetto,as indeed she was. Apparently, &quot;I looked more like an animalthan a human being,&quot; Mrs. Gruberska says now, chain-smokingwhile her teen-age daughter listens to the story and bitesher lower lip. &quot;I wasn't a very appetizing package for anyoneto take.&quot;   A couple was found to transport the toddler into an areaof Poland considered safer for hiding Jews. Instead, theydecided to keep her.   After the war, their best efforts to hide the girl'sheritage failed. Townspeople knew part of the story andgossiped among themselves. At school, classmates wrote on theblackboard &quot;Jew Go to Palestine.&quot; Dr. Gruberska says shewould arrive early to erase what had been written overnightbefore others could see it. Catholic children would spit onher at Mass, she says.   Yet her mother never admitted her child was Jewish, andshe instead told her she was the victim of her beautifulblack hair. Both her parents are now deceased.   Dr. Gruberska, with the support of her husband, says shehas embraced Jewish culture, though she has kept somedistance from its purely religious aspects. She has madeclear to her own children that they are Jewish. Her son isnow attending a Jewish high school in New Jersey, onscholarship from the Ronald Lauder Foundation.   &quot;I was very happy that he has decided to learn Hebrew andlook into the traditions, but it shocked me when he decidedto have himself circumcised this year,&quot; she says.   ---   Barbara Kurek, nee Emma Schiffren, was less than two yearsold when her mother and two other Jewish women smuggled herand five other children out of the Warsaw ghetto to thenearby town of Lubno. Her father owned the brick factorythere; her mother owned property on which a man ran a cobblershop.   The cobbler consented to take the children for a shortwhile, expecting the women to return when it was safer. Butwithin hours, news reached him that the women had beencaptured and shot outside the brick factory -- a bloodyexample to any other Jews who might stray from their ghettoprison. The cobbler decided it was too dangerous to keep allthe children under one roof, so he and his wife separatedthem. But they held on to Emma and gave her the name Barbara,after their young daughter who had died of typhus.   When Barbara was 18, she wanted to marry a young Polishofficer in a Catholic ceremony. Her mother forbade it. &quot;Youcan't do that, because you don't belong in the church,&quot; shesaid. Then she told Barbara about her past.   Barbara married the officer anyway. The obliging priestwho officiated at the wedding had earlier provided falsebaptism papers. But Barbara's husband insisted that thesecret of her past be kept to protect their children, both ofwhom were baptized as Catholics. Following the example of heradoptive mother, Mrs. Kurek didn't tell her own daughteruntil shortly before she was to be married. As it happened,the girl was marrying a Pole who had one Jewish parent, butthey will also keep the secret from their children until theyare &quot;old enough to understand,&quot; says Mrs. Kurek.   Mrs. Kurek, now 49, tells the story fearfully and shyly,her beautiful and almost aristocratic features caught insidethe plump and weathered frame of an impoverished Pole. Shehas failed in her search to find Jewish relatives, and whatshe has learned has brought her more disquiet. When shevisited the town where she was raised, people there told herthe name of the Polish police officer who betrayed her Jewishmother to the Nazis. They told her how this policeman's wifewas often seen wearing her real mother's fine coat andclothing.   Now Mrs. Kurek wants revenge, and doesn't know how to getit. &quot;Can you help me?&quot; she asks.   ---   Eva Rzadzka says she knew as a nine-year-old that she wasdifferent. Her dark, curly hair just didn't fit in the familyportrait. Her mother tried to lighten and straighten it byroughly rubbing in rinses and ointments. She also says hermother often beat her, demanding that she act more like herbrother.   Mrs. Rzadzka recalls a time when her aunt, who was caringfor her, couldn't stand the child's torture any longer. &quot;Yourmother only does it because you are not her child,&quot; Mrs.Rdzazka remembers the aunt saying. &quot;You are Jewish, and yourmother is dead.&quot; The aunt pointed to the large amount ofprecious jewelry in the otherwise poor household andexplained that Eva's real parents had left it, and much more,so that the family would protect their daughter.   But the aunt made the young girl promise not to tellanyone about this, particularly her mother. &quot;I consideredthis my own special secret,&quot; says Mrs. Rzadzka. &quot;I connectedit to the jewelry, to the gold. My child's imagination madeit something sad and dark.&quot;   It was only after her mother's death in 1982 that Mrs.Rzadzka felt free to search for her history in earnest, butthe hunt only brought frustration. Only her aunt had all thedetails, and she had died as well. All Mrs. Rzadzkadiscovered through another relative was that her real namewas Dina Szapiro, and that her family had been well-to-do.   What hurt most, she says, was that after her mother'sdeath her father gave the family jewels to her Polishbrother. Only when her father was dying, in 1984, did he begher forgiveness. &quot;He cried that everything the family had wasdue to me,&quot; she says.   --   Most of the hidden children will probably never be found.A New York-based organization called The Hidden Child hasscheduled, for late May, the First International Gathering ofChildren Hidden During World War II. From a probable pool ofseveral thousand in the world, they have located 1,000, ofwhom 300 to 600 have expressed interest in attending the NewYork conference.   One child who almost certainly won't attend is LolekErlister. In April 1943, the six-year-old miraculouslyescaped from a pit holding bodies of children who had beenmachine-gunned during the Warsaw Ghetto uprising. But twomonths later, he was separated from his mother forever. Whilefleeing from a drunken Pole who had been sheltering them,they jumped onto a moving tram in downtown Warsaw. Thesix-year-old boy fell underneath it and his foot was crushed.   His mother remembers that she cried so hysterically, aPolish policeman walked up and sneered that she was weeping&quot;as only a Jew could.&quot; In terror, she fled, leaving herinjured boy and her false papers behind that gave her a phonyPolish name, Vera Stodolska.   The policeman apparently took the boy to a nearbyhospital, where his life was saved, but his foot was lost. ACatholic friend of the mother's delivered food to thehospital every day for three weeks to check on the child. Butthen Lolek disappeared. The hospital director, fearing hewould be punished if the circumsized boy were discovered, hadhim moved to a nearby convent.   Lolek's parents, who now live in New York, have madefrequent visits to Poland over the years, looking for theirchild. Several years ago, they located the hospital, wherethey were given the name of a nun at the convent run by theSisters of Charity of St. Vincent De Paul. The nun toldLolek's mother that her son is alive, healthy and&quot;spiritually purified.&quot; But that is all anyone from theconvent would tell her.   Mrs. Erlister is now 81, and she still yearns for thechild she hasn't seen since 1943. &quot;We do not seek to changehis religion or nationality or his relationship to those whosheltered and loved him,&quot; explains his younger brother, Jan,who has never seen him. &quot;We only want to add to his love, andto relieve our anguish.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>