<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900625-0078</DOCNO><DOCID>900625-0078.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Lisa Jones, Convicted Ex-Assistant   At Drexel, Gets 10 Months in Jail   ----   By Ann Hagedorn and Laurie P. Cohen   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   FORGN AXP TWX MOB</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)BANKS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Lisa Jones, a former trader's assistant at Drexel BurnhamLambert Inc. who was convicted of perjury last year, wasresentenced to 10 months in prison.   On Friday, U.S. District Judge Leonard B. Sand, promptedby a recent decision from the Second U.S. Circuit Court ofAppeals, reduced Ms. Jones's prison term from 18 to 10months. The judge also cut Ms. Jones's financial penalty from$50,000 to about $40,000.</LP><TEXT>   The 27-year old Ms. Jones, a former runaway who made$100,000 a year at the now collapsed Drexel, sobbed as JudgeSand announced his decision. Her attorney, Daniel Bookin, hadurged the judge to reduce her punishment to probation. Heexpressed his concern that her fragile mental condition wouldbe further damaged by a stay in prison.   Mr. Bookin read from a letter his client had sent JudgeSand in which she described &quot;never-ending sleepness nightsand days filled with anxiety.&quot; He also stressed that Ms.Jones's sentence was unduly harsh in comparison with those ofmore powerful players convicted during the government'scrackdown on insider trading on Wall Street.   Ms. Jones was convicted of five counts of perjury and twocounts of obstruction of justice for lying to a grand jurylooking into allegedly illegal trading involving Drexel. Hertrial drew considerable attention because she had worked forformer Drexel trader Bruce Lee Newberg, who was laterconvicted along with five partners of now-defunctPrinceton/Newport L.P. for engaging in a scheme with Drexelaimed at generating bogus tax losses. Her attorney depictedher as a hapless pawn in the government's sweepinginvestigation.   Mr. Bookin, of the San Francisco law firm Farella Braun andamp;Martel, appealed the conviction and the original 18-monthsentence on the basis of alleged conflicts of interest by hertrial lawyer who also represented other Drexel employees. Thecourt upheld the conviction. But it ruled that Judge Sand hadimproperly increased Ms. Jones's sentence beyond the leveldeemed appropriate under the federal sentencing guidelines.   The government sought a steep penalty based on theargument that Ms. Jones's perjury had cost the governmenttime and money in its effort to prove its case againstPrinceton/Newport. The appeals panel, seeing no evidence ofsuch cost, asked the judge to resentence Ms. Jones.   At Friday's hearing, prosecutor Neil Cartusciello stressedthat Ms. Jones &quot;could have added very relevant evidence&quot; tothe Princeton/Newport investigation. After her conviction,according to individuals familiar with the case, thegovernment urged Ms. Jones to cooperate in their probes, butshe declined. Mr. Cartusciello told the judge that Ms. Jones&quot;still has information concealed.&quot;   ---   FORMER HOLLY FARMS CEO sues Wachtell Lipton.   The former president and chief executive officer of HollyFarms Corp. sued Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen andamp; Katz, allegingthat an error by the New York law firm cost him and otheremployees of the poultry and feed-products concern millionsof dollars.   In a suit filed earlier this month in Memphis, Tenn.,Chancery Court, R. Lee Taylor II alleged that Wachtell failedto &quot;exercise due skill, care and diligence in connection withrendering advice&quot; to Holly and its former board. Mr. Taylorhas charged that Wachtell made an error in an amendment itdrafted for Holly's stock bonus plan in January 1989.   The former Holly executive is suing Wachtell on behalf ofhimself and some 600 participants in Holly's stock bonusplan. Mr. Taylor had previously sued Holly in connection withthe alleged error. The litigation is pending.   Mr. Taylor is seeking a jury trial and unspecifieddamages. While the suit doesn't state how much money thedrafting error cost employees, attorneys familiar with thematter had previously estimated the cost at more than $35million.   In recent years, state courts have increasingly ruled thatif lawyers act negligently, they may be liable to thirdparties.   Wachtell declined to comment on the suit. But in a courtfiling opposing Mr. Taylor's action against Wachtell, lawyersrepresenting the New York firm say that Mr. Taylor, in hiscapacity as a director and chief executive of Holly, &quot;haddirect responsibility to supervise and control the review andapproval of the stock bonus plan.&quot; They say that Wachtellcould also sue Mr. Taylor for contributory negligence inconnection with the plan.   Mr. Taylor was fired from his job last August, less thantwo months after Tyson Foods Inc., another poultry producer,acquired Holly for about $1.29 billion.   Tyson's purchase ended eight months of bidding andlitigation with Holly.   ---   INS LIST bars 340,000 aliens from entering U.S. forpolitical reasons.   According to the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, whichobtained an edited version of the &quot;Lookout&quot; list from theImmigration and Naturalization Service under a court order,the number of people listed is far greater than many peoplehave estimated. The list dates back to 1904, but two-thirdsof the entries were made since 1980.   &quot;This is the first time we've gotten a sense of themagnitude,&quot; said Arthur Helton an attorney with thehuman-rights group. The 370-page document lists the datesthat individuals were added to the list and is broken down bycountry. A federal judge previously ruled that for privacyreasons, the individuals' names couldn't be disclosed. Thecommittee plans to ask U.S. Judge Leonard Sand in federalcourt in Manhattan to order the INS to divulge furtherdetails, such as the individuals' professions.   The list is mainly used to identify non-Americans who fallunder three sweeping political categories under the 1952McCarran-Walter Act. Under that law, people can be prohibitedfrom entering the U.S. if they are considered a threat to the&quot;public interest,&quot; a threat to &quot;national security,&quot; oraffiliated with any Communist or totalitarian party. Nearlyall the individuals listed were listed under the thirdcategory.   In the first three months of this year, 4,399 people wereadded to the list, including 401 from China and 3,486 fromEastern Europe.   The list includes people from 146 different countries andother jurisdictions, such as Palestine and Hong Kong. Chinaaccounts for the largest number of entries on the list,106,777; second is the Soviet Union, 33,064; third isYugoslavia, 31,734; fourth is Hungary, 28,450; and fifth isPoland, 24,608. Mexico ranked 10th, with 5,402, and Japanranked 11th with 4,393.   It is unclear whether some people were listed more thanonce over the years, so the exact number of individuals can'tbe determined. Often individuals don't learn that they are onthe list until they apply for a visa or until they arrive inthe U.S. A spokesman for the INS couldn't be reached forcomment.   Mr. Helton said he thinks the committee's findings willspur legislators to change the law. &quot;I think they will bestunned by the magnitude of the lookout list and its recentescalation,&quot; he said.   ---   AMERICAN EXPRESS TESTS prepaid legal services forcardholders.   The prepaid legal services of Signature Group ofSchaumburg, Ill., are being offered to about one percent ofAmerican Express Co.'s 25.6 million U.S. cardholders.   The solicitation is the financial-services company's firsttest of whether cardholders are interested in paying monthlyfees to be eligible for fixed-price legal services. SignatureGroup is a unit of Montgomery Ward andamp; Co., which is asubsidiary of Mobil Corp.   For $6.75 a month, cardholders will be able to retain anattorney to handle an uncontested divorce for $210, a willand a minor's trust for $170 or a noncommercial real estateclosing for $185, as well as other services.   Maureen Bailey, a spokeswoman for American Express, saysthat if a second solicitation proves successful, the companymay expand the service to all cardholders by the end of theyear.   ---   KAYE SCHOLER WILL MERGE with a bankruptcy law firm.   Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays andamp; Handler, a 355-lawyer NewYork law firm, approved a proposal to merge with the14-lawyer Levin andamp; Weintraub, Crames andamp; Edelman, also in NewYork. All five Levin andamp; Weintraub partners will becomepartners at Kaye Scholer. The merger will become effectiveJuly 1.   Levin andamp; Weintraub, one of the nation's best-knownbankruptcy law firms, primarily represents debtors, includingRevco D.S. Inc. and Manville Corp.   Kaye Scholer's bankruptcy lawyers represent mostlycreditors, including Equitable Life Assurance Society of theU.S.   ---   HBO IS ACCUSED of violating song copyrights.   In a trial that began this week in Manhattan, BroadcastMusic Inc., a not-for-profit group that represents thousandsof composers, claims that Home Box Office is transmittingmovies and programs that use BMI-licensed songs withoutpermission.   BMI has asked U.S. District Judge John Sprizzo to issue aninjunction barring HBO, a Time Warner Inc. subsidiary, frombroadcasting the programming unless it pays licensing feesfor the songs. BMI also asked the judge to rule that it canrequire separate licensing agreements from national cableprogrammers, such as HBO, and from the programmers' localcable-system customers.   HBO maintains that it has an oral agreement with BMIallowing it to transmit movies using the songs. The companyhas also charged that BMI is a monopoly and that the grouphas taken steps to make it more difficult for the cableindustry to license its music.   ---   Wade Lambert and Arthur S. Hayes contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>