<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910228-0139</DOCNO><DOCID>910228-0139.</DOCID><HL>   Counterpoint:   The Worst Idea of All: A Mideast NATO   ----   By Doug Bandow</HL><DATE>02/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   Flushed with the success of liberating Kuwait, manyadvocates of an expansive American role in the world arecalling for a new, U.S.-led security arrangement in theregion. Few government officials admit to wanting a permanentpresence. And the language they use varies. But all speak inthe context of a vision that seems to have taken hold onthese shores: A Mideast NATO.   It is hard to imagine a worse idea. This is true first ofall because keeping troops in the Mideast, probably theworld's most volatile region, suffused with thousands ofyears of economic, political and religious conflict, wouldhave a far more negative impact than maintaining them inEurope. Soldiers would become as obvious a target ofterrorism as were the Marines in their compound in Lebanon.The U.S. would almost inevitably be pulled into a series ofregional conflicts, even when those conflicts did notthreaten U.S. interests.</LP><TEXT>   A particularly unpleasant possibility: American forcescaught in the midst of an Islamic fundamentalist uprising.Enforcing a Pax Americana by stationing troops in the feudalGulf states themselves could serve as a rallying pointagainst what are unpopular regimes. And if those governmentsfall, a U.S. troop presence would probably ensure the enmityof the new rulers, whoever they might be.   In Jordan, a country already so anti-American thatsouvenirs depicting the SCUD missile are massively popular,angry crowds yesterday marched on the U.S. Embassy. A U.S.troop presence in the region, let alone in that country,would only further destabilize King Hussein. While U.S.officials may despise him for his balancing act, anyreplacement would be yet more hostile to the U.S. and Israel.It is not just Arab Muslims, though, who would resent anAmerican presence. Popular sentiment is already running verystrongly against the U.S. throughout the Islamic world, evenas far away as North Africa, Pakistan and Malaysia. The fearof terror that intrudes on our daily lives here in the U.S.-- increased airport and office security -- would no longerbe a &quot;temporary Gulf war situation,&quot; but would becomepermanent. A NATO-like structure in the Mideast even has thepotential to slow the move to democracy farther north, in theSoviet Union. So far, Mikhail Gorbachev's shift towardrepression poses no threat to the West, but that could changeif the forces of reaction in his country perceive the U.S. tobe expanding militarily and decide to assert themselvesfurther.   In the euphoria of this moment, it is still worthrecalling that results of past U.S. intervention in theregion are not reassuring. Washington has bungled at leastthree previous attempts to bring stability: Helping toinstall and maintain the brutal shah of Iran, sending Marinesto Lebanon, and subsidizing Saddam Hussein in his war againstIran.   Moreover, to relieve the Arab states from the burden ofdefending themselves would create the sort of dependencycharacteristic of domestic welfare recipients. Throughout thebuildup to the war, and the war itself, Americans havecomplained about the Saudis' contribution. Saudi Arabia isvastly wealthier than Iraq and possesses nearly as large apopulation, yet the Saudi military is minuscule. Why? TheHouse of Saud has spent years attempting to bribe foreignbullies while refusing to arm its own population, which feelslittle loyalty to the ruling family. A permanent Americanmilitary shield would allow Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and theother Gulf states to continue to avoid both political andmilitary reform.   There is also something to be said for participating in analliance only if you think your friends will stay yourfriends. After all, only three years ago Kuwait and the U.S.were supporting Iraq in its aggression against Iran; nowSecretary Baker wants to bring Iran into any postwar regionalarrangements. Early in the 1980s, U.S. warships and planeswere attacking Syrian troops in Lebanon and Damascus wasconsidered to be a major supporter of terrorism. Today, HafezAssad is a valued ally. America's support for Israel ensuresthat Washington's relations with even &quot;moderate&quot; Arab stateswill be uneasy.   Indeed, this is not the first &quot;NATO&quot; that has been triedin the Middle East. The Baghdad Pact, signed in 1955, wasintended to help safeguard Iraq and Iran from the influenceof the Soviets, Egypt and Syria. The alliance spurred theSoviets and Egyptians to cooperate before collapsing justthree years later after a coup d'etat in Iraq. Our friendsand enemies have all switched sides.   Yet people worry. Can Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and their Araballies defend themselves without the U.S.? The answer is yes-- even if Saddam Hussein survives. Saddam was always morelike Mussolini than Hitler, with a vast but weak war machine.Before the war started the states surrounding Iraq (notcounting Egypt) had nearly eight times the population, 2 1/2times the air power, and twice the infantry and tank strengthas the Iraqi leader. Now his country lies in ruins, hiscapability for producing weapons of mass destruction has beeneliminated, much of his air force is in the hands ofadversarial Iran, and the Pentagon estimates that half histanks and artillery have been destroyed. The mass surrenderof his army demonstrated that it was battle-weary rather thanbattle-hardened, and soldiers returning from a pleasantcaptivity to ruined homes are unlikely warriors in a new warof conquest. Saddam will be lucky to survive, let alone againthreaten his neighbors.   Might Hussein still rain SCUDs down on his neighbors? Hedidn't do so before the war and stands to gain nothing fromcontinuing to do so in the future. Anyway, he knows thatIsrael would retaliate, since it would no longer fearsplitting the coalition. To attack Kuwait and Saudi Arabiawould guarantee Iraq's isolation and the further ruination ofhis country. It is also worth remembering that one major airstrike was enough to contain another much-feared tyrant,Moammar Gadhafi of Libya. After the U.S. tried, and failed,to kill him in 1986, the Libyan leader nevertheless slowedhis terrorist efforts throughout the globe.   The circumstances in the Gulf are too much different fromEurope's to create a Mideast NATO. The Europeans for whomNATO was constructed shared with the U.S. a common commitmentto freedom and democracy. In addition, a new and perhaps evenmore threatening enemy had replaced Adolf Hitler: JosefStalin. The victorious European states had suffered almost asmuch devastation as the former aggressor. More relevant tothe Gulf situation are alliances that have either disappearedwithout a trace -- Seato and Cento -- or are still formallyin place but moribund, like Anzus and the Rio Pact. A MideastNATO would be brain dead from its creation.   We should not expect Americans to pay for, nor die for,wars unrelated to U.S. security. Nor should we put Americanmoney and lives at risk when our allies can defendthemselves. The U.S. has cut Saddam Hussein down tomanageable size. Now Arab states must contain him and otheraggressors. Next time it should be up to Arab states to spendtheir money and their blood to defend themselves.   ---   Mr. Bandow is a fellow at the Cato Institute, a Washingtonthink tank.</TEXT></DOC>