<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911127-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>911127-0005.</DOCID><HL>   Two Worlds:   Under Japanese Bosses,   Americans Find Work   Both Better and Worse   ---   Factory Workers Embrace   New Style, But Managers   Feel They're Not Heard   ---   A Debate Over Loose Screws   ----   By Thomas F. O'Boyle   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   J.TSL JCI LABOR</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)</IN><NS>LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)OHIO (OH)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WISCONSIN (WI)</RE><LP>   ST. MARYS, Ohio -- To fish or not to fish. That was thequestion.   For months, Setex Inc., a Japanese-American joint venturehere, was split over whether the serene pond on its frontlawn should be stocked with fish for employees to catch ontheir off-hours. While American managers didn't object to theidea, the Japanese managers deemed it inappropriate. After acontentious three-hour meeting, the Japanese finallyrelented.</LP><TEXT>   Setex, a car-seat manufacturer, is one of dozens ofJapanese factories that have transformed this southwesternOhio region from the Rust Belt into the Sushi Belt. But whileJapanese companies have successfully transplanted to the U.S.the manufacturing techniques that have made them the envy ofthe world, they have had a much harder time transplantingtheir management philosophies.   Unlike U.S. blue-collar workers, who generally praisetheir Japanese bosses, many U.S. managers working in thesebusinesses say they aren't allowed to make decisions or fullyuse their talents. Japanese concepts of nemawashi --consensus building -- and ringi -- shared decision-making --frustrate American managers accustomed to individualresponsibility and recognition. Aggressive, ambitiousAmericans often feel out of place.   In addition, American managers typically complain about alack of feedback from their Japanese superiors. Even whentheir work is exemplary, some managers contend, they aren'tpromoted, simply because they aren't Japanese. Many quit infrustration -- reinforcing a belief among Japanese thatAmericans are ready to jump ship when a better offer comesalong. Others sue, charging discrimination or breach ofemployment contracts.   &quot;The vast majority {of these suits} stem from complaintsby white-collar managers over the way they were treated andmanaged,&quot; says John Gillespie, a Japanese-American relationsspecialist at Clarke Consulting Group in Redwood City, Calif.   While the Japanese have learned that &quot;some things don'ttransplant very well,&quot; Mr. Gillespie says, they haven't yetfigured out which models they should adopt in managing acrosscultures. The issue, he adds, is &quot;perhaps the most urgentchallenge facing Japanese multinationals in the 1990s&quot; asthey expand their presence in North America and Europe.   Already, that presence is mushrooming. Japan's directinvestment in the U.S. now approaches $85 billion. Much ofthat has been spent rebuilding America's industrialheartland. Japanese-owned facilities in Ohio, Illinois,Michigan, Indiana, Kentucky and Tennessee include 39 steelmills, nine rubber and tire factories, seven auto-assemblyplants and 250 auto-parts suppliers, accounting for about100,000 manufacturing jobs, according to Richard Florida ofCarnegie Mellon University and Martin Kenney of theUniversity of California at Davis. Nationwide, more than350,000 Americans work for Japanese companies in either theservice or manufacturing sectors, and that number coulddouble by the end of the decade.   Ohio is second only to California as a site for Japanesemanufacturing. In dozens of small towns spanning a 100-milestretch of Interstate 75 north of Cincinnati, Japaneseprocedures and processes have taken hold. Factories nowoccupy land that was cornfields only two years ago.   Workers, called &quot;associates&quot; or &quot;team members,&quot; labor inpristine, largely nonunion plants. They do morning exercises,clad in company uniforms, and practice kaizen, a philosophyaimed at continually improving products and production.   In the town of Troy along I-75, dubbed the &quot;Tokyoexpressway,&quot; Matsushita Electronics Corp. operates its singlemost automated plant, minting 5,000 color television picturetubes a day and exporting some to the Far East. To the north,in Sidney, Color andamp; Composite Technologies Inc. uses robotsand computers to mix more than 3,000 grades of colorfulplastic resins. And in Tipp City, Nova Steel Processingslits, cuts and ships 15,000 tons of steel monthly to Midwestauto and appliance customers.   &quot;Without the Japanese we'd be a Rust Belt,&quot; says LarryHoffman, senior sales manager of Gokoh Corp., anotherJapanese-owned firm in Troy, which sells industrial suppliesfrom a renovated hangar where warplanes were once made.   The process of renewal is evident in St. Marys (pop.8,441), home to several new Japanese concerns. In the 19thcentury, the Erie Canal put St. Marys on the map. Now, twoJapanese concerns, AAP St. Marys Corp. and Setex, havebrought prosperity to the town again. Together, they employ400 and rank as the town's third- and fourth-largestemployers. They've brought other benefits, too: St. Marys hasa sister city in Japan and a new clock tower in the townsquare, a gift from AAP.   Three years ago, Setex began building car seats for HondaAccords, assembled 56 miles away in Marysville. The seats,which get bolted into the cars just hours after leavingSetex, have won high marks for quality. Only one in 10,000,on average, is rejected by Honda. And Setex tries to improveeven on that. Every seat goes through a final inspectionbefore shipment: If a worker inadvertently releases onebefore four safety checks have been done, sirens sound.   &quot;It's a well-run plant,&quot; says David Lipp, a supervisor ata Huffy Corp. bicycle plant in nearby Celina. He has touredthe factory and borrowed some ideas.   Setex also gets high marks from its blue-collar employees.The factory is immaculate, well-lit, ergonomically designedand air-conditioned. And the company tries to lessen boredomand possible injury from the repetitive motion ofassembly-line work. Since Setex made warm-up exercisesmandatory two years ago, its 140 hourly workers haven't had asingle serious back or wrist injury.   Setex &quot;team members&quot; rotate jobs every two hours, movingthrough all 18 assembly jobs in a few days. One worker,Jeffrey Schafer, likes this because &quot;it promotes teamwork andlets me see how one job affects others in the plant.&quot;   He also says the job is demanding. Workers are asked tostay overtime, often with little or no warning. And theiroutput must keep pace with the production scoreboards aboveeach assembly line.   Even child-care services reflect the demanding nature ofJapanese employers. Toyota Motor Corp. keeps a facility open24 hours a day in Georgetown, Ky. For some school-agechildren whose parents work the night shift, it is in effectan orphanage: They sleep and eat there, seeing parents onweekends. &quot;Toyota is a very demanding employer,&quot; says thecenter's director, Debbie Highsmith. &quot;There's a good deal ofovertime, and they're expected to be there no matter what.&quot;   American managers complain they must fight to be heard bytheir Japanese colleagues. At Setex, Americans say many ofthe innovations that have strengthened the company aretheirs. The job rotation concept, for example, wasn't aJapanese idea -- and wasn't embraced by Japanese managers atfirst. When operations manager Brian E. Briars suggested itto his Japanese bosses, &quot;they hated it,&quot; he says. &quot;Theythought it was inefficient.&quot;   Mr. Briars persisted and eventually won them over. Hiscrusade was helped by the fact that Setex is a joint venturebetween Japan's Tachi-S Inc. and Johnson Controls Inc. Assuch, Mr. Briars, who came from Johnson Controls, hadstanding he might not have had if the company were ownedoutright by the Japanese.   Another thorny issue involves errant screws on the factoryfloor. It's a persistent occurrence at Setex, and hasinspired persistent animosity. Japanese managers see errantscrews as a serious lapse in manufacturing discipline. Thatangers the American shift supervisors, who view suchcriticism as picayune. &quot;If we have screws on the floor, wehave defects in quality,&quot; says Setex's president, Masa Enami.&quot;That won't please our customers.&quot;   Communication, or the lack of it, is another sore point.For a long time, joint American-Japanese staff meetings werefollowed by a Japanese-only meeting. Mr. Briars began toresent the fax machines that transmitted messages in alanguage he couldn't understand. And his American colleagueswere frustrated when they couldn't get certain informationout of Honda, whose Japanese managers preferred to provide itonly to the Japanese. &quot;It takes a long time to gain theirtrust,&quot; Mr. Briars says.   Some American managers aren't sure if they can ever gainit. &quot;They really don't want your input. They don't bring youinto the decision-making process, just implementation,&quot; saysRussell Kreider, who nine months ago became plantsuperintendent at Ikeda Interior Systems Inc., anotherJapanese-owned auto-parts supplier on I-75 in Sidney. Mr.Kreider, whose predecessor left Ikeda after less than a year,calls the transition from an American to a Japanese employer&quot;fairly difficult,&quot; mainly because he doesn't have access tomuch of the information he once did.   Nor does he have the control. Mr. Kreider supervises 100hourly workers, but has little authority: He doesn't hire andfire as he once did, and layoffs aren't permitted. BecauseIkeda doesn't cut back on its production force even duringperiods of slack demand, Mr. Kreider must find odd jobs, likepainting and cleanup, to keep workers busy.   His role, he says, is ambiguous. He's supposed to providedirection and guide group decision-making. His bosses want toencourage continuous improvement among the &quot;associates&quot; --and Mr. Kreider's role is seen as a &quot;facilitator&quot; in thatprocess. But he finds the ambiguity disconcerting.   &quot;There are decisions I don't make that I normally wouldbecause I don't really understand their philosophy,&quot; he says.   Speaking through an interpreter, Hiroyuki Kawai, Ikeda'spresident, says Mr. Kreider's frustrations reflect thedifference between the American management system and theJapanese system, which makes few allowances for&quot;individualism&quot; and demands that &quot;everyone be oriented towardone goal.&quot;   Language is also a constant source of trouble. Even theEnglish spoken by the Japanese sometimes baffles Americanmanagers. And &quot;what difference does it make if you callsomeone an hourly worker or an associate?&quot; Mr. Kreider asks.   Plenty, from the Japanese perspective. Japanese companiesstress teamwork, harmony and consensus. They see theworkplace as an extended family. While American managerstypically look forward to time off with their families, theJapanese spend long hours after work socializing together andpile up years of unused vacation time.   That applies to the companies operating along I-75, whichshow a startling degree of uniformity. They seem to preferjob applicants who have no background in their industry,training people who have a high capacity for teamwork.   Once hired, workers discover an egalitarian atmospherethat extends even to office furnishings: Presidents typicallyhave the same spartan metal desks as secretaries, abuttingone another in large open areas. Privileges of rank found atmost American corporations -- executive dining rooms,reserved parking, special bonuses and stock options -- don'texist.   The Japanese firmly believe this ethos produces a moreharmonious, energized work force. &quot;If the bosses only giveorders, it's difficult for people to understand why topmanagement is doing things,&quot; says Taiji Yamada, thecontroller at AAP in St. Marys. &quot;We know that some Americanmanagers aren't comfortable with this way of thinking, but weprefer our system.&quot;   Mr. Yamada need only point to AAP to show the Japanesesystem has its strengths. The company makes cast aluminumwheels, sold mostly to Ford Motor Co. and Nissan Motor Co.Earlier this year, business was awful, with orders off 50%.But AAP didn't lay off any of its 210 employees -- iteducated them. The plant was shut down for seven weeks, whileAAP supervisors taught associates a variety of analytical andstatistical procedures in classroom and on-the-job sessions.   The effect of this education has been impressive, saysAAP. It says plant productivity has risen more than 50%, andAAP's material costs per wheel have fallen 55%.   The effect on morale has been even more dramatic. Amongthe many letters of thanks management received was one fromthe wife of a worker: &quot;You have shown your true colors inthis recession,&quot; she wrote. &quot;I think we are lucky that myhusband works for a company that cares more about theirpeople than the bottom line.&quot;   That commitment to workers impressed American managers aswell. Randy Wendel, an operations manager who came to AAPafter a General Electric Co. motor factory in Indiana closed,couldn't &quot;imagine GE ever having done that.&quot; He says the movedemonstrated that AAP's Japanese parent, Hitachi Metals Ltd.,had &quot;real confidence that their investment in training wouldpay off in the long run.&quot;   Still, Mr. Wendel has his gripes. The biggest adjustmentfor him, he says, is the consensus approach todecision-making. At GE, he explains, buying a new piece ofequipment usually took the approval of just one keysupervisor. At AAP, the entire management staff, typicallyseven or eight people, must review it, discuss it -- andsometimes object to it. &quot;It can be real time-consuming,&quot; hesays.   But Mr. Wendel sees a positive aspect to this, too. &quot;Onceyou've made a decision, it's behind you,&quot; he says. &quot;Everyonehas approved it.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>