<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910513-0129</DOCNO><DOCID>910513-0129.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Stock Sale Is Urged as Punishment   In California Environmental Suit   ----   By Amy Stevens and Ellen Joan Pollock   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   C.VIT LABOR SGP SK</CO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)CONTAINERS andamp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)INDUSTRIAL andamp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)BOND AND STOCK REGISTRATIONS AND PRICINGS (REG)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)</NS><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)FLORIDA (FL)ILLINOIS (IL)INDIANA (IND)IRAQ (IZ)MEXICO (MX)NEW JERSEY (NJ)</RE><LP>   In an unusual approach to the prosecution of corporatecrime, the state of California is trying to force a companyaccused of violating environmental laws to sell new stock topay fines.   It is apparently the first time that a regulatory agencyhas demanded a court-ordered stock sale in order to punishcriminal action.</LP><TEXT>   The suit, filed by the California Department of HealthServices against Safety-Kleen Inc., Elgin, Ill., charges thatthe hazardous waste recycler committed nearly 100 violationsof state and federal environmental laws in California. Inaddition to demanding payment of unspecified fines,prosecutors are demanding that Safety-Kleen issue new stockand turn it over to the state, which then would redeem it forcash on the open market.   Compelling payment in this manner would punish thecompany's owners by diluting the value of their shares, butit wouldn't necessarily reduce the value of the company'sresources, prosecutors said. In this way, nonculpable parties-- such as bondholders and low-level employees -- wouldn'thave to bear the brunt of the government's punitive actions,as occasionally happens when huge cash fines sendcorporations into bankruptcy.   &quot;The process would work kind of like an escrow. The statedoesn't want to own stock in the company. We're simplyinterested in the proceeds,&quot; said Deputy Attorney General KenAlex, who brought the case. &quot;The idea is if it reduces theprice of the stock, those people who have control of thecompany will be a lot more sensitive to environmentalconcerns the next time around, because they don't want thevalue of their stock to go down,&quot; Mr. Alex said.   He attributed the state's unusual theory to John Coffee, alaw professor at Columbia University, who has argued thatlegislatures should institute a system of &quot;equity fines&quot; toreplace the huge cash levies that have become increasinglycommon in prosecutions of corporations, apparentlycontributing to the bankruptcy of companies such as DrexelBurnham Lambert Inc. Mr. Coffee said in a telephone interviewthat shareholders, of all potential cost-bearers, are in thebest position to challenge corporate behavior.   Safety-Kleen spokesman Robert Willmschen said the company&quot;doesn't see the point&quot; in the state's demand for a stockoffering, because the potential penalties in this casewouldn't be high enough to jeopardize its solvency. &quot;What'sthe difference if we pay a fine or issue stock? Theprofessor's point was that it's better for a company to stayin business, but that's not the issue here,&quot; he said.   Other lawyers said that demands for the sale of stock topay fines, and other unusual arrangements, can be part ofsettlement negotiation but are unprecedented in an initialcourt complaint. &quot;It sounds perfectly bizarre to specify whatthe source of the funds should be. The state probably doesn'teven have the power to seek such a remedy,&quot; said RogerCarrick, an environmental lawyer with the firm of Heller,Ehrman, White andamp; McAuliffe.   ---   U.N. SECRETARY GENERAL proposes panel to sort out claimson Iraq.   The recommended adjudication process, which must beapproved by the United Nations Security Council, applies toclaims arising from Iraq's invasion and occupation of Kuwait.   Claimants will be paid from a fund based on a yet-to-bedetermined percentage of the value of Iraq's exports ofpetroleum products.   The plan involves the establishment of a New York-basedUnited Nations Compensation Commission and calls for amultitiered process in which governments will present theirnationals' claims by category to panels made up of threecommissioners. Iraq will be permitted to comment on theclaims.   The commissioners will then report to the commission'sgoverning council, which will make a final determination.Some appeals will be permitted when disputes arise overcommissioners' decisions about facts or the law. Individualgovernments will be responsible for parceling out the moneyto individuals and corporations.   The plan anticipates that some claimants will also attemptto recover their losses through their national legal systems.   Details of the claims process have not yet beendetermined. But Markham Ball, a partner at the law firmMorgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius in Washington, said the proceduresoutlined in the U.N. report appear to be &quot;rather cumbersome&quot;and &quot;on its face an extremely complicated and drawn-out kindof proceeding.&quot;   Since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, lawyers have worried thatany resulting international claims process would end up ascomplex as the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal formed in 1981 afterthe Iranian hostage crisis. That tribunal is still sortingthrough claims.   People familiar with the State Department's input on theproposal say the plan roughly follows U.S. wishes.Nevertheless it is anticipated that the U.S. will press forthe commissions' headquarters to be in Europe, that themakeup of the governing council be altered and that someprocedures be streamlined.   A State Department spokesman said the report was &quot;notintended to resolve all the substantive issues that willarise.&quot;   ---   BIBLES MAY BE DISTRIBUTED in public schools, judge rules.   A federal judge ruled that the Rensselaer, Ind., schooldistrict can allow The Gideons International organization todistribute their bibles to fifth graders. The opinion isexpected to be looked to by other courts facing similar FirstAmendment issues.   The case was brought by the Indiana Civil Liberties Unionon behalf of two children and their father, Allen H. Berger,who objected to the distribution. According to the opinion,Rensselaer schools allowed a variety of local groups todistribute literature in the public schools, including theBoy Scouts and 4-H.   For many years the Gideons had distributed their bibles --excerpted compilations from the King James Version of theChristian Holy Bible -- once a year during brief visits tothe fifth grade. The Bergers argued that the distributionviolated the Constitution.   U.S. District Judge Allen Sharp of Lafayette ruled thatthe distribution of the Gideon bible was &quot;no more anendorsement of Christianity than allowing little leaguebaseball to disseminate its materials endorsing the nationalpastime.&quot; He said in his opinion that because the bibles&quot;emanated not from the teacher but from a private actor, whodid not engage in a proselytizing recitation of scripture andverse . . . the court finds that no message of officialendorsement resulted.&quot;   Mr. Berger said he hopes to appeal the decision, which hesays contradicts rulings in a few similar cases. &quot;Ipersonally think that government agencies need to have ahands off attitude toward religion,&quot; he said. &quot;{They} shouldnot assist any religious organization in their evangelicalefforts.&quot;   John R. Price, the lawyer for the school system, said hebelieved the case had &quot;important precedential value.&quot;   &quot;We see it as an important decision because the ICLUbrought the case essentially to censor the bible,&quot; he said.   ---   TWO TEAMSTERS LEADERS are accused of giving union posts tocriminals.   Charles Carberry, a court-appointed special investigationsofficer, has charged International Brotherhood of TeamstersPresident William J. McCarthy and Joseph Trerotola, presidentof the union's eastern conference, with failing to expelknown organized crime figures and appointing three to theconstitution committee for the union's internationalconvention.   According to court papers, the actions by Messrs. McCarthyand Trerotola violate the consent order signed in 1989 tosettle a civil racketeering suit brought against theTeamsters by the U.S. Justice Department.   Mr. Carberry will prosecute the Teamsters leaders, whoface expulsion from the union, before a court-appointedindependent administrator. U.S. District Court Judge DavidEdelstein, who is overseeing the consent degree, must approvethe administrator's decision. A Teamsters spokeswoman saidMessrs. McCarthy and Trerotola were not available forcomment.   According to the investigators office, about 100 chargeshave already been brought against Teamsters for violating theconsent degree.   ---   STOCK SELLERS sue five businessmen charged by SEC withinsider trading.   The class action suit filed in federal court in New Yorkalleges that former Vitro S.A. executive Jorge Guajardo andfour associates made $1.2 million in illegal trading profitsusing advance information about Vitro's 1989 acquisition ofglass-products makers Anchor Glass Container Corp., Tampa,Fla. Vitro is based in Monterrey, Mexico.   The suit also claims that if the plaintiffs, formerstockholder Philip D. Schwartz and others, had been privy tothe confidential information they would not have sold theirAnchor Glass securities when they did.   Last month the Securities and Exchange Commission filed acivil suit against Mr. Guajardo and the other executives,accusing them of insider trading and conspiring to concealtheir activities. Mr. Guajardo settled the SEC suit andagreed to pay $47,431 in fines.   Samuel Rosenthal, attorney for defendant ManuelVillarreal, wouldn't comment on the suit. Attorneys for theother defendants couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   SCHERING-PLOUGH continues its efforts to stop allegedtrademark infringement.   Schering Corp., a subsidiary of Schering-Plough Corp. ofMadison, N.J., says it is cracking down on companies that areillegally using its trademark &quot;Proventil&quot; for similarproducts, said a spokesman for Schering. Proventil is analbuterol sulfate solution used in mist-producing inhalationmachines.   Last week the company asked a federal judge in Miami,Fla., to order Ideal Pharmacy of Hialeah, Fla., to recall aproduct.   Schering is also demanding that Ideal Pharmacy pay$500,000 in damages. Last month, Schering sued anotherpharmaceutical company in Florida for infringing on theProventil trademark.   A spokeswoman for Ideal Pharmacy said Daniel Hernandez,the company's president, declined to comment.</TEXT></DOC>