<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900824-0126</DOCNO><DOCID>900824-0126.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Federal Courts May Allow TV Cameras   ----   By Ann Hagedorn and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   K.EST LLY MDT LABOR T FREST MDEST</CO><IN>MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)MEDICAL SUPPLIES (MDS)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   Federal courts may soon follow most state courts inopening their doors to the scrutiny of television viewers.   A committee of federal judges has issued a reportrecommending that cameras be allowed in federal courtrooms onan experimental basis. The plan, which requires the approvalof the U.S. Judicial Conference, would allow cameras intocivil proceedings in six district courts and two appealscourts for three years. The courts would participate on avolunteer basis beginning July 1, 1991.</LP><TEXT>   Timothy Dyk, a Washington attorney who represents acoalition of news organizations including the NationalAssociation of Broadcasters, C-Span and several newspapers,has been trying to persuade the U.S. Judicial Conference topermit cameras and other broadcast equipment into federalcourtrooms for nearly seven years. The Conference is headedby Chief Justice William Rehnquist and sets rules for allnonmilitary federal courts except the Supreme Court.   The Judicial Conference will decide whether to authorizethe plan at its September session. Advocates believe that theexperiment has a good chance of getting approval. In a May 7,1990, letter to U.S. Rep. Robert W. Kastenmeier, a proponentof cameras in the courts, Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote, &quot;Iam by no means averse to the idea of the sort of experimentwith television and radio coverage in federal courts whichyou describe.&quot;   Proponents of cameras in the courts have long argued thatthe benefits include public education and the incentive forcourts under the watchful eye of the public to work moreefficiently. They say that modern cameras andstate-of-the-art lighting and sound equipment permitsbroadcasters to work without being intrusive.   &quot;The benefit is that it takes the mystique and elitism outof the law and puts the law on a level of everyman,&quot; saidJames Goodale, a New York attorney and media specialist.   According to Mr. Dyk, 45 states allow cameras in theircourts. &quot;The federal courts are about to enter the electronicage,&quot; he said. &quot;What having cameras means in part is that thepublic will have greater confidence in the judicial system byseeing how it works.&quot;   Opponents fear that lights, cameras and microphones mightdisrupt courtroom proceedings. They also worry that thebroadcast media might misinterpret or trivialize legal issuesand that jurors and witnesses might alter their performanceif they are televised.   The committee that proposed the plan, the Ad Hoc Committeeon Cameras in the Courtroom, recommended against opening thecourts to cameras last fall. The committee's chairman, U.S.District Judge Robert Peckham, of San Francisco, couldn't bereached for comment.   Two people familiar with the decision said that lobbyingefforts by Steven Brill, president of the American LawyerMedia Limited Partnership, in which Time Warner Inc. is alimited partner, may have influenced the committee to changeits position. Mr. Brill is planning to launch a 24-hour cablechannel primarily devoted to live trial coverage.   &quot;The argument is basic,&quot; said Mr. Brill. &quot;If there's onebranch of government that is meant to be public, it's thecourts. . . . The strength of a democracy is based on peopleknowing what's going on.&quot;   ---   FEDERAL APPEALS COURT rules lender is not liable for wastecleanup.   The Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Portland, Ore.,ruled that the Port of St. Helens, a municipal corporationthat issues revenue bonds to promote industrial developmentin St. Helens, Ore., is not liable for the cleanup ofhazardous waste on property that it owns.   The decision marks the second time that a federal appealscourt has ruled on the scope of an exemption in the federalSuperfund law that shields lenders from liability when theyhave a security interest in a company but don't participatein its management. Under Superfund, those who own or operatecontaminated sites are responsible for cleaning them up.   In the decision, the appeals panel ruled that the port didnot have to pay the cleanup bill because it had not exercisedany management authority at the site.   Environmental lawyers said the decision is significantbecause it appears to conflict with a May ruling by a federalappeals court and could set the stage for a challenge in theU.S. Supreme Court. An Atlanta court found lenders do nothave to be involved in the day-to-day operations of afacility to incur liability.   In the current case, the port issued bonds in 1981 toBergsoe Metals Corp. of St. Helens to finance theconstruction of a recycling plant. The port holds the titleto the property.   In 1986, Bergsoe was put into involuntary bankruptcyproceedings. By that time, state environmental authoritieshad determined that the plant was contaminated with hazardouswaste.   The bankruptcy trustee sued East Asiatic Ltd. of New Yorkand East Asiatic Inc. of Copenhagen, former shareholders ofthe company, seeking to hold the companies liable for thecleanup. (That case is still pending.) Those companies thensued the port, alleging that the port is liable for thecleanup costs.   In a key finding, the appeals panel rejected theplaintiffs' argument that the port is not covered by theexemption because it negotiated the building of the plant andmaintained the right to inspect the site.   The court wrote that &quot;merely having the power to getinvolved in management, but failing to exercise it, is notenough&quot; to incur liability under Superfund.   &quot;The opinion should comfort lenders because itdistinguishes between the power to manage and the actualmanagement of a borrower's operation,&quot; said Lawrence P.Schnapf of the New York firm Lord Day andamp; Lord, Barrett Smith,an environmental lawyer not involved in the case.   Elizabeth Conklyn, of the Seattle firm Bogle andamp; Gates, alawyer for the plaintiffs, said that her clients had notdecided whether to appeal. &quot;It is our position that the porttook sufficient action to indicate it might be liable,&quot; Ms.Conklyn said.   A lawyer for the port couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   APPEALS COURT WIPES OUT $26.6 million award to Eli Lilly.   The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit vacateda lower court's finding that Medtronic Inc. infringed on anEli Lilly andamp; Co. patent, and dismissed a related 1988 $26.6million damage award.   The ruling was expected because the U.S. Supreme Court inJune found in favor of Medtronic's central argument in thecase, and sent the matter back to the court of appeals.   Lilly had sued Medtronic for infringement of a patent on aheart pacemaker. Medtronic, a maker of biomedical devices,claimed that a 1984 amendment to a federal law -- whichpermits companies to produce drugs patented by othercompanies if the manufacture is intended solely for thegathering of data for an application to the Food and DrugAdministration -- also applied to its heart device. The heartdevice also requires FDA approval.   A federal district court in Philadelphia ruled that theamendment applied only to drugs, and a jury awarded the $26.6million to Lilly in 1988. But the U.S. Court of Appeals ruledin March 1989 that the law wasn't restricted to drugs.   In June, the U.S. Supreme Court also found that Medtronicwas protected by the law's exception to patent infringementclaims. Lilly's patent on the device expires in October.   The U.S. Court of Appeals' ruling also erasescontempt-of-court citations issued against Medtronic by thefederal court in Philadelphia, as well as certain injunctionsthat had remained in place.   Medtronic said the lower court's earlier contempt findinghad &quot;held chilling implications for medical researchactivities and onerous overtones limiting First Amendmentprotection for scientific dialogue.&quot; The company said that itis &quot;extremely pleased that the company's position has beenvindicated after seven years of intense litigation.&quot;   The appeals court remanded the case to the lower court forfinal action. A Lilly spokesman said: &quot;We are disappointedwith the court's decision.&quot; He added, &quot;Since this is ongoinglitigation, we would prefer not to comment further.&quot;   ---   ATandamp;T IS SUED for not paying benefit to deceased employee'sunmarried partner.   The lawsuit, filed in Manhattan, is believed to be thefirst federal case over &quot;domestic partnership&quot; benefits. Itclaims that American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. discriminatedagainst the partner of a deceased lesbian employee by notpaying her a sickness-death benefit that is routinely givento surviving family members.   In the suit, Sandra Rovira of New Rochelle, N.Y., allegedthat by not paying the benefit, ATandamp;T violated city and statediscrimination laws -- as well as its own personnel policy,which bans discrimination on the basis of sexual orientationor marital status. The suit claims that ATandamp;T also violatedfederal labor law by not following its personnel policy. Thepolicy says the company will not discriminate in providingthe benefit, according to the suit.   A spokesman for ATandamp;T said, &quot;ATandamp;T doesn't discriminate onany basis, including sexual preference.&quot; He said thecompany's benefits committee rejected Ms. Rovira's benefitclaim on the basis of &quot;state law regarding the legal statusof the relationship.&quot;   Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, a gay-rightsgroup representing Ms. Rovira, said that ATandamp;T'ssickness-death benefit usually equals one year of thedeceased employee's salary. The suit asked the court to orderATandamp;T to pay the benefit, estimated at $58,000, plus damagesof $75,000 for the alleged discrimination.   Ms. Rovira's companion, Marjorie Forlini, an ATandamp;T salesmanager, worked at the company for 18 years until she died ofcancer in 1988. She and Ms. Rovira lived together for 12years and considered themselves a married couple, the suitargues.   Ms. Forlini helped raise and support Ms. Rovira's twosons, who also were denied the benefit, according to thesuit.   ---   THRIVING IN THE U.S.S.R.: Philadelphia firm lines upSoviet business.   Schnader, Harrison, Segal andamp; Lewis has been retained by anumber of Soviet government and private entities to appraisebusiness offers and look into trade options. Among itsclients are the Russian republic of the Soviet Union, thecity of Leningrad and a major Soviet magazine, LiteraturnayaGazeta.   Jerome Shestack, the senior partner who conducted thenegotiations, said the Russian republic and the city ofLeningrad have taken the lead in encouraging entrepreneurialefforts in the Soviet Union. &quot;They are more receptive tofree-enterprise types of solutions than the centralgovernment at this point,&quot; said Mr. Shestack, formerly theU.S. representative to the United Nations Commission on HumanRights.   Mr. Shestack said much of the firm's work will involveevaluating offers the Soviets have received from Americanbusinesses. The Soviets also are seeking advice on their owntrade and financial proposals, Mr. Shestack said, such as apossible employee stock-ownership plan for LiteraturnayaGazeta and a Leningrad joint venture with a U.S. departmentstore.   The law firm also is working in the U.S. to help fund therestoration of buildings in Leningrad.   ---   GULF CRISIS spurs Houston law firm to offer free phoneservice.   Butler andamp; Binion said it will provide free phoneconnections to Washington for Texans seeking informationabout relatives in Kuwait and Iraq.   The firm's philanthropy was inspired by &quot;reports of peoplewho were running up $600 phone bills calling numbers inWashington trying to get information,&quot; the firm said.   Associate Stephanie Harrison, acting as a spokeswoman forthe law firm, said the service will utilize Butler andamp; Binion'stie lines connecting its Texas offices to its Washingtonoffice.   Texans can dial an 800 number and have a Butler andamp; Binionoperator connect them to a dial tone in Washington.   &quot;Service will continue until the State Departmentinaugurates its own 800 service or until the crisis is over,&quot;the law firm said.   ---   James P. Miller and Wade Lambert contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>