<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910206-0124</DOCNO><DOCID>910206-0124.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   How the Fed Can Ease the Credit Crunch   ----   By Martin Feldstein</HL><DATE>02/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)BANKS (BNK)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE BANKERS, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)</IN><GV>FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   There is widespread fear that the current economicdownturn will be deeper and longer than necessary because ofa &quot;credit crunch&quot; -- an inability or unwillingness ofcommercial banks to make loans to creditworthy borrowers.When banks curtail their lending in this way, many businessesmust cut inventory building, equipment purchases and newhires. Such cutbacks start a cumulative contraction thathurts even larger businesses with direct access to thecapital markets. Finding ways to permit or to encourage banksto resume commercial lending may therefore be a vital step inassuring a rapid turnaround of the present economic decline.   Although banks are always more cautious when the economyis weak and the future is uncertain, the situation is worsenow because of recent changes in bank capital requirements.Long before the current downturn, the central banks of themajor industrial countries agreed to set uniform minimumstandards for bank capital. They hoped to make commercialbanks more prudent by increasing the capital they had at riskand to create a level playing field for banks engaged ininternational competition by imposing a uniform capitalstandard of about 4% of total assets, and 8% of a&quot;risk-based&quot; weighted measure of assets.</LP><TEXT>   Under this risk-based measure, ordinary commercial loansare given full weight while single-family mortgages are givena weight of one-half and government bonds are not counted atall. Thus a bank needs $8 of capital per $100 of commercialloans, but only $4 of capital per $100 of home mortgage loansand no capital for government bonds. (The actual rules, likeeverything in Washington, are more complicated.)   A bank that has more than enough capital to meet boththese requirements can make new loans whenever a creditworthyborrower requests a loan. The bank can obtain the additionalfunds with which to finance that lending by selling morelarge certificates of deposit, by borrowing in the interbankfederal funds market or by raising its interest rates onsmall deposits to attract more funds. Or it can sellgovernment securities from its portfolio and use the proceedsto finance new loans.   In contrast, a bank that has only enough equity capital tosupport its current level of lending cannot simply raiseadditional deposits to finance new lending. And if the bank'stotal capital equals only 8% of the risk-based measure of itsassets, it cannot sell government securities to finance newloans since government securities do not require anyrisk-based capital while the loans require an 8% provision ofcapital.   Over the long term a healthy bank can raise additionalequity capital through retained earnings or by issuing newshares. But in the current financial environment, new equityissues by banks are impossible and retained earnings add tocapital only very slowly. In addition, regulators are forcingmany banks to reduce the accounting value of their capital bywriting off troubled loans or increasing reserves for futureproblems.   A bank without sufficient capital can be closed by theregulators as insolvent, can be put under strict regulatorycontrol that limits dividends and other actions, and can beforced to discharge the existing senior management. Thedesire to avoid any of these consequences certainly providesa strong incentive to banks' managements to limit the size oftheir lending. In practice banks therefore do not even lendthe maximum that their capital would allow.   Even banks with excess capital are also reluctant to makeadditional loans because they fear that future loan losses orincreases in loss reserves could cut their capital below theminimum required amount. Indeed, many banks are scaling downtheir activities by restricting loans, reducing deposits andsubstituting government bonds and single-family mortgages forcommercial and industrial loans that require more risk-basedcapital.   Some key Federal Reserve officials argue that theunwillingness of the banks to lend has prevented an expansionof the money supply during the past six months. I disagree. Ibelieve that an expansion of the money supply could have (andshould have) been achieved by additional open marketpurchases of government bonds and by the resulting greaterdeclines in interest rates. But even if the Fed now succeedsin raising the total money supply, the capital requirementscould still leave many individual banks and significantsections of the country with substantial credit limits. For asmall or medium-size business that has close links to asingle bank, the inability to get a loan from that bank maymean the inability to get any credit at all. And a regionlike New England could see lending stagnate because of tightcapital constraints even if aggressive open market operationsby the Fed increase lending in other parts of the country.   One approach to this problem would be to reduce thecapital standards for the present time and then to phase-inthe full requirements over several years. A time of economicdecline with massive real estate write-downs is certainly thewrong environment for tightening bank capital requirements.And American banks would be better able to adjust to uniforminternational capital standards after Congress adopts some ofthe changes in bank rules that the administration is nowproposing.   If capital standards are to be temporarily relaxed, itwould be good to strike a new international agreement, sothat American action to reduce capital requirements does notraise doubts about the creditworthiness of the Americanbanks. Fortunately, there is also an alternative way toincrease bank lending to qualified borrowers without reducingthe banks' capital requirements.   The Federal Reserve should use its discount window to buyhigh-quality commercial and industrial loans from healthycommercial banks that are constrained by the availability ofcapital. The Fed's current policy is to lend to commercialbanks only on a very short-term overnight basis and generallyonly against the collateral of U.S. government securities,unless the borrower is deemed to be in such distress that theFed must lend against any kind of security that the bank canoffer.   The Fed's current policy can help a bank that is havingdifficulty attracting deposits but it does nothing to permita bank that is constrained by the amount of its capital frommaking a corporate loan. But if the Fed expands the types ofassets that it accepts from banks to include commercialloans, a bank that was otherwise reluctant to lend could doso whenever it knew that its prospective loan could be soldor &quot;discounted&quot; to its regional Federal Reserve bank. (Fortechnical reasons, in order to avoid a capital requirement onthe loan, the commercial bank would probably have to sell theloan to the Federal Reserve rather than use it as collateralto borrow from the Fed.) If banks knew that they could turnto the Federal Reserve when called upon by longstandingclients or by those with contractual lines of credit, theymight be willing to use their existing capital more fully tomake loans to qualified borrowers.   After selling the loan to the Federal Reserve, thecommercial bank would continue to collect the interest on theloan (just as banks now do that originate single-familymortgages and sell them to Ginnie Mae but would pay most ofthat interest to the Federal Reserve as a discount in theinitial sale. The interest rate charged by the FederalReserve should be slightly above the Fed funds rate so thatbanks would not use this Commercial Loan Facility as alow-cost source of funds but only as a means of lending whenthey lacked the capital to add loans to their own portfolio.The difference between the interest rate charged to thecorporate borrower and the rate paid by the bank to the Fedwould cover administrative costs and provide a profitincentive for extra lending.   The Commercial Loan Facility at the Federal Reserve shouldaccept only highquality loans with very little risk ofdefault. To decide which loans were acceptable the Fed wouldnot have to do a full credit analysis of each prospectiveloan. Instead, loans might be qualified for sale to the Fedin any of several ways. Bank loans to corporate borrowerswith an investment grade commercial paper rating mightautomatically qualify. Loans of other corporate borrowersmight be accepted only if the originating bank kept a portionof the loan, perhaps dividing the loan into a senior andjunior portion and keeping the junior portion. This would ofcourse require the bank to have capital for a portion of theloan but that would still permit an overall expansion oflending.   Alternatively, the commercial banks could sell the loan tothe Federal Reserve with recourse in case of default so thatthe Federal Reserve had no risk of default. Loans sold withrecourse would require some bank capital but less than if theloan were kept by the originating bank. Even this capitalrequirement might be avoided if the originating bankpurchased private insurance against the risk of default.There are, in short, many ways to protect the Federal Reservewhile permitting the commercial banks to expand their lendingwith the existing level of capital.   A Commercial Loan Facility at each regional FederalReserve Bank would provide a strong signal of governmentpolicy and a powerful incentive to the commercial banks toexpand their commercial lending. Such a Commercial LoanFacility would not be a substitute for a more expansionarymonetary policy, for a more balanced approach to bank creditsupervision or for fundamental legislative reform ofcommercial banking. But it could help to turn around theeconomy and to permit a less disruptive gradual adjustment tothe new capital standards.   ---   Mr. Feldstein, former chairman of the president's Councilof Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard.</TEXT></DOC>