<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910814-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>910814-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Overseas Calling:   American Firms Send   Office Work Abroad   To Use Cheaper Labor   ---   Ireland and Other Nations Use   Phones, Computer Links;   U.S. Labor Leaders Worry   ---   Another Blow for M.B.A.s   ----   By Bernard Wysocki Jr.   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR TAXES</CO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AND MONETARY INDICATORS (IEI)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><RE>ARIZONA (AZ)IRELAND (EI)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FLORIDA (FL)INDONESIA (IO)JAMAICA (JM)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)PHILIPPINES (RP)SINGAPORE (SN)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)WEST INDIES (WIS)</RE><LP>   LOUGHREA, Ireland -- The jobless rate in Ireland is nearly20%, and the economy is in a kind of permanent recession. Buta growing number of U.S. companies are hiring.   In this quaint village of 3,000, Cigna Corp. recently tookover an unused factory on the edge of town. TheConnecticut-based insurer has hired 120 young Irish workersto process medical claims flown in daily from the U.S. Payaverages about $11,000 a year.</LP><TEXT>   Across town, the office of McGraw-Hill Data Services --Ireland is running full tilt with a staff of 40 women. Adozen part-timers were recently added to an evening shift.Working at computer terminals, the women maintain theworld-wide circulation files of 16 McGraw-Hill Inc.magazines, by a direct link to McGraw-Hill's mainframes inHightstown, N.J.   &quot;This, to me, is a great growth industry,&quot; says generalmanager J. Philip Clancy.   So it is. In the late 1970s and '80s, many blue-collarjobs migrated overseas. Today, there is a movement ofdata-processing and other &quot;back office&quot; jobs offshore -- toplaces where wages are cheaper, people speak English, andstate-of-the art telecommunications facilities allowinstantaneous links to the American company's host computers.   Barbados, Jamaica, the Philippines, Singapore and Irelandhave emerged as among the most popular &quot;back office&quot;locations. The jobs range from simple data entry toaccounting, medical transcription, telemarketing, andtechnical support for high-technology products.   Though the trend is nascent, some say the flow of servicejobs offshore could quickly become a torrent, partly becausesetting up is so easy. &quot;All you need is office space, sometrainers and some computers,&quot; says Robert Ady, head of PHHFantus, a Chicago relocation consultant.   In the years ahead, some analysts say, tens of thousandsof clerical and technical jobs could migrate abroad. Thiscould give U.S. employers &quot;a chance to tap talent anywhere inthe world,&quot; says Sunil Tagare, vice president of KesslerMarketing Intelligence, a Newport, R.I., consulting firm. Atthe same time, it could spell unemployment for some Americanclerical workers and even some professionals. Mr. Tagarepredicts the U.S. is &quot;going to lose a lot of white-collarjobs.&quot;   Labor leaders already worry. Dennis Chamot, an AFL-CIOofficial in Washington, says American jobs lost this way todate number only several thousand. But he fears that once theU.S. economy clearly goes into recovery, the move ofback-office work offshore could accelerate, as companies lookfor cheap labor.   If so, for some American workers, the 1990s may reveal thedarker side of the information age: If you work at acomputer, your job could be moved halfway around the world.That would probably be a blow to several U.S. cities thathave emerged as data-processing centers in the recent past,including Omaha, Neb.; Des Moines, Iowa; Sioux Falls, S.D.,and several Florida communities. Competition is alreadyheating up between such places and the foreign countriestrying to lure the jobs.   &quot;Our competition is Florida, Iowa and Arizona,&quot; says T.A.Gus Jones, vice president of the Industrial DevelopmentAuthority of Ireland. From his office in New York, Mr. Jonescalls on banks, insurance companies, credit-card processorsand just about anybody else with at least four mainframecomputers. His message is simple. &quot;If you can move it 3,000miles west, you can move it 3,000 miles east,&quot; he says.   But some people say the whole strategy is short-sighted.One of Ireland's chief competitors for foreign investment,Scotland, has deliberately steered clear of data-processing.Robert Crawford, North American director of the Locate inScotland program, says new technologies, such as electronicscanning of printed material, will render many data-entryjobs obsolete. &quot;If you think this will create lots of jobs,you better be careful, because you'll lose them,&quot; says Mr.Crawford, who is based in Stamford, Conn. He says Scotlandprefers to continue focusing on manufacturing, where thetoe-to-toe battle with Ireland for foreign investment hasraged for years, and continues.   Unquestionably, though, there's a migration of back-officejobs to Ireland. And a look at the Irish phenomenon shows thetrend in its most sophisticated form, and hence mayforeshadow what will happen in the 1990s.   Ireland's success in attracting dozens of back-officeshops is more by design than luck. In the 1980s, Irelandinvested $3.5 billion to upgrade its telecommunicationsnetwork, first with sophisticated satellite technology, laterby laying fiber-optic cable from one end of the country tothe other.   Ireland has also lured foreigners with tax breaks thatwould make the most generous U.S. governor look like a piker.Employment grants, training grants, and construction grantsalone often amount to several million dollars worth ofincentives to a foreign investor. On top of that, Irelandpromises foreigners a low, 10% tax rate until the year 2010.   The Irish tax structure, one of the linchpins of thestrategy, would probably lead to citizen revolts in manyparts of the world. Farmers and corporations pay very littlein taxes and wages are taxed as high as 53%. Yet the nationhas chronically inadequate roads and chronic, double-digitunemployment.   Nonetheless, social tensions in Ireland are moderate. Andthe tolerant attitude toward taxing wages allows thegovernment to lure foreign investment with such generouscome-ons. &quot;We exploit the situation,&quot; says Seamus Pairceir, aformer Irish commissioner of revenue and a member of Dublin'sestablishment.   Mr. Pairceir is a prime backer of the most ambitiousforeign-investment lure, a $300 million internationalfinancial center now rising on the river Liffey in the heartof the capital city. The project aims to be a small versionof New York's World Financial Center.   There is a glass-enclosed &quot;Winter Garden&quot; planned for thecenter of the complex, along with retail shops, apartmentbuildings and a major hotel. Tenants either already in orcommitted to the center include such heavyweights as ArthurAndersen andamp; Co., Deutsche Bank, and a General Electric Co.treasury-management office.   Yet even in the glitzy financial center, the activityisn't so much trading and investment banking as the moremundane tasks of finance, such as registration and recordkeeping for mutual funds, or operating in-house or &quot;captive&quot;insurance companies for multinational corporations.   The variety of American back-office operations in Irelandalone is staggering. Dozens are already open, the oldestdating from 1988. Many have opened in the past 12 months inDublin and in the countryside. They include banks, computermakers, mutual-fund companies and others.   The data-processing offices tend to be outside of Dublin,in country towns. Typical among them is one operated byMassachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co., of Springfield,Mass. It has a claims processing office in the town ofTipperary, a two-hour drive southwest from Dublin.   The office resembles its counterparts in the U.S. --bright, with new computers but no telephones at the desks.Most of the workers are women in their 20s, with highschooldiplomas and often some secretarial training. They come fromTipperary and the surrounding countryside.   The jobless rate around Tipperary exceeds 20%, thevillage's main street looks a bit worn, and most days thereare people just hanging around. It's like this in many Irishcities and towns, which is why so many Irish have emigratedover the years, or resigned themselves to a life of nearpoverty.   When people find a job, they hang on to it for dear life.For Mass Mutual's Edward Superson, an American who came herelast year to establish the Irish benefit-payments office, thelack of turnover is a pleasant surprise. In the U.S.,turnover in claims processing is continual, and very costly.&quot;I'll never have any turnover,&quot; Mr. Superson says. &quot;Nobody isgoing to leave.&quot; That puts heavy pressure on managers to hiregood people to start with.   Day to day, the pace of life in Ireland is more relaxedthan in America, Mr. Superson says. People expect to leavework at 5:30 p.m., and overtime is often resisted. Banksoften close during the lunch hour. Getting a telephoneinstalled may take three months. &quot;Some people here say thisis a Third World country except that nobody is starving,&quot; hesays.   Yet Mr. Superson finds it all quite refreshing, and laudsthe diligence of his employees here. &quot;In the U.S., there's anattitude of `Ah, tomorrow's another day. Seventy percentaccuracy is okay,'&quot; he says with disdain. &quot;Here, excellenceis the norm. One wrong is one too many.&quot;   Another factor pulling U.S. companies here is the abilityto spread the work force over different time zones. An Irishoffice will tend to put demands on expensive mainframecomputers at off-peak hours. When it is 10 a.m. in Ireland,it is 5 a.m. on the U.S. East Coast, a time when most bigcomputers are underutilized.   But the big draw here is good, cheap labor. Ireland'sdemographics are among the youngest in Europe (the averageage is 28) and education levels are high. Wright InvestorsService, a Bridgeport, Conn., investment manager anddata-base publisher, has 85 employees in its Shannon office,opened in the late 1980s. Most of them are young financialanalysts earning less than the equivalent of $20,000 a yearorganizing financial information from companies around theworld for Wright's databases. That is far preferable tohiring American business-school graduates at $45,000,especially since the M.B.A. holders would probably soon bebored, says Peter Donovan, president of the firm.   It is precisely these kinds of higher-level jobs --financial analysts and technicians -- that the Irishgovernment is trying its best to attract. And much the samecan be said for Jamaica, Singapore and, for that matter, manyU.S. communities. So the future may bring intensifiedworldwide competition for these high-skill computer-basedtasks.   In a Dublin office building overlooking Dublin Bay, it isalready possible to get a glimpse of these emerging jobs.This is the European outpost of Quarterdeck Office SystemsInc., a Santa Monica, Calif.-based computer-software companywith 1990 sales of $26.3 million. Here, 20 young technicalspecialists field tricky problems, by the telephone, fromQuarterdeck customers all over the world, including nearly athousand calls a week from the U.S.   Quarterdeck has a technical-support staff in California,but after hours, the head office throws a switch and thecalls are routed automatically to Ireland.</TEXT></DOC>