<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900925-0022</DOCNO><DOCID>900925-0022.</DOCID><HL>   Silver Lining:   Natural Gas Reserves   Help Unocal Benefit   From Mideast Crisis   ---   Profit Is Rising Despite Lack   Of Sizable Oil Production;   Shale Project Grinds On   ---   Burden From 80's: Big Debt   ----   By David J. Jefferson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   UCL</CO><IN>NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)PIPELINE OPERATORS (PIP)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   SALTON SEA, Calif. -- A flier circulating among employeesat the Unocal Corp. geothermal plant here pictures thefacility opposite a battle tank, a gun and an oil barrel andproclaims: &quot;There is an alternative.&quot;   With the Mideast crisis shaking oil markets, &quot;this hereshould be Unocal's new ad campaign,&quot; drawls OlinWhitescarver, veteran manager of the company's operations inthis desert valley.</LP><TEXT>   The project to convert steamy brine from deep within theEarth to electricity is one of the &quot;crown jewels&quot; that UnocalChairman Richard J. Stegemeier likes to discuss. Theoperation, which only recently turned profitable, helps makethis midsized oil company the world's leading producer ofgeothermal energy.   Unocal's two other &quot;crown jewels&quot; are its huge natural-gasreserves, which are already enhancing its short-term profitoutlook, and an experimental oil-shale business, which couldyield major long-term benefits if a continuing oil crisisspurs demand for alternative fuels. Unocal thus is one of theoil companies that stand to benefit from the upheaval in theMideast, even though it isn't one of those with hugepetroleum reserves.   But despite aggressive new management devoted tostrengthening Unocal's niche in the industry, the nation's13th-largest oil company remains haunted by a legacy of the1980s: the huge $6.1 billion debt load Unocal built up as itdefeated a hostile bid from T. Boone Pickens.   &quot;We had to mortgage our future,&quot; grouses Mr. Stegemeier,arguing that without that debt Unocal might now have nearlytwice its current 800-million-barrel oil reserves. &quot;Every dayas we walked into the office, we had to write a symboliccheck for $2 million just to cover the interest,&quot; he says.These days, writing that symbolic check, which now is down to$1 million, &quot;is still painful.&quot;   Unocal has paid heavily to remain independent. To slashits debt to today's approximately $4 billion, it has had toclose a Beaumont, Texas, refinery that had accounted for aquarter of its crude-oil processing capacity. It also hasformed a joint venture to run its Midwest refining andmarketing operations, disposed of some Canadian and Norwegianassets and even sold its headquarters building on the edge ofdowntown Los Angeles.   In addition, Unocal has nearly halved its capital spendingin the past five years. That cutback creates the prospectthat it will soon have to pour hundreds of millions ofdollars into refinery improvements and other efforts to catchup with competitors that lead in developing less-pollutinggasolines. And Unocal remains hampered in overhauling itsold-fashioned marketing, which critics say makes Unocalvulnerable to financially stronger companies such as itshometown rival, Atlantic Richfield Co.   While competitors emphasize self-service pumps, which bysaving labor help hold down gasoline prices, Unocal stickswith the same service-oriented, premium-priced appeal it usedwhen a 1949 TV commercial showed a young Marilyn Monroetooling up to a Union Oil station in her sports car andcooing to the eager attendant to put oil &quot;in Cynthia's littletummy.&quot;   With survival in the post-Pickens era apparently assured,Mr. Stegemeier faces what he concedes is &quot;the more difficultpart: positioning ourselves for growth in the '90s.&quot;   Changing strategies suits the 62-year-old executive farbetter than it did his iron-willed predecessor, Fred L.Hartley, the engineer who ruled the company for nearly aquarter-century before retiring in 1988. Mr. Hartley, now 73,shaped Unocal's commitment to geothermal energy and shale oil-- a program that wags labeled &quot;Hartley's Folly&quot; becauseshale oil is so much more expensive than conventional crude.Mr. Hartley was also seen as unbending when asset sales andother wrenching moves might have been prudent.   The contrast between old and new is striking. Mr. Hartley,who loosed an acerbic wit on all who dared question hisauthority, dismissed securities analysts as &quot;peons&quot; and tolddividend-starved shareholders that the company knew betterways to spend money. Mr. Stegemeier projects an image ofcorporate affability, certainly to shareholders; he cheeredthem with a 40% dividend increase and a 2-for-1 stock splitlast November. He gives managers considerable leeway to makedecisions and can laugh at himself. At an interview, hegreets a reporter with a mouthful of candy and apologizesimpishly.   Moreover, Unocal &quot;has been completely turned around interms of substantive focus since he took over,&quot; says BernardPicchi, an analyst at Salomon Brothers.   Much of the Stegemeier plan hinges on developing Unocal'snatural-gas reserves of more than six trillion cubic feet --equal to more than a billion barrels of oil.   Unocal's U.S. gas position, which is second only to thatof Occidental Petroleum Corp. in percentage of total companyreserves, is especially strong in the Gulf of Mexico. Whilebattling Mr. Pickens, Unocal bundled its properties thereinto a separate, publicly traded Union Explorationpartnership, which subsequently was converted into acorporation. Lately, Unocal has had &quot;the lowest finding costsand best reserve replacement of any major oil company&quot; in thegulf, says Frederick P. Leuffer, a C.J. Lawrence analyst.   Unocal also turned to natural gas for its first bigacquisition since the Pickens battle: the $336 millionpurchase of a Gulf Coast exploration and production company,Prairie Holding Co.   Some analysts remain skeptical about gas demand. &quot;Don't gooverboard counting on natural gas,&quot; warns Marc Cohen ofKidder Peabody. &quot;If my reading is correct, nationwide thereis only about 160,000 barrels a day of consumption that couldreadily be converted from oil to natural gas.&quot; But Unocal andothers expect natural-gas prices to rise this winter, afterfalling this summer to the lowest levels in nearly 10 years,though they will lag well behind fuel oil, the nearestalternative. &quot;We now have a window of opportunity to developour reserves and bring them to market rather quickly,&quot; saysJohn F. Imle Jr., senior vice president for energy resources.   Industry experts predict that if crude-oil prices hold atcurrent levels, natural gas will surge to more than $2 perthousand cubic feet from about $1.50 now. Figuring that every10-cent increase in gas prices yields a seven-cent rise inUnocal's per-share earnings, some analysts have recentlyincreased their 1990 earnings estimate by nearly a third, toabout $1.50 a share. Unocal earned $260 million, or $1.11 ashare, on $11.35 billion of revenue last year. In New YorkStock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Unocal's stockclosed at $33.50, down 12 1/2 cents on the day.   Geothermal's role in Unocal's future is much smaller. Thecompany has reserves equal to about 216 million barrels ofoil -- a quarter of its crude reserves -- and geothermalaccounted for a mere $188 million of sales last year.   Acquired in 1965, the geothermal business took off aftergasoline price increases during the 1973 oil embargo madealternative fuels viable. The geothermal operations nowextend to northern and southern California, the Philippinesand Indonesia, and Unocal plans to spend several hundredmillion dollars over the next several years for furtherexploration and development along the Pacific Rim's geologic&quot;ring of fire.&quot; Says Mr. Imle, &quot;World tensions caused by oilavailability can only improve the outlook for geothermal.&quot;   Its limitations, though, are important. Not transportablelike oil, geothermal energy is restricted to a few regionswhere the plates of the Earth's crust join to create theright subterranean conditions. Even there, the steam isn't inunlimited supply. Production from Unocal's largest and oldestgeothermal project, in the Geysers field north of SanFrancisco, declined recently as the underground pressurepushing the steam out of the ground fell.   Geothermal generating costs also raise a substantialproblem. While most power costs 4.5 cents to 7.5 cents perkilowatt hour, Unocal's Salton Sea facility charges as muchas 9.5 cents to provide electricity for SCEcorp's SouthernCalifornia Edison.   Oil shale fever peaked in the late 1970s, when expertswere predicting $100-a-barrel crude oil by the year 2000. Mr.Hartley, who had written a college thesis on shaledevelopment, poured more than $1 billion into producingsynthetic crude from shale. But Unocal's Parachute Creek,Colo., plant, beset with technical problems for years, nevercame close to making economic sense. After Mr. Hartleyretired, company officials considered closing it.   Now Unocal remains committed to the shale project, whichproduces oil for $40 a barrel, because of a federalprice-support contract that could total $400 million by 1996.That contract allowed Unocal to show modest positive cashflow from shale operations earlier this year, though itsuffered losses again in the second quarter. Unocal has beenquietly courting outside investors for the project, includingJapan National Oil Co.   Although the promise of shale oil has never beenfulfilled, Unocal gains a patriotic aura by keeping theproject alive. The Western U.S. has at least 600 billionbarrels of recoverable shale reserves, roughly equal to theproven reserves of the Organization of Petroleum ExportingCountries. The U.S. &quot;could face a new decade of price shocksand supply disruptions,&quot; Mr. Stegemeier said a year ago inwhat now sounds like a prophetic speech. &quot;America's oil-shalereserves would then become an abundant, economicallycompetitive energy alternative.&quot;   But Unocal won't invest heavily on shale in the wake ofIraq's Kuwait invasion. Still smarting from the 1986crude-price collapse, which caught the whole industry offguard, its executives say they don't count on prices stayinghigh. &quot;We don't want to get caught spending money we may notget,&quot; cautions Claude Brinegar, the chief financial officerand a former U.S. transportation secretary.   Yet Unocal has pushed ahead with exploration. It keptreserves stable through most of the 1980s, at more than 1.9billion barrels of oil and oil equivalents. Last year,according to C.J. Lawrence's Mr. Leuffer, Unocal was the onlyone of 17 major domestic oil companies that on a worldwidebasis &quot;fully replaced production from new discoveries,extensions and enhanced recovery.&quot; In fact, he adds, itreplaced 142% of world-wide reserves, excluding acquisitionsand revised estimates of the oil that can be recovered fromgiven fields.   The company's push into new technology is one reason. Atthe Hartley Research Center, a campus-like compound in OrangeCounty, Calif., scientists work on computerizedthree-dimensional seismic mapping systems that have allowedUnocal to tap small sand reservoirs in Thailand. And onPlatform Irene, in the Pacific waters north of Santa Barbara,Unocal is using the world's longest single horizontal well toimprove recovery. The $3.5 million well costs more than twiceas much as a vertical well, &quot;but that's economically moreviable than building a new platform,&quot; says fieldsuperintendent C.B. Beauchamp.   Increasingly, Unocal is taking a risky road by exploringand producing overseas. Currently in Thailand, Indonesia,Burma, Syria and the Netherlands, it may soon look inVietnam, the Soviet Union and other countries long off-limitsto Western investment. The returns could be significantbecause finding a few large fields could make Unocal an oilgiant.   &quot;Petroleum geology has to guide our exploration, notpolitics,&quot; Mr. Stegemeier says. &quot;If we let politics guide us,we'd be drilling for oil in Switzerland.&quot;   Unocal's marketing, hampered by low budgets, is anacknowledged weak spot. The company relies on its wits todevelop relatively inexpensive publicity campaigns. WhenArco, Chevron and Shell undertook expensive reformulations oftheir gasolines this year to cut pollution, Unocal counteredby offering to pay $700 apiece to buy 8,300 smog-belching oldcars in the Los Angeles area and scrap them. The $10 millionplan includes free emission checks for older cars and a smallfleet of Unocal trucks that cruise freeways and help strandedmotorists.   But the car-crushing campaign is mostly a stalling tactic.One California state agency is voting late this week onstandards to force companies to develop cleaner gasolines by1993; another agency seeks refinery improvements in the LosAngeles area that could cost Unocal hundreds of millions ofdollars.   Environmental issues have long plagued Unocal, certainlysince the 1969 platform blowout that spilled thousands ofbarrels of oil into Santa Barbara Channel. Unocal literaturecalls that mishap &quot;the major event that helped coalesceenvironmental-protection groups into a powerful lobby.&quot; Thecompany's current environmental program wins praise fromregulators, though. California's South Coast Air QualityManagement District donated $100,000 to the auto-scrappingcampaign.   But at a recent news conference on the environment, Unocalexecutives displaying a flattened white Maverick for TVcameras were chided about Unocal's raising pump prices soquickly after Iraq invaded Kuwait. Unocal was a likely targetbecause of the higher prices at full-service stations. &quot;Welook for the carriage trade,&quot; Mr. Stegemeier says.   Unocal's marketing approach, however, may soon go the wayof the buggy whip. Full-service is a graying market, someanalysts say, and &quot;with consumers very conscious of therun-up in prices and conservation in vogue, initially you'dexpect to see a preference for lower-priced gasolines,&quot;analyst Mr. Leuffer says. He believes Unocal's market sharecould dip for a while.   So Unocal executives are looking more closely at switchingto self-service and even convenience stores similar to thosepioneered by Arco. Refining and marketing must &quot;adapt to thedemands of the '90s,&quot; says Roger Beach, Unocal's senior vicepresident in charge of those areas.   With Unocal emphasizing moves to remain competitive, itdismisses the takeover rumors that continue to dog it. Mr.Stegemeier says Unocal &quot;hasn't been for sale for 100 years,and we have no intent of putting the company up for sale. Webelieve the things we've done to restructure the company willkeep us independent.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>