<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911011-0110</DOCNO><DOCID>911011-0110.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Fidelity Ex-Employee Is Charged   With Taking Payoffs From Drexel   ----   By Wade Lambert and Richard B. Schmitt   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   KRI TAXES</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)POLITICS (PLT)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)TAXES (TAX)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)FLORIDA (FL)KENTUCKY (KY)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOUTH CAROLINA (SC)UNITED STATES (US)VIRGINIA (VA)</RE><LP>   A former portfolio manager for Fidelity Investments wascharged with illegally accepting payoffs from Drexel BurnhamLambert Inc.'s junk-bond department in return for investingmillions of dollars of her clients' money in Drexeltransactions.   Patricia Ostrander, currently president of OstranderCapital Management in Boston, was indicted by a federal grandjury in Manhattan on three counts of securities-lawviolations. Ms. Ostrander, a 53-year-old resident ofBrookline, Mass., left Fidelity in 1987.</LP><TEXT>   Ostrander Capital and New American High Income Fund, aclosed-end fund of which Ms. Ostrander is also president,announced that Ms. Ostrander has been granted an indefiniteleave of absence from both the company and the fund. Ellen E.Terry, vice president of Ostrander Capital and the fund, willassume principal responsibility for managing the portfolio,the company and the fund said.   The charges against Ms. Ostrander involve the MacPhersonlimited partnership, allegedly set up by Michael Milken,formerly head of Drexel's junk-bond department, to rewardexecutives and money-managers for investing in transactionsunderwritten by Drexel. In civil suits, thrift regulatorshave alleged that Mr. Milken used the MacPherson partnershipto bribe such people as Ms. Ostrander to take part in ascheme to manipulate the junk-bond market.   Mr. Milken, currently serving a 10-year sentence for sixsecurities-related felonies, has denied the thriftregulators' allegations.   Drexel has said it was unaware of the MacPhersonpartnership.   Jeremiah O'Sullivan, an attorney for Ms. Ostrander inBoston, said, &quot;My client didn't engage in any of the conductdescribed in the indictment. She will plead not guilty andexpects to be found not guilty.&quot; Mr. O'Sullivan also saidthat Ms. Ostrander &quot;has a 30-year reputation that isunblemished and beyond reproach in the industry.&quot;   Mr. O'Sullivan said that in defending Ms. Ostrander, heexpects to draw on Mr. Milken's pre-sentencing hearing. Atthat hearing last year, the government made its allegationsabout the use of MacPherson by Mr. Milken. Mr. O'Sullivan, aformer U.S. Attorney in Boston, said the judge in the Milkencase found that prosecutors didn't prove that Mr. Milken&quot;induced or promised any inducement to fund managers&quot; inreturn for their participation in junk-bond transactions.   Ms. Ostrander, in a statement, said, &quot;I never sought norreceived any outside compensation for my services, and I amshocked by these allegations.&quot;   The indictment charges Ms. Ostrander with violatingsecurities laws by accepting unlawful compensation inconnection with the investments she made on her clients'behalf, receiving payment in connection with her managementof pension plan investments, and failing to report herpersonal purchase of securities to Fidelity.   The indictment alleges that Ms. Ostrander, who controlledthe investment of about $1 billion in Fidelity clients' fundsin the mid-1980s, made a profit of $750,000 through theMacPherson partnership.   The indictment said that in November 1985 while atFidelity, Ms. Ostrander invested $86 million in junk bondsunderwritted by Drexel to finance the leveraged buy-out ofStorer Communications Inc. The indictment also alleged thatthrough her stake in MacPherson, Ms. Ostrander receivedwarrants to buy equity in the company that acquired Storerfor 8.8 cents a warrant, &quot;a price below the existing andpotential value of the warrants.&quot;   Fidelity, which is based in Boston, has sued Ms. Ostranderin state court in Massachusetts, seeking to recover for itsinvestors any profit Ms. Ostrander made on the transactions.A spokesman for the company said the suit doesn't estimatethe amount that Fidelity believes she made. He also said thatno Fidelity clients have sued the company over Ms.Ostrander's alleged conduct.   The Fidelity funds invested in the Storer junk bonds wereFidelity Puritan Fund and Fidelity Equity Income Fund. TheFidelity spokesman said the funds made a profit on theinvestment.   Prosecutors said Ms. Ostrander faces a total maximum fineof $750,000 on the three counts, a possible prison sentenceof five years on one of the charges and three years on theother two.   ---   CALIFORNIA VOTER INITIATIVE limiting legislators' terms isupheld.   The California Supreme Court is the first court to weighin on a growing national trend geared at limiting the tenureof incumbents.   Unless overturned, the decision upholding Proposition 140means that an entirely new state legislature will be inoffice by 1999. The court also upheld a provision of the 1990initiative that orders a 40% reduction in the budget of thestate legislative staff.   The California Legislature itself had filed the suit,claiming that the law abridged the First Amendment rights ofcandidates to seek office and of voters to choose theirdesired leaders. Lawyers for the legislature said they wouldappeal the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court. Veteranlawmakers, meanwhile, deplored the ruling.   &quot;I find it difficult to believe, among other things, thata lifetime ban on anything could be ruled constitutional,&quot;Assembly Speaker Willie L. Brown Jr., who has held officesince 1964, said in a statement. &quot;But sadly, six justicesobviously have seen it differently.&quot;   The 6-1 decision, written by the court's chief justice,Malcolm Lucas, said term limits were justifiably aimed atcombating &quot;an entrenched, dynastic legislative bureaucracy&quot;and &quot;making an extended career in public office both lessavailable and less attractive.&quot; The court invalidated aprovision of the law that eliminated pension benefits ofincumbents, however, saying such limits could only be appliedin the future.   If the ruling withstands appeal, it will take effectretroactive to Jan. 1, 1991, and limit assembly members tothree two-year terms and state senators to two fouryearterms.   Giving lawmakers a permanent vacation is attractingnational support. Oklahoma and Colorado also enactedlegislative-term limits last year, with Colorado being thefirst state to make its limits applicable to members ofCongress. Neither measure has been tested in court;Colorado's law would not force the retirement of anyonecurrently serving until 2002.   Ballot initiatives restricting the tenure of legislatorsare also believed to be in the works in Washington, Ohio andabout 15 other states.   ---   PRESS CAN BE BARRED from jury selection, appeal courtrules.   The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va.,ruled that reporters and the public can be banished fromcourtrooms while prospective jurors are being questioned, butonly if there is strong reason to believe that the public'spresence will jeopardize a defendant's right to a fair trial.   However, the unanimous appeals panel also ruled thatjudges contemplating barring the public from watching juryselection must give advance notice so that the public has anopportunity to object.   &quot;I look at this as we got half a loaf,&quot; said Jerry JayBender, a lawyer in Columbia, S.C., who represented StateRecord Co., a Knight-Ridder Inc. unit. State Record publishesthe State newspaper in Columbia, South Carolina's biggestnewspaper and one of six publishers that joined the suit.   The case involved the appeal of a decision by U.S.District Judge Falcon B. Hawkins in Columbia to bar reportersfrom covering jury selection in the extortion trial ofseveral South Carolina legislators indicted in the summer of1990. About half of the 17 defendants indicted in &quot;OperationLost Trust&quot; were black.   At the trials of four defendants earlier this year,defense lawyers won the right to ask prospective jurors todescribe their attitudes towards race and other sensitiveissues in a confidential 18-page questionnaire. Their answerswere to be the subject of extensive questioning in opencourt.   In two of the trials last February, Judge Hawkinsdetermined without holding a hearing that &quot;forthrightresponses from potential jurors . . . would be chilled ifthey felt their remarks would be published.&quot; The appellatejudges ruled that Judge Hawkins was justified in closing theproceeding, but that he should have given advance notice toallow the press and public to air objections.   Courts are typically extremely reluctant to close theirdoors to the public. A decision to close a pretrialproceeding requires a showing that there is a strong chancethat a defendant's right to a fair trial will be violated ifthe proceeding is left open and that there are no reasonablealternatives to excluding the public.   Mr. Bender, the attorney for State Record, argued thatprospective jurors too embarrassed to openly discuss theirracial prejudices could request a meeting with the judge andlawyers.   But the appeals panel ruled out that alternative because&quot;the confidential questionnaires . . . must still be alludedto in such a proceeding and the juror is still faced withanswering very personal and private questions before agallery of the full press.&quot;   ---   IN PRINCETON-NEWPORT, appeals court throws out conspiracycount.   The federal appeals court in Manhattan, amending adecision it issued in June, dismissed the conspiracyconviction against four of the defendants in thePrinceton/Newport L.P. fraud case.   Defense attorneys had asked that the count be dismissedbecause the court previously vacated the tax-fraudconvictions in the case. They argued that the conspiracycount against the four -- James Sutton Regan, Jack Z.Rabinowitz, Paul Berkman and Steven Barry Smotrich -- wasbaseless once the tax-fraud convictions were thrown out. Thecourt upheld the securities-fraud and conspiracy convictionsof the two other defendants.   In granting the defense attorneys' request, the SecondU.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said that &quot;the participants inthe trial all appear to have assumed that those fourdefendants weren't involved in the alleged securities fraudand there is little proof to justify a finding to thecontrary.&quot;   The case, against five officials of the brokerage firm andone Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. trader, marked thefirst time that securities-firm officials were criminallyprosecuted under the Racketeer Influenced and CorruptOrganizations law. But the court dismissed the tax countsthat made up the bulk of the RICO allegations, ruling thatthe defendants hadn't received a fair trial and questioningwhether RICO should be used in tax cases.   ---   ANIMAL RIGHTS ACTIVISTS want to ban a Kentucky sport.   The Fund for Animals Inc., a New York animal protectiongroup, sued Kentucky and its Department of Fish and Wildlife,to put an end to &quot;shake-out&quot; season.   Shake-out season, held from late October throughmid-November, permits hunters to stalk opossums and raccoonswith dogs. Hunters, however, are not allowed to use guns orweapons to kill the animals. Instead, they often prod themwith sticks or shake branches to make them fall to the groundwhere they're attacked by the dogs.   The plaintiffs, which include several Kentucky chapters ofthe Humane Society, say these hunting expeditions violatestate animal protection laws. &quot;If this isn't cruelty toanimals, what is?&quot; says Eric Reed, a volunteer with theLouisville office of the Fund for Animals. &quot;It's a deplorablepractice.&quot;   The commissioner of the Department of Fish and Wildlife inFrankfort, Donald McCormick, called shake-out season &quot;atradition&quot; that's part of training dogs, but declined commenton the suit.   The state Attorney General's office had previously issueda written opinion that shake-out season doesn't violatecruelty to animal laws, according to a spokesman for thatoffice. He also declined comment on the suit.</TEXT></DOC>