<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910611-0029</DOCNO><DOCID>910611-0029.</DOCID><HL>   Cleaning Up:   Chemical Firms Find   That It Pays to Reduce   Pollution at Source   ---   By Altering Processes to Yield   Less Waste, They Make   Production More Efficient   ---   Dow Reuses a Toxic Solvent   ----   By Scott McMurray   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   ARC DD DOW MTC RCM</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)ENERGY (ENE)</MS><IN>CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)</NS><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)</GV><RE>ALABAMA (AL)CALIFORNIA (CA)DELAWARE (DE)EUROPE (EU)FLORIDA (FL)FRANCE (FR)ILLINOIS (IL)LOUISIANA (LA)MICHIGAN (MI)MISSOURI (MO)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The chemical industry's record on the environment has beena sorry one. Despite tougher regulation and pressure frompublic interest groups, it still accounts for nearly half ofall the toxic pollution produced in the U.S.   Yet lately, a new force has been driving the industry toclean up its act: economics.</LP><TEXT>   In a major shift, chemical companies are viewing waste notas an unavoidable result of the manufacturing process, but asa measure of its efficiency. The more unusable byproducts aprocess creates, the less efficient it is -- and the moreeconomic incentive there is for making it better.   That's what Du Pont Co. discovered at its Beaumont, Texas,plant, which makes products for plastics and paint. Foryears, the facility had been spewing out a staggering 110million pounds of waste annually. Du Pont engineers arguedthat reducing the pollution would be too expensive.   But when they took a second look last year, they foundjust the opposite was true. By adjusting the productionprocess to use less of one raw material, they were able toslash the plant's waste by two-thirds. Yields went up andcosts went down. The savings: $1 million a year.   &quot;When I heard about it, I just said: `That's amazing,'&quot;says Edgar Woolard, Du Pont's chairman and chief executiveofficer. He says the company now even sees waste reduction asa way to achieve a competitive advantage.   Environmentalists heartily support this view. Slashingtoxic waste production &quot;is very similar to energyconservation in the 1970s: There is a potential for massivesavings,&quot; says David Roe, a lawyer with the EnvironmentalDefense Fund.   The entire chemical industry, says EnvironmentalProtection Agency administrator William Reilly, is &quot;gettingreligion&quot; about the benefits of cutting wastes.   Other industries, from semiconductor makers in SiliconValley to metal processing companies across the Rust Belt,are also beginning to focus on toxic waste reduction as a wayto cut costs, curb pollution and make operations moreefficient. But it's the chemical industry that has the mostto gain from waste reduction savings simply because it churnsout so much.   According to the EPA, in 1989, the last year for whichfigures are available, the industry produced nearly half ofthe 5.7 billion pounds of toxins generated nationwide andtracked by the EPA. Chemical company officials say that,since then, the proportion has stayed roughly the same,though the total amount of toxins released in the country isbelieved to have declined. Some environmentalists haveargued, however, that the EPA significantly understates thetotal amount of toxins discharged into the environment.   Richard Mahoney, Monsanto Co.'s chairman and chiefexecutive officer, estimates that there is $125 million worthof material that currently isn't recovered from the wastethat leaves the company's plants. What's more, other costsassociated with waste are rising. They include processing,disposal and cleanup, not to mention lawsuits and governmentfines when those jobs don't get done right.   Dow Chemical Co., for instance, recently spent $30 millionbuilding a waste incinerator and dump to handle toxicmaterials at its plant site in Midland, Mich. And, earlierthis year, Monsanto paid the state of Massachusetts $1million to settle claims that its Everett, Mass., plantdidn't report certain waste-water discharges. It paid another$192,000 to a trust fund that supports the cleanup of Bostonharbor. Last year, it forked over $27 million to clean othersites. At year end, it had an accrued liability of $120million on its balance sheet to cover certain future cleanupcosts.   Chemical companies, however, might have made substantialcuts in toxic emissions sooner had they recognized some ofthe potential economic advantages, such as lower materialscosts. &quot;One of the differences is that we're now putting someof our best people into this area,&quot; says Robert Luft, DuPont's senior vice president, chemicals. &quot;When you do that,you can start making some fast progress.&quot;   In the past, chemical companies used to focus merely oncomplying with federal and state pollution laws for specificchemicals or plants. They didn't pay much attention to theaggregate amount of waste they produced each year, or thefuture liability it represented. Waste disposal costs werelow, and the typical approach to pollution often was thedilution solution: Dilute wastes in massive amounts of air upa smokestack or water out the end of a sewer pipe.More-permanent solutions were unattractive. They almostalways involved adding equipment, which meant higher costs,and, thus, intense corporate resistance.   That began to change after the deaths of more than 3,800people in Bhopal, India, following the release of a cloud oftoxic gas at a Union Carbide Corp. subsidiary in 1984. Thedisaster led to U.S. legislation in 1986 directing the EPA tocompile and publicize a survey of toxic emissions, which putpressure on big polluters to do more than just meet minimumgovernment standards.   In the process, companies began to discover economicadvantages, as well. Some came from increasing productionefficiency, while others came from finding other uses forsome of the byproducts. Along the way, companies began toconclude that pollution was a sign of a bad manufacturingsystem. &quot;When you make a lot of waste you know you don't havecontrol of your operation,&quot; says Mr. Woolard, Du Pont'schairman.   Dow Chemical has been applying the same philosophy to itsoperations. For example, it estimates that, by recycling atoxic solvent used to make its Verdict herbicide, it is nowsaving about $3 million a year, and halving the amount ofsolvent going out the door as waste.   At its Plaquemine facility near Baton Rouge, La., Dowspent $15 million on waste reduction projects last year thatit says have already saved $18 million in toxic wastedisposal and raw material costs. The company promotes theseprojects internally with the acronym WRAP: Waste ReductionAlways Pays.   Monsanto says that its nylon fibers plant in Pensacola,Fla., has cut its toxic air emissions by about 90% since1987, and saved a few million dollars a year in raw materialsexpense. The plant is capturing a toxic solvent in amineral-oil bath before it escapes up a smokestack. It thenrecycles the solvent back into the production process. Themineral oil isn't wasted either: It is returned to the plant,where it captures more solvent.   Monsanto says it's Sauget, Ill., plant, across theMississippi River from company headquarters outside St.Louis, cut its air and water emissions of PDCB, acarcinogenic chemical used in making mothballs, by 90%, orone million pounds. The company cooled the plant's wastevapor and captured the crystallized chemical for reuse beforeit was emitted. Loading the product directly into tank carsunder sealed conditions cut vapor emissions even further.   In some cases, the industry is constructing new plantsthat incorporate the latest waste reduction technology. A newDu Pont herbicide plant, near Dunkirk, France, is expected toproduce 90% less pollution than an existing facility. Amongother things, it will distill and recycle solvents.   In other cases, chemical companies are tying togetherproduction processes at different plant sites to cut wasteand save on raw material costs. Last fall, a Du Pont plant inMobile, Ala., that makes herbicides and insecticides begantapping into the waste stream leaving the plant, pulling outsolvents and titanium byproduct that it used to incinerate.The solvents get recycled into the plant's own operations,while the titanium is treated and shipped to a Du Pont plantin DeLisle, Miss., where it is used to make paint pigments.By integrating production this way, the Mobile plant cut itsannual toxic emissions by about 25 million pounds, nearly20%.   Besides cutting costs, these waste reduction programs helpcompanies earn public good will, as well as meet demands fromregulators and environmentalists. Arco Chemical Co. is usingseveral waste reduction processes to meet the stiffenvironmental standards that apply to the expansion of itsChannelview, Texas, propylene oxide plant just east ofHouston. The Arco Chemical plant, where 17 workers died in anexplosion last July, is in an area of back-to-back oil andchemical plants that parallels the ship channel leading tothe Gulf of Mexico.   &quot;Roll down your car window and the aroma will knock youover,&quot; is how George Smith, of the Sierra Club's Houstonchapter, describes the area.   The environmental group feared Arco Chemical's plantexpansion would fill the air with an excessive amount ofbenzene, so it threatened to put the plan through a lengthypublic hearing process. In response, Arco Chemical agreed toinstall a distillation process to recover benzene from liquidwaste at the plant. The process keeps much of the benzenefrom reaching the plant's water treatment unit, where itcould partially evaporate into the air before decomposing.   As it turns out, the added cost of the distillationprocess is largely offset by savings from the benzene that'srecycled, says John Evans, environmental superintendent forthe plant. And when all waste processes are in place,including catalytic converters that break down hydrocarbonsbefore they go up the smokestack, the expanded facility willemit substantially fewer toxic chemicals than the originalplant, even though production will have increased 200%, Mr.Evans says.   Environmentalists say the chemical industry still has along way to go before it gets unqualified praise. Butchemical companies contend that both regulators and thepublic will continue to see a substantial reduction in theiroutput of toxic wastes. Monsanto, Dow and Du Pont all saytheir emissions have declined by between 30% and 50% in thepast four years. They add that the numbers will continue todrop in the years ahead. The EPA is providing additionalincentive: Last month, the agency proposed extending thedeadline for required pollution controls at plant sites ifcompanies speed up voluntarily cuts in their emissions.   Even though some of the short-term costs for the new wastereduction programs have been high-more than $200 million ayear at the largest chemical companies -- Monsanto's Mr.Mahoney says it is money well spent. &quot;Our initiative andcommitments to environmental protection will, over the longterm, make us more efficient, more cost effective and morecompetitive,&quot; he predicts.</TEXT></DOC>