<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900625-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>900625-0116.</DOCID><HL>   Latest in Lobbying:   Business Group Uses   Professors, Not Cash,   To Influence Congress   ---   Coretech Links Universities,   Companies in Seeking Law   On the Randamp;D Tax Credit   ---   If the Eyes Glaze, Back Off   ----   By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Senate Finance Committee Chairman LloydBentsen is surrounded by special-interest pleaders pushing toextend a major corporate tax break. He is loving every minuteof it. &quot;You really know how to get to a guy,&quot; he says with asmile for the photographer they brought along. At the closeof the April meeting in his high-ceilinged office, he uttersthe words that are music to every lobbyist's ears: &quot;I'll doeverything I can.&quot;   But what makes these lobbyists so successful is that mostof them aren't really lobbyists at all. Most are soft-spokenprofessors from the University of Houston in Sen. Bentsen'shome state of Texas. They are here to support thecontroversial research-and-development tax credit, abillion-dollar-a-year break that especially benefits a fewdozen big-name corporations -- corporations that, notcoincidentally, are allied with the professors in anorganization called the Council on Research and Technology,or Coretech.</LP><TEXT>   Unholy alliances between business and nonbusinessinterests are the latest thing in Washington lobbying. &quot;Thedifficulty of passing legislation has increasedexponentially,&quot; says Coretech's top professional lobbyist,Stuart Eizenstat, who was President Carter's domestic-policyadviser. &quot;To make common cause with people who would not beyour traditional allies is important.&quot;   Money still talks in politics, but it may be about to talka little more softly. Congress is moving, perhaps as early asthis year, to reduce the import of campaign cash byoverhauling the entire campaign-finance system. With suchtraditional avenues of influence as the political-actioncommittee falling into increasing disrepute, lobbying standsat a crossroads. Corporate pleaders will have to rely less onpolitical contributions to make their case, and more onsubtler -- some might say more insidious -- means. The resultis likely to be more lobbying, not less, and of anincreasingly sophisticated kind.   Coretech represents the cutting edge of this new softsell. It doesn't even have a PAC, and doesn't contribute tocampaigns. Instead, it uses the services of a wide array ofmodern lobbying specialists, including a publicist, twoscholars, a tax lawyer, video-production experts and, ofcourse, dozens of researchers from both corporate andacademic realms. &quot;Lobbying is no longer somebody coming witha bag full of money and laying it on a member's desk orrelying on personal contacts to have that member do you afavor,&quot; Mr. Eizenstat says.   Coretech includes 72 universities and 46 companies. Forthe universities, it lobbies to fatten the budget of theNational Science Foundation to $3 billion by fiscal 1993, a$1 billion rise, and also to authorize an increase ofmillions of dollars in U.S. spending on research facilities.   But its biggest issues are clearly corporate, and the bulkof its $700,000 annual budget is bankrolled by businesses.Universities become members for $2,000 each; corporate duesrun from $5,000 to $30,000, depending on the extent ofresearch expenditures.   For the companies, those dues seem a worthwhileinvestment: Tax savings from the Randamp;D credit for some ofCoretech's biggest corporate members, such as HewlettPackardCo., Digital Equipment Corp., Merck andamp; Co. and InternationalBusiness Machines Corp., have run into the tens of millionsof dollars a year. The average Coretech member saves at leasta few million dollars from it, officials say.   But critics say the tax credit -- given to companies thatraise their Randamp;D spending by certain amounts -- is basically awaste, a reward to big businesses for doing what they wouldhave to do anyway. &quot;It's used frankly more for tax avoidancethan to spur research and development,&quot; says Rep. BrianDonnelly, Democrat of Massachusetts. &quot;In a market-driveneconomy, these people are forced to invest by their desiresto make profits.&quot;   Rep. Fortney Stark, a California Democrat who is on thetax-writing Ways and Means Committee, doesn't believe the taxcredit spurs research at all. He thinks it's notable that atbig pharmaceutical companies, for instance, budgets forresearch and for advertising have been growing at about thesame rate, even though Randamp;D carries a tax credit andadvertising doesn't.   Even advocates of the credit concede that it hasn't beenas effective as it could be. But that, they say, is becauseit has been allowed to lapse periodically since it wasestablished in 1981. &quot;I can't think of one discussion I'vehad internally or externally that said, `What about the Randamp;Dcredit?' because we don't know if it's going to be there,&quot;says Robert Gilbertson, chief executive of Data Switch Corp.&quot;It's better than nothing, but you might as well forget itbecause it's not doing any good. It's just throwing moneydown a rat hole.&quot;   What Coretech really wants is a permanent extension of thecredit. Its method was on full display during its recentLobby Day. At Coretech's request, 108 scientists from 39states had descended on Washington to meet with lawmakers andtheir aides to put the best face on the tax credit.   Those present include corporate representatives, too, butthey tend to stay in the background. The lobby group's agendais carefully structured to include an effort to increasefederal funding for college research as well as extending thecorporate tax break.   At an 8 a.m. breakfast briefing, Kenneth Kay, Coretech'sexecutive director, gives his troops their marching orders.The college members are specifically instructed to speak onbehalf of corporations, and vice versa. He also tells them toemphasize that they are scientists, not lobbyists.   &quot;But let me warn you, please, not to spend 15 minutesdoing that,&quot; he says. &quot;One of the tests is to look at theother person's eyes, and as soon as they start to glaze over,back off.&quot;   Another test is to avoid overkill -- which isn't met inthe meeting with Democratic Rep. Thomas Downey: Thedelegation is so heavy with Cornell University professorsfrom his home state of New York that the congressman ismiffed. &quot;It's not by coincidence that you decided to tap mynatural inclination toward my alma mater,&quot; he sayssarcastically. &quot;I appreciate being appreciated.&quot;   But by the end of the day, the results are in, and theyare good for Coretech. Its lobbyists have met with no fewerthan 150 lawmakers and 100 congressional staffers. And forthe most part, they report, they have gotten a sympathetichearing.   In seeking to keep the credit going, Coretech faces onebig problem. &quot;There is no constituency for research,&quot; Mr.Eizenstat says. &quot;Our job is to create one.&quot;   One way Coretech does this is by forming a network ofhome-state contacts in both the corporate and collegecommunities. Last year, Coretech spent a day training a fewdozen researchers in how to curry favor with lawmakers backhome, and how to give them credit in the local press fortheir support. It was called an &quot;adopt-a-member program.&quot;Now, at the drop of a fax or in response to a phone call,these people and others who care about research immediatelyknow best how to ask their legislator for help.   In 1987, the group hired two Brookings Institutionscholars to demonstrate that the Randamp;D tax credit increases theamount of research corporations do.   Anticipating criticism of the credit from Congress'swatchdog agency, the General Accounting Office, Coretech in1989 retained a former staffer of the respected CongressionalJoint Taxation Committee to negotiate changes in the credit.Thus, Coretech's alterations already were moving throughCongress by the time the GAO published its report.   Coretech also works behind the scenes to develop what Mr.Kay calls &quot;atmospherics&quot; designed to improve the image of thegroup and its issue. To appeal to academics, it has publisheda pamphlet predicting a shortage of engineers and scientists.To bring its message to a wider audience, it has produced avideotape extolling increased federal subsidies for Randamp;D,featuring the lawmakers who sponsor its bills. And toingratiate itself with lawmakers, it sends the photographs ittakes during Lobby Day to newspapers back home.   Coretech's assiduous work paid off handsomely lastDecember when it learned that President Bush's budgetproposal would drop a related $800 million-a-year Randamp;D taxbreak having to do with how multinationals divide theirresearch expenses between U.S. and foreign operations.   Mr. Kay immediately initiated &quot;a fire drill.&quot; UsingCoretech's network, he quickly drummed up letters andtelephone calls to a variety of Bush administration officialsto urge them to include the provision. Mr. Eizenstat and somecongressional allies also made calls, and the tax break waseventually fully restored.   To try to prevent the episode from recurring, Coretechrecently hired a Republican lobbyist, Craig Fuller, who asMr. Bush's former vice presidential chief of staff has closeties to officials in the administration. The trouble with theallocation rules &quot;clearly was a wake-up call,&quot; says Mr. Kay,a former aide to Sen. Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana.   Still, Coretech's lobbyists find that in an era ofbudgetary constraints, keeping the tax credit is a continuingstruggle. Even its friends offer words of caution. &quot;It's thisoverall deficit,&quot; Democratic Rep. Michael Andrews of Texastells a delegation on Lobby Day. &quot;All too often these issuesare driven by revenue; the merits of the issue aresecondary.&quot;   Last year, the House and the Senate Finance Committee bothvoted to make the Randamp;D credit permanent. But only a week afterthe finance committee vote, the Senate stripped everyrevenue-losing provision from its tax bill, including Randamp;D.Under pressure to reduce the budget deficit, Congressultimately decided to extend the credit for only theequivalent of nine months. Mr. Eizenstat refers to theepisode as creating &quot;the shortest permanent tax credit inhistory.&quot;   This year Coretech is trying again for a permanentextension. President Bush, Sen. Bentsen and the House's toptax-writer, Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski ofIllinois, have all come out in favor of it. But while it hasa decent chance, it is far from a done deal. For one thing,Mr. Rostenkowski's support is still shaky; he has had doubtsabout the credit's usefulness in the past, and this year isfocusing his efforts on deficit-reduction, demanding that anytax cuts be fully paid for.   Coretech goes out of its way to soften up the chairman.Lobby Day participants stay in town an extra night to meetwith the Chicagoan. At the session, Melvin L. Loeb, vicepresident for research and development of Chicago-basedWesley Jessen Corp., a unit of Schering-Plough Corp., thankshim profusely for his support, calls him a &quot;champion&quot; of thecause and hands him an award for his efforts to date.   Rep. Rostenkowski refuses to give a firm commitment. But,he allows, &quot;I think I'm being boxed in.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>