<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910823-0060</DOCNO><DOCID>910823-0060.</DOCID><HL>   People's Republic:   As Joyous Crowds Hail   End of Soviet Coup,   Gorbachev Is Left Out   ---   In Backing Communist Party,   President Seems to Miss   Shift in Public Sentiment   ---   The Demise of a KGB Statue   ----   By Peter Gumbel and Laurie Hays   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- The revolution that saved Soviet PresidentMikhail Gorbachev is now leaving him behind.   One day after the collapse of a coup that briefly toppledMr. Gorbachev's government, tens of thousands of joyousRussians took to the streets of Moscow to push for a radicaltransformation of Soviet society. Amid cheers, waving flagsand fireworks, huge crowds jammed Red Square. They celebratedthe popular uprising that stopped the coup and demanded thefinal breakup of the Communist Party, which is believed tohave backed the plotters. Freely expressing their derision,people painted a swastika on the side of the fortress-likeKGB building and used cranes to yank a statue of the founderof the secret police off its pedestal. For a time last nightthe statue hung suspended in the air, ropes tied around itsneck.</LP><TEXT>   Boris Yeltsin, who led the resistance, didn't miss a beatof the public heart: The president of the Russian republicstood in front of a boisterous crowd and pledged to rid thegovernment, media and army of Communist influence.   But where was Mikhail Gorbachev? He missed the big rally,and he may be missing the big shift in public sentiment, too.   Rather than use the defeat of the hardliners to promisebolder reforms, Mr. Gorbachev, now back in Moscow from histhree-day house arrest in the Crimea, offered anextraordinary defense of the Communist Party at a televisednews conference, his first public appearance since his returnearly Thursday.   &quot;I'm convinced socialism is correct,&quot; Mr. Gorbachev said,insisting that he won't reject the party by stepping downfrom his post as its general secretary. Some of his erstwhileclose aides, including Alexander Yakovlev, a longtimeGorbachev confidant and the godfather of glasnost, have quitthe party in disgust recently, calling it &quot;unreformable.&quot; ButMr. Gorbachev described such decisions as &quot;a bit hasty&quot; andsaid he would continue to work for the party's renewal. Themovement toward greater democracy and liberty, he added, &quot;isthe same as the movement toward socialism.&quot;   The Soviet president's actions also suggested a differencewith Mr. Yeltsin, at least in nuance, over how vigorously topurge remaining hard-liners in the Soviet administration. Hefired the heads of the defense ministry, the interiorministry and the KGB, all of whom took part in the coupattempt. But he replaced them with their close colleagues,rather than popular heroes who had opposed this week'stakeover. And although he talked about the need to removemore officials directly involved in the coup, he warnedagainst &quot;a witch-hunt.&quot;   By contrast, Mr. Yeltsin prefers a good old Russia-stylepurge: He wants to call to account all those who not onlysupported the eight-man &quot;emergency committee&quot; that seizedpower, but also those who executed its orders. Mr. Yeltsinhas already sacked the heads of several regional and citygovernments in Russia because they backed the regime. And heis deeply suspicious of senior government officials who areonly speaking out against the Putsch now that it is over.   The government should act decisively to ensure that thisweek's events &quot;never happen again,&quot; Mr. Yeltsin told a hugecelebration rally outside the Russian Parliament, the placethat became the focal point of resistance.   The gap between the hopes of the Russians who reversed thecoup and Mr. Gorbachev, who was toppled by it, could causegrowing political tension in the nation and hasten Mr.Gorbachev's own loss of influence. Indeed, the coup may havepermanently undermined Mr. Gorbachev, not least because hehimself had elevated its leaders to his government. Manypeople want him to step down, and were enraged by his failureto turn up at Thursday's celebration rally.   &quot;Gorbachev hasn't understood a thing,&quot; complained LeonidGurevich, who heads the Russian Parliament's foreign-tradecommittee. &quot;The Putsch showed the true face of the{Communist} structure that he leads. But he can't change hissocialist choice. That is the most dangerous thing.&quot; SomeBush administration officials, too, were disappointed withMr. Gorbachev's first day back on the job, particularly hisdecision to name Gen. Mikhail Moiseyev, who wasn'toutspokenly against the coup, as the country's new defenseminister. Still, even those Soviet officials who see Mr.Gorbachev as on the way out want him to stay on as Sovietpresident for a while to avoid creating a power vacuum in theKremlin at an already dangerous time.   Mr. Gorbachev's future role may become clearer after ameeting today with Mr. Yeltsin and the leaders of eight otherSoviet republics. The ten men are expected to discuss how tocontinue decentralizing power in the Soviet Union, a processthat's been underway for some time.   Six of the eight coup leaders have now been arrested andare expected to stand trial soon. One is still free, andformer Interior Minister Boris Pugo has committed suicide.Russian officials said he shot himself in the mouth just ashe was about to be arrested.   In other developments during the day, President Bushlifted the freeze on aid to the Soviet Union -- put in placeat the outset of this week's unrest -- and said the failureof the coup may speed Soviet consideration of theindependence of the Baltic states. The three states,Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, yesterday formally asked theState Department to recognize their independence. Latvia alsosaid it intends to arrest the republic's Communist Partyleader, who supported the coup.   Mr. Gorbachev seemed stunned to find that people heconsidered his allies had led the coup, especially DefenseMinister Dmitri Yazov and Vladimir Kryuchkov, the KGB chief.&quot;I simply didn't believe Yazov was part of the group,&quot; hesaid. As for Mr. Kryuchkov, he praised his &quot;level of culturalerudition.&quot;   The Soviet Parliament's presidium agreed to lift theimmunity of several deputies believed to have been involvedin the coup, including a leading member of the CommunistParty, Oleg Shenin; General Valentin Varennikov, thecommander of Soviet land forces; and Valery Boldin, who isMr. Gorbachev's chief of staff.   But its list notably omitted one figure who isincreasingly thought to have played a central role in thePutsch: Anatoly Lukyanov, the chairman of the Soviet nationallegislature and a friend of Mr. Gorbachev since the days whenthey attended Moscow University together in the 1950s.   For months now, rumors have been circulating in Moscowthat the gruff-voiced Mr. Lukyanov was conspiring against theSoviet president. But it was only on the first morning of thecoup that a piece of evidence emerged. Moments after theseizure of power was announced by Tass, the news agency ranthe text of a statement by Mr. Lukyanov sharply criticizing anew federal treaty that Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Yeltsin and theleaders of two other republics were planning to sign thefollowing day. Just days before, Mr. Lukyanov had in factpublicly endorsed the treaty, which will transfer manyeconomic and political powers from the Kremlin to individualSoviet republics.   The Tass report was the only piece of evidence directlyimplicating Mr. Lukyanov, who wasn't a member of the eightmanemergency committee. But Ivan Silayev, the Russian premier,described Mr. Lukyanov as &quot;the chief ideologist of thejunta.&quot; Other Russian officials said they think Mr. Lukyanovmay have been trying to maneuver himself into the Sovietpresident's job.   Mr. Gorbachev was very cautious about his old friend,revealing that he had held a conversation with Mr. Lukyanov,in which the latter had tried to justify his behavior. TheSoviet president said he had &quot;taken note&quot; of the explanation.Mr. Lukyanov's fate may be decided at a session of the SovietParliament that has been called for next Monday.   While attention started to focus on whom to blame for thecoup, and how to punish them, Muscovites threw a giant partyto celebrate the triumph of their own brand of people'spower. An estimated 100,000 people clambered over makeshiftbarricades outside the Russian Parliament at noon to greetMr. Yeltsin with jubilation. &quot;Yeltsin, Yeltsin,&quot; theyshouted, as the silver-haired Siberian walked out onto abalcony to address them.   His message didn't disappoint. After praising their roleas the people who had &quot;saved democracy, Russia and the wholeworld,&quot; he launched into his savage attack on the CommunistParty and promised sweeping measures to eliminate its power.The Russian branch of the Communist Party, the mostreactionary wing, would lose its registration as an officialorganization, he declared. And he announced that he hadordered Communist Party cells in the army to be disbanded.The moves came just three weeks after he had issued similarinstructions to remove Communist cells from all state-runfactories and organizations on Russian territory.   &quot;Party leaders in the armed forces directly supported thecoup d'etat and took part in it,&quot; his latest decree read.&quot;Party organs promoted the involvement of the military in thewar against its own people.&quot;   The decree was underscored in the Central Asian republicof Kazakhstan, where president Nursultan Nazarbayev announcedthat he was resigning from the politburo and centralcommittee of the Soviet Communist Party to protest itscomplicity in the coup.   Mr. Yeltsin also told the rally that he had re-examinedthe new federal treaty he had been scheduled to sign anddiscovered that it contained &quot;some weak points.&quot; He plans tobring up his new objections at his meeting with Mr. Gorbachevand the other republican leaders today.   As the rally ended outside the parliament, Mr. Yeltsin andother officials led the march onto Red Square, the very heartof the Soviet capital. Hundreds of demonstrators broke awayfrom the main group and held a protest rally outside theheadquarters of the Communist Party's Central Committee.   Throughout the day, people clustered around some of theunsung heroes of the week. Mikhail Yenashev, 31, an unshavennavy captain wearing civilian clothes, was smothered by acrowd trying to get his autograph. He had refused to go alongwith the coup, and is one of several military officers nowactively campaigning for the party's removal from the armedforces.   Mr. Yenashev is critical of the party indoctrinationprocess and its hierarchy, which prevents non-party membersfrom receiving promotions. He also believes that the militaryis too large and that many soldiers have nothing to do butdig holes and collect garbage.   &quot;Of course, there will be resistance, but it won't bemuch,&quot; he says. &quot;Those with the party are demoralized andthey want to save their jobs.&quot;   Momentum is now clearly on his side, and dozens of armyand KGB officers have signed a petition against the Party'sactivities.   &quot;Thanks to this junta, the whole idea of getting rid ofthe party in the army is 10 years closer to realization,&quot;said Yuri Basov, 44, a lieutenant-general and 25-year armyveteran. &quot;Thanks to the coup, the process of democracy hasbeen speeded up.&quot;   Some other people still lingered inside the RussianParliament building, dazed by the turn of events this week.Nikolai Proselkov, a disheveled former army colonel with ablood-stained shirt and four-day stubble, proudly clutchedthe evidence showing which side he had been on. It was anorder signed by the Moscow military commander on Monday toarrest him.   Mr. Proselkov, who had been discharged from the army ayear ago for his anti-Communist activities, was seized andbeaten up by KGB officers within hours of the start of thecoup and taken to an internment camp just outside Moscow. Hesays the camp, a deserted army barracks, was meant for 60people but held just three other dissenters. He was releasedearly Wednesday, well before the coup was officially over,and he rushed to the parliament building to help defend itagainst possible attack. Mr. Proselkov has been there eversince.   &quot;I never had any doubt that the junta wouldn't last,&quot; hesays. &quot;By the end, even the KGB guards at the camp weregetting drunk in despair.&quot;   Standing just behind him, wearing a bright tartan cap,Yevgeny Yevtushenko, one of the nation's best-known poets,was reading out his latest work, specially composed for theoccasion. &quot;Around Yeltsin there are no ghosts of past rulers,but real Russians,&quot; Mr. Yevtushenko intoned melodramatically.&quot;Never again will Russia be on its knees,&quot; he said. &quot;TheRussian Parliament is like a wounded marble swan swimminginto freedom.&quot;   The show of public revelry and defiance continued lateinto the evening, when the most symbolic event took place.   During the afternoon, the Moscow City Council hastilyadopted a resolution to remove the statue of FelixDzerzhinsky, the Bolshevik founder of the Cheka, a forerunnerof the feared and hated KGB.   Thousands rushed to the square on hearing the news. Somescaled the 30-foot monument and threw cables and ropes aroundits neck. Then they went on a graffiti spree, spraying &quot;TheKGB drinks and eats our death&quot; on the walls of the nearbyLubyanka building, long used as a temporary jail for thoseshipped off to Stalin's gulags. By midnight, the cranes andropes had done their work; the statue came crashing down, andwith it the emblem of an era many hope is now gone forever.   Watching the dismantling with growing excitement, VladimirRasskasov, a 45-year-old Russian deputy from Archangel,reflected on its symbolism. &quot;People,&quot; he said, &quot;have a thirstfor compensation for all the years of suffering andhumiliation.&quot;   ---   Neela Banerjee in Moscow contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>