<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910327-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>910327-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Saving the Banks:   Banking and Commerce Belong Together   ----   By Peter J. Wallison</HL><DATE>03/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   The most controversial part of the Treasury's bankingreform proposal -- permitting commercial corporations to ownbanks -- should not be controversial at all. This permissionwould simply recognize reality. And it offers the onlysensible long-term solution to the current problems in thebanking industry.   Opponents of Treasury's plan claim that it would eliminatethe so-called separation between banking and commerce -- aprinciple they treat with a reverence normally reserved forpronouncements in the Federalist Papers. In reality, however,the notion that there should be some kind of separationbetween banking and commerce was first articulated by theFederal Reserve Board in 1938, and has never been adopted asa policy by Congress.</LP><TEXT>   A reading of the legislative history of the Bank HoldingCompany Act -- a law frequently cited as the embodiment ofthe concept -- shows that Congress was concerned about theconcentration of financial resources, not the separation ofbanking and commerce, when it enacted and amended the law.The Treasury's willingness to come to terms with this absurdsacred cow is one of the most commendable elements of itsreform program.   For those who do not have the misfortune to follow thearcana of banking policy in this country, a few distinctionsmay be necessary at this point. It has indeed been alongstanding policy in most countries to limit the range ofactivities in which banks themselves may engage. Although theGlass-Steagall Act in the U.S., which generally forbids banksfrom engaging in securities activities, represents the mostrestrictive of such policies, it seems to be generallyaccepted among bank regulators in Europe, Japan and the U.S.that banks should not control nonfinancial businesses.   This is a very different principle from the Treasury'sproposal, which would permit commercial corporations tocontrol banks. When a bank owns a commercial firm, it is ineffect investing its depositors' funds in a subsidiary ratherthan using those funds for its function as a financialintermediary. On the other hand, when a commercial firm ownsa bank, it is simply a shareholder, and does not impair orreduce the bank's intermediary functions. In recognition ofthis distinction, most of the major developed countriesimpose no restrictions on investments in banks by nonbankingcorporations, and indeed the acquisition of banks byinsurance companies is developing into a trend in Europe.   It is of course possible that a commercial company thatowns a bank might try to exploit for its own purposes asubsidiary bank's access to cash or to the interbank paymentssystem -- but this economically irrational behavior caneasily be prevented by regulation, and is in fact effectivelyprohibited by current law.   So the separation of banking and commerce is not the hoaryprinciple its proponents would have us believe, and to theextent it has found expression at all in traditional bankregulation concepts it has not been applied to the ownershipof banks by commercial corporations, but only to the reverse,the ownership by banks of nonfinancial enterprises.   But even assuming that at some time in the recent pastthere was a national policy of separating banking andcommerce, it has clearly been abandoned without anyone havingnoticed or cared. Banking consists, generally, of twodistinct functions: taking deposits and making commercialloans. If we look at these functions separately, we can seethat neither of them has ever been considered out-of-boundsfor corporations engaged in commerce. General ElectricCommercial Credit, which performs all the commercial lendingfunctions of a bank, is of course a subsidiary of anindustrial company and yet is one of the most significantcommercial lenders in the U.S.   Every charge that critics level against permittingcommercial corporations to own banks -- preferentialallocation of credit, for example -- is equally applicable toGeneral Electric's ownership of GECC, and to the many othersimilar examples of commercial corporations owning commerciallenders.   Since no one seriously advances the idea that GECC shouldbe separated from GE, the source of any support for theseparation of banking and commerce must be sought in the factthat banks are deposit-taking entities -- or morespecifically that they are deposit-takers insured by thefederal government.   It is not immediately obvious why a commercial firm shouldnot be able to own a company that is an insureddeposit-taking entity. Clearly, the shareholders of banks andSandamp;Ls -- other insured deposit-takers -- are ordinary folksinvesting for profit. There can be no claim that thedeposit-taking franchise or the availability of federaldeposit insurance is some kind of subsidy to which only theparticularly worthy or public-spirited may aspire.   The reason, if there is any, must apparently be found insome supposed inconsistency between insured deposit-takingand commercial activities. But if this was once the basis fora policy that would separate banking and commerce, it nolonger has any validity. For many years, commercialcorporations have been able to acquire and own Sandamp;Ls -- whichare insured deposit-taking institutions -- and a large numberof commercial corporations, including Ford Motor Company,currently own these thrift institutions. Incidentally, it isworth noting that none of the Sandamp;Ls owned by commercialcorporations has failed in what is known as the Sandamp;L crisis;these institutions have where necessary had access to thecapital resources of their parent companies.   The Treasury Department's proposal simply recognizesreality: In the U.S. today, there is no such thing as apolicy of separating banking and commerce. But its real valueis not simply its clear-eyed perception of the real world.There are good reasons for permitting banks and other insureddeposit-takers to be owned by commercial corporations. TheTreasury's discussion of its plan suggests that one of thesereasons is the fresh capital that would be brought to thecapital-starved business of banking. While this is certainlya worthwhile objective, it is doubtful that many commercialcorporations would enter banking as it exists today, sinceovercapacity and high deposit insurance costs have made itonly marginally profitable even for the best performers.   What the Treasury plan really contributes is not a way forcommercial corporations to get into banking, but an orderlyway for banking organizations to get out. This is becauseTreasury is proposing a two-way street -- just as commercialcorporations can acquire banks, any company that already ownsa bank may establish or acquire an enterprise engaged in somearea of nonfinancial commerce. The consequences of thispolicy, if ultimately adopted by Congress, will befar-reaching; it is not too much to say that it will save thetaxpayers billions that would otherwise have to be spentbailing out banks.   To understand why this is true, one has to step back andlook at the recent history and future prospects of thebanking industry. Because of technological changes --primarily the ability of data processing equipment andcommunications facilities to bring up-to-date and accurateinformation on prospective borrowers to a world-wide capitalmarket -- the traditional intermediary role of banks isdeclining.   The value added by banks -- their superior knowledge ofthe financial condition of borrowers -- is gradually beingeroded. Bank managements, unable because of regulation toexpand their activities into new fields, are engaged in anincreasingly difficult struggle to hold on to a piece of anineluctably shrinking pie. This is a struggle many of themare bound to lose, and since the taxpayers are in effecttheir guarantors it is the taxpayers who will ultimately haveto pay the costs of a sea-change in the economic value of thebanking function.   In other areas of the economy, where the heavy hand ofgovernment regulation is not so decisive, a decline in themarket's demand for a company's product or service stimulatesone of two management responses: The company elects to fightfor its share of a declining market, reckoning that it willbe a survivor, or it changes its focus and product line toone that more closely conforms to current or anticipatedmarket needs. Many of the most successful companies intoday's economy evolved from wholly different antecedents astheir traditional markets moved away from them.   Under current law, however, the managements of bankingorganizations have only the first choice -- to fight for ashare of a declining market. The second choice, moving intomore profitable areas of activity, is foreclosed.   It is these restrictions that Treasury's plan wouldeliminate. By permitting the managements of bank holdingcompanies -- not banks themselves -- to establish or acquirenonbanking enterprises of any kind, Treasury would open achannel through which many other U.S. industries have passedto survive and even prosper in the face of changing marketneeds. The capital now frozen into the declining bankingindustry would be freed for deployment in other moreprofitable pursuits. The pressure on the capital that remainsin banking would be reduced, and so would the likelihood thatU.S. taxpayers will ultimately have to pay the real costs ofthe current banking laws -- which consign all bankingorganizations to the economic equivalent of a death march.   ---   Mr. Wallison, White House and Treasury counsel during theReagan administration, is an attorney in Washington.</TEXT></DOC>