<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900626-0025</DOCNO><DOCID>900626-0025.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>06/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE SUPREME COURT RULED on notification for abortion andthe right to die.   The justices, providing legislators another opening tocurtail abortion rights, ruled that states can require mostminors to notify at least one parent before obtaining anabortion. However, the high court said mandating notificationof both parents may interfere with the constitutional rightto abortion. Separately, the court ruled 5-4 that states mayrequire clear proof that a patient in a vegetative statewishes to die before allowing food and water tubes to bedisconnected.</LP><TEXT>   By emphasizing the need for clear evidence of a patient'swishes, the ruling is likely to encourage greater use ofso-called living wills by individuals.   ---   MANDELA URGED Bush to support efforts to end apartheid inSouth Africa.   The black nationalist leader, who met for three hours withthe president at the White House, defended the use ofviolence to free Pretoria from white-minority rule, but saidforce wouldn't be used as long as the South Africangovernment negotiates in good faith with the black majority.Bush assured Mandela the U.S. wasn't about to lift sanctionsagainst South Africa but said all sides in the anti-apartheidstruggle should renounce violence and repression.   Mandela asked the U.S. to provide financial support to theAfrican National Congress, but the administration later saidit had rejected the request.   ---   CHINA ALLOWED dissident Fang to leave, ending hisU.S.-backed refuge.   Chinese officials permitted Fang Lizhi and his wife, LiShuxian, to leave Beijing for Britain on a U.S. militaryplane. Fang, an astrophysicist and human-rights advocate, andhis wife took sanctuary in the U.S. Embassy after last June'scrackdown on a prodemocracy movement. China's official newsagency said the pair were given &quot;lenient treatment&quot; so thatthey could receive medical care abroad. Fang is said to havea heart ailment.   The U.S. declared, &quot;This humanitarian action is afarsighted, significant step that will improve the atmospherefor progress in our bilateral relations.&quot;   ---   Fresh earthquakes rattled northwest Iran as aid poured infrom dozens of countries. Nearly 400 aftershocks, someregistering as strong as 5.5 on the Richter scale, have beenreported since last Thursday's huge temblor. Officials saythey expect the death toll to surpass 50,000, and anestimated half million people have been made homeless.   ---   Shamir denied Israel bowed to pressure from Moscow andWashington when it promised Sunday not to settle SovietJewish immigrants in occupied territories. The Israeli primeminister said he wrote a letter two weeks ago reassuringSoviet President Gorbachev that Israel didn't have a policyof directing Soviet Jews to the occupied lands.   ---   Yeltsin said Russia would sharply restrict its payments tothe central Soviet government as the republic pushes forgreater independence. In a television interview, the RussianFederation president, a rival to Soviet President Gorbachev,also said Russia would set up its own central bank.   ---   An EPA report proposed that exhaled smoke be declared aknown human carcinogen. In addition, the federal agencyissued a draft guide to workplace smoking policies thatrecommends that passive smoking be eliminated whereverpossible and measures the effectiveness of various methods ofreducing worker exposure to smoking.   ---   A bomb exploded in an exclusive club in London frequentedby members of Britain's Conservative Party, and authoritiesindicated they suspected involvement by the Irish RepublicanArmy. Scotland Yard said nine people were injured in theCarlton Club explosion. Prime Minister Thatcher, an honorarymember of the club, was in Dublin.   ---   EC leaders agreed on a timetable for writing separatetreaties on political union and economic and monetaryintegration. Opening a two-day summit in Dublin, the 12European Community leaders set the opening of the politicalunion conference for Dec. 14 in Rome, followed the next dayby the opening of the economic union conference.   ---   Liberian insurgents shunned peace talks with Doe'sgovernment, vowing to take the capital by force. A rebelspokesman said they would consider resuming negotiations inSierra Leone only if the president agreed to leave Liberia.Guerrillas have fought to within 20 miles of Monrovia sinceinvading from the Ivory Coast six months ago.   ---   Police fired rifles at hundreds of stone-throwinguniversity students in Zambia's capital during violentprotests over a doubling of the price of cornmeal. Casualtyfigures weren't immediately available. Paramilitary forcesand police officers occupied central Lusaka in an attempt tocurb looting and to seal off main routes to the city.   ---   Slovenia said it would begin working on a new constitutionthat would give it independence, a move bringing the Yugoslavrepublic closer to secession, the Tanjug news agencyreported. Slovenia has advocated turning the nation's sixrepublics into a loose confederation with little centralcontrol.</TEXT></DOC>