<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900406-0150</DOCNO><DOCID>900406-0150.</DOCID><HL>   Democracy's Tide Washes the Himalayas   ----   By Jan Sharma</HL><DATE>04/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   KATHMANDU, Nepal -- From Berlin to Managua, the past yearhas seen people all over the world turn out despoticgovernments in favor of democracy and human rights. Nowisolated Nepal is trying to join the club. For the past sixweeks, Nepali citizens have been rallying, mostly peacefully,to demand a greater say in the running of their country.   In response, the government has ordered all schools andcampuses closed, arrested hundreds of people and shut downseven newspapers. Armed policemen patrol the streets in thisonce polite and peaceful city; four people were reportedkilled in the suburb of Patan last weekend when police openedfire on a demonstration. The situation has reached a pointthat cosmetic measures like the cabinet reshuffle announcedlast weekend will no longer do. The government must come toterms with the opposition or lose its legitimacy.</LP><TEXT>   The demonstrations cap a difficult year for Nepal. InMarch 1989, India refused to renew trade and transit treatieswith Nepal, closing down all but two of the 15 trade routesalong the 1,100-mile border. The combination of economictension and the refusal to relax the ban on political partiessparked a resurgence of political activism. The sevenbitterly divided communist groups formed the United LeftFront in January; then the democratic Nepali Congress Partydecided to launch a protest movement Feb. 18, the anniversaryof the restoration of the Hindu monarchy in 1950. The twogroups joined together in the Movement for Restoration ofDemocracy and pledged to fight for Western-style liberalpolitical institutions.   On the announced day, thousands of people converged onKathmandu's main street and in a dozen other towns andvillages. Their demands: dismissal of the government; alifting of the ban on political parties; and parliamentaryelections.   At the heart of the dispute is the Panchayat method ofgovernment, which rules through a series of indirectlyelected councils, culiminating in a National Assembly, butwith the king as the source of all authority. Panyachatleaders enjoy a life even Europeans would envy while theaverage Nepali earns only $150 a year -- and inflation ishigh. Nepalis can be jailed for up to 18 months withoutcharge. Religious freedom is limited.   Since the protests began, police have killed, by their owncount, 15 people, and released prisoners say they have beentortured and beaten. The use of force has rallied most ofNepal's intelligentsia behind the anti-government movement.Doctors and health workers staged a general strike Sunday toprotest the imprisonment of medical workers while 250 lawyersmarched on the prime minister's office to demand the releaseof 64 jailed colleagues. Government workers went on strikefor two hours yesterday.   There are signs that the movement may be gaining supportamong urban workers. Industrial laborers in Hetauda staged aone-day strike in support of the movement on March 22. Thefollowing day, hawkers refused to sell state publications andset fire to government newspapers. Housewives in Kathmandurattled steel pans at the university last Friday to maketheir displeasure heard. But Harvard- and Eton-educated KingBirendra has refused to budge on the issue of Panchayat rule.   In Kathmandu, life is normal enough betweendemonstrations, but Patan is as tense as a war zone. OnTuesday, condolence meetings were held in memory of thepeople killed Sunday, and on Monday, the Constitution ofNepal is to be burnt publicly.   The government is getting nervous at what it calls the&quot;anti-national, anti-social, subversive and terroristicelements out to disrupt peace and stability with foreignbacking.&quot; Official sources privately admit that they havegiven Panchayat workers foreign aid money to stage counterrallies. Meanwhile, the Swiss and West German governmentshave officially notified Nepal that they will stop aid unlessthe human-rights situation improves.   Even some of King Birendra's supporters oppose theextended crackdown and have urged negotiation. A statementsigned Feb. 22 by 40 members of the 145-member nationalassembly, including a former prime minister, six formerministers and two nominees of King Birendra, criticized theuse of force and called for a political dialogue. They blamedthe &quot;desperation of reactionaries&quot; in the government for theunrest.   Former Attorney General Sambhu Prasad Gyawali, who servedunder the Panchayat for 11 years, has called on King Birendrato recognize the major political parties to save Nepal &quot;fromthe whirlwind of a devastating civil strife.&quot; Last weekend,Foreign Minister Shailendra Kumar Upadhyaya, who urged thegovernment to negotiate, resigned in protest against thecrackdown. Prime Minister Marich Man Singh Shrestha submittedhis resignation last night, the Associated Press reports. ThePanchayat policy committee is scheduled to meet on April 18to discuss possible reforms, but it is unlikely to make thedramatic concessions needed to curb the country'srestiveness.   For its part, the Congress Party could ease fears aboutits aims by repudiating its alliance with the United LeftFront, which is led by Sahana Pradhan, the widow of a Maoistleader, Puspa Lal. The ULF is violent and unpredictable.Congress can hardly believe in the ULF's sudden conversion todemocracy, and the front's violent tactics give thegovernment a pretext to crack down on even peaceful protests.   The relationship between Nepalis and their king isimportant. He is the symbol of national unity, the source ofall government policies, the defender of tradition and aHindu saint. That does not mean, however, that therelationship cannot change. All around the world, from Japanto Sweden, monarchy coexists with multi-party democracy.Since 1950, the Nepal monarchy has based its legitimacy onthe consent of the people. Now is the time for King Birendrato accept that his people want reform. The alternative ismore bloodshed, which can only weaken the ties that bindtogether king and people.   ---   Mr. Sharma is chief reporter for Rashtriya SamacharSamiti, a government news agency based in Kathmandu.</TEXT></DOC>