<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900406-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>900406-0049.</DOCID><HL>   Patent Injustice?   How a Detroit Inventor   Battled Years to Prove   Ford Stole His Ideas   ---   Robert Kearns Hasn't Gained   From Windshield Wiper   He Showed Ford -- So Far   ---   An Option on Cars Globally   ----   By Joseph B. White   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   F C GM G.DAI G.POR TOYOY</CO><IN>AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)</IN><LP>   DETROIT -- It was a poignant scene: Robert W. Kearns, anunknown and nearly broken man, had stepped before the judgeto explain, in a figurative way, why he was suing the world'sbiggest car companies.   &quot;I'm wearing a little badge here, and that badge says I aman inventor,&quot; he said at the court hearing in 1980. &quot;Maybeyou can't see the badge. I don't think anybody is going to beable to see the badge until my trial is finished.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   What's more, Mr. Kearns insisted, he is an inventor ofsubstance, not some eccentric tinkerer with a wild storyabout a big company stealing his creation and, with it,millions of dollars in royalties. It was he who designed thefirst practical, electronic intermittent windshield wiper --the popular stop-and-go system now found on millions of cars.And it was Ford Motor Co. and others, he claimed, who piratedthe invention.   Mr. Kearns's lawsuits would drag on for years, and showhow consuming this sort of pursuit of vindication can be. Inthe course of battle, he suffered an emotional breakdown. Hewas dropped by three law firms. He sparred with judges. Andhe relied heavily on his son Dennis, who, on one occasion,proposed intimidating Ford lawyers with a .45-caliber pistol,and, on another, had an affair with a paralegal in anopposition camp -- and came away with a fistful ofincriminating documents. &quot;I don't think there's been a patentcase like this one before,&quot; grumbles the judge presiding overthe suits.   Intent in his cause, Mr. Kearns, now 62 years old, wagedan extraordinary and solitary crusade. Then, on Jan. 29, ajury returned an equally extraordinary decision.   Given to rumpled clothing, his hair white and wispy, Mr.Kearns looks the part of the eccentric inventor. He oncedreamed of getting rich in Detroit supplying his wiper to theworld's auto makers, but he ended up with a much more obscurecareer: studying the skid resistance of highway surfaces forthe U.S. government. Even after abandoning Detroit forMaryland, he still considered himself the righteous David ina world of Goliaths. So he sued them all: Ford, GeneralMotors Corp., Chrysler Corp., Daimler-Benz AG, Porsche AG,Toyota Motor Corp. and 18 other auto makers.   The federal district judge overseeing the Ford case, AvernCohn, has imposed a gag order on participants in the trial,so Mr. Kearns, his family, his lawyers and Ford have refusedcomment for this article. Nonetheless, the story of RobertKearns and his invention is amply told in stacks ofdepositions and motions that fill more than a half-dozenboxes in Detroit's federal courthouse.   It begins in 1962, when Robert Kearns was 35 years old andsimultaneously a professor at Wayne State University inDetroit and a Ph.D. candidate in engineering at Case WesternReserve University in Cleveland. At the time, Mr. Kearns wastrying to devise a project for his doctoral dissertation. &quot;Ihad chosen a rather elaborate topic that the professorthought would cost me $30,000,&quot; he said in his courttestimony. &quot;I began to think of something that might be oflower cost.&quot;   What followed was the kind of inspiration that separatesinventors from ordinary people. Mr. Kearns had been virtuallyblind in his left eye since a flying champagne cork hit himin the face on his wedding night. That injury, he says, madehim think about how his eyes worked, and specifically, howhis eyes were periodically cleaned when he blinked. Thisobservation sparked an idea: Why not develop windshieldwipers that would &quot;blink&quot; too. That way, during light rain,the wipers would just occasionally clear the windshield.   Mr. Kearns began to tinker. He was familiar withtransistors, thanks to a four-year stint in the militaryresearch labs of Bendix Corp. He had a test car: The Kearnsfamily 1962 Ford Galaxy convertible. And he had access to acheap supply of windshield wiper motors, courtesy of hisbrother, Martin, who had a low-level job in Ford's researchlabs.   By October 1963, Robert Kearns had produced a workingprototype of his &quot;blinking&quot; wiper. The key elements were acollection of circuits hidden inside a red metal box mountedon his 1962 Ford. The device was far from perfect. When itgot hot, for instance, the wipers would suddenly switch on bythemselves -- rain or no rain. Nonetheless, on Oct. 22, 1963,Mr. Kearns drove out to meet with two Ford engineers to seeif they were interested.   They were. And that began a six-year waltz between Mr.Kearns and Ford. Ford engineers had been trying to develop anintermittent wiper of their own. But their devices relied ona variety of mechanical systems -- plungers, springs anddiaphragms. Mr. Kearns's system was more advanced andreliable because it was controlled electronically.   Mr. Kearns quickly fixed the problem that caused hiswipers to jump into action in hot weather. During the nextyear, he tested the system's durability by running the wipersfor six months in a fish tank filled with oil and sawdust.Then he took out the first of several patents.   But his dreams of ascending into the affluent ranks ofDetroit's auto-parts suppliers soon came a cropper. Between1966 and 1969, Mr. Kearns worked with Ford, passing alongdetails about his wiper in return for encouraging words, butlittle else. Ford officials even gave him an award: Aspecially mounted, two-speed wiper motor. But they didn'tgive him a contract.   Instead, according to Ford documents and testimony at thetrial, Ford engineers were busy dissecting the Kearns wiper.Then, in 1969, the auto maker introduced an electronicallycontrolled, intermittent wiper system that incorporated manyof Mr. Kearns's ideas -- something a Ford officialacknowledged under cross examination during the trial.   Mr. Kearns was stunned. Ford, however, insisted the systemwas Ford's own, and that Mr. Kearns's patents were based oncommon knowledge, and therefore not valid. For the next eightyears, Mr. Kearns and his lawyers traded letters with Fordand its lawyers. Meanwhile, Mr. Kearns began what his lawyersdescribe as a spiral into emotional collapse.   By 1971, Mr. Kearns had moved to Gaithersburg, Md., andhad gone to work for what was then the National Bureau ofStandards. From this obscure post, Mr. Kearns, aided by hisson Dennis, continued his fight with Ford. The younger Mr.Kearns, then in his 20s, was launching a career as a privateinvestigator by helping his father get dirt on auto makers.   Dennis Kearns says that, in July 1976, he bought a controlbox for a Mercedes Benz intermittent wiper system from anauto dealer and obtained the wiring diagram that went withit. Robert Kearns, worried that his invention was beingpirated by Daimler-Benz, too, began composing his own diagramof the Mercedes system to see if it matched his patents. Inthe midst of this effort, he suffered his emotional collapse.&quot;He never finished the drawing,&quot; Dennis Kearns says today.   According to court documents filed by his lawyers, Mr.Kearns had experienced an &quot;emotional breakdown . . . sosevere that it caused {him} to run away from home and wanderaimlessly through three states.&quot; He wound up in a hospital.   Since then, Mr. Kearns has often portrayed himself as aman clinging to sanity after years of battling his giantadversaries. &quot;My psychiatrist advises me there is always thepossibility that I could go over the brink,&quot; he once told thecourt. &quot;And if I go over the second time, it might bepermanent.&quot;   By January 1978, Mr. Kearns had recovered sufficiently tostart filing suits, starting with Ford. By 1985 he had suedvirtually every major auto maker, accusing them of stealinghis ideas. (He also tried manufacturing his wiper in Ireland,but never found financing for the venture.)   Not surprisingly, the federal court boggled at the sheervolume of the litigation and its complexity. Mr. Kearns'stesty relations with the three law firms that ultimatelydropped him didn't help speed things along. Firm No. 1 --Harness, Dickey andamp; Pierce of Birmingham, Mich. -- quit in1979, less than a year after filing Mr. Kearns's first suit.In a motion asking the court to let them leave the case,Harness lawyers said Mr. Kearns berated them with &quot;constantverbal reprimands.&quot; The lawyers also weren't too happy aboutDennis Kearns's packing a heater.   Harness said in its motion that Dennis Kearns drew the .45and declared he wanted to leave it &quot;exposed&quot; during a meetingwith Ford lawyers so they &quot;would be impressed with hisseriousness.&quot; Harness said it told Mr. Kearns, before Ford'slawyers arrived, &quot;to take the weapon out to his car . . . andnever bring it to our office again.&quot;   Harness's successor, Washington patent lawyer Richard L.Aitken, lasted less than two years. He got out in December1980 after complaining to the court about Mr. Kearns'sdemands. Mr. Kearns, according to his lawyers' testimony,would sometimes refuse to let his own attorneys see hisrecords, fight even routine requests by the defense forinformation, and turn down settlement offers. WhenDaimler-Benz AG and Porsche AG offered to pay $150,000 eachto settle his suits against them, Mr. Kearns said no. &quot;I wasnot interested in any money settlement,&quot; he said in a 1980hearing. &quot;What I am looking for is a purchase order&quot; -- anagreement to supply the wipers.   Mr. Aitken was unimpressed, particularly since Mr. Kearnsalready owed his firm $25,000 in fees. He also was tired ofthe hail of motions and counter-motions that delayed thecase. So he quit.   Chicago litigators Keith V. Rockey and Thomas C. Elliottof McDougall, Hersh andamp; Scott signed on next, and lasted nearlysix years. They would later label their client&quot;recalcitrant.&quot; But it was Dennis Kearns's amorous exploitsthat made them bolt for the exit.   Dennis Kearns is the oldest of six children, and, unlikehis father, is a natty dresser given to stylish suits, Frenchcuffs and a large gold ring on his right hand. His privatedetective agency, Phoenix Group International Inc., occupiesa suite of small offices in the tony Detroit suburb ofBirmingham. Two samurai swords rest on a black wood standbehind his desk.   The younger Mr. Kearns has said he is innocent of anywrongdoing in his relationship with the paralegal. In 1985,he told the court that he met the woman, Laurie J.Fitzpatrick, at a paralegal seminar in Washington, D.C. Hesays Ms. Fitzpatrick, who worked for an opposition law firm,offered him the documents, which included records of Porscheinternal meetings discussing the Kearns wiper.   Ms. Fitzpatrick, however, offered a different story. In a1985 deposition, she said Dennis Kearns met her at theseminar and asked her out for a drink. That began theireight-month relationship. One day, she said, he called her atwork to say her employers had agreed to provide him withcertain documents. He then gave her a sketchy description ofthe papers, and added: &quot;I want to see you tonight, you cangive them to me then.&quot;   &quot;Like a dummy, it didn't occur to me to check this out,&quot;she said. They met at her apartment, where she handed overcopies of the documents. Then they went to a restaurant, andMr. Kearns broke off the affair. (Ms. Fitzpatrick couldn't belocated for comment, and her former law firm has sincedisbanded.)   Lawyers for Porsche discovered the leak when the papersturned up in court filings. At the time, Judge Philip Prattwas presiding over the case and, after reviewing thecontroversy, he sided with Ms. Fitzpatrick. &quot;Her testimonywas candid, even though at some points painful,&quot; he wrote inhis opinion. He ordered the elder Mr. Kearns to pay nearly$134,000 in penalties as punishment for his son's&quot;outrageous&quot; conduct. (Dennis Kearns, who provided commentfor this article on this issue alone, says he may appeal thedecision.)   The flap, and the subsequent death of Judge Pratt, helpeddelay a trial of the lawsuits for several more years. Thecases got moving again when Judge Cohn took over in early1989 and decided to try the suit against Ford first. Finally,in January, the case went to trial.   By this point, Mr. Kearns was on his fourth set oflawyers, William Durkee and Paul M. Janicke of the Houstonfirm Arnold, White andamp; Durkee. Their refrain sounds a bitfamiliar: &quot;Sometimes, it's hard for me to get things across&quot;to Mr. Kearns, one Arnold White attorney said in court.   The trial lasted three weeks and, on Jan. 29, the sixjurors returned with their verdict. It had taken Mr. Kearnsfully 12 years of wrangling in court to get to this stage. Byhis own account, the effort had left him financially ravaged.&quot;My kids are commuting 35 miles {to college}, they're drivingon bald tires,&quot; Mr. Kearns lamented at one point. &quot;That isthe sort of price I'm paying to be here.&quot;   But the resilience ultimately won him his vindication. Thejury declared Mr. Kearns in the right, and said Ford stolehis idea for the wiper.   Ford's potential exposure is huge. Internal Ford studiesordered into evidence indicate the auto maker has sold morethan 16 million cars with intermittent wiper systems. Thesystems currently sell for about $20 each -- of which as muchas half is gross profit to Ford, according to calculations byMr. Kearns's attorneys.   Ford's best hope in avoiding a whopping judgment, assumingthere isn't an out-of-court settlement, now appears to beJudge Cohn. Already, the judge has ruled that, based onprecedent, Mr. Kearns's award can't be a share of Ford'sprofits from intermittent wiper sales. And earlier thismonth, he said, &quot;If the jury came back with a judgment of$500 million, I'd be constrained to set it aside as shockingto judicial conscience.&quot; The jury is expected to begindeliberating on an award this month, and Ford is expected toappeal.   The fact that the case dragged on for 12 years may, in theend, be to Mr. Kearns's advantage. When he filed his suitagainst Ford in 1978, the climate in the federal courts washostile to patent holders, experts say. But by the time theKearns case came to trial, this attitude had shifted: Moreinfringement cases were being decided in favor of patentholders. And, the appeals court was letting more of thosedecisions stand.   What is more, the appellate court has effectively removedmany of the limits that constrained damage awards in the1960s and 1970s. Now, &quot;the damages are out of sight,&quot; saysHarold C. Wegner, a Washington patent lawyer.   In January, for instance, a Chicago federal-court juryordered toy maker Mattel Inc. to pay Jerome H. Lemelson $24.8million, plus interest estimated at an additional $46million, for violating his patent on flexible plastic toytracks. Mattel, which is appealing the judgment, sold thetracks for its Hot Wheels toy cars.   At the very least, the Ford decision will give Mr. Kearnsbig leverage in his pending cases against other auto makers,leverage that could win him rich settlements. After all, hewas found to have valid patents, which Ford violated. Thejury agreed with Mr. Kearns's defiant declaration: His badgedoes read, Inventor.</TEXT></DOC>