<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910917-0024</DOCNO><DOCID>910917-0024.</DOCID><HL>   The `Land for Peace' Fallacy   ----   By David Bar-Illan</HL><DATE>09/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)EGYPT (EG)ISRAEL (ISR)JORDAN (JD)LEBANON (LBN)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SYRIA (SY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The current fracas over Israel's request for loanguarantees tends to obsure a basic fact about theArab-Israeli peace process: that like all democracies seekingagreements with dictatorial regimes, Israel is at adisadvantage. Neither the Palestinian leadership nor the Arabgovernments have an impatient public, a free press andopposition parties breathing down their necks, clamoring forpeace, and berating them for not moving fast enough. UnlikeIsrael, they can assume &quot;take it or leave it&quot; positions withimpunity.   Nor do dictatorships consider peace a desirable goal initself. They attend peace conferences and sign treaties onlyif they can gain something other than peace, and they have nocompunction about discarding arms agreements, non-aggressionpacts and peace treaties. Ultimately, only thedemocratization of the Arab countries, in a process similarto that which has transformed Eastern Europe and the SovietUnion, can bring true, lasting peace to the region.</LP><TEXT>   Not that peace agreements with non-democratic countriesare completely useless. True, Israel's peace with Egypt ishardly ideal. Israelis realize that only Egyptian dependenceon American financial help (now larger than aid to Israel)and the easily monitored barren desert that separates Israeland Egypt make peace, such as it is, possible. Yet they hopethat as the years pass in relative tranquillity, war willbecome unthinkable, and that the very fact that the Israeliflag is displayed in Cairo and Alexandria will endow Israel'spresence in the Middle East with an ineradicable hue ofnormalcy.   Can the same kind of peace be achieved with Israel's otherneighbors? The fortuitous geographic and topographicconditions do not exist on Israel's borders with Jordan,Syria and Lebanon. Even if Israel forfeited its historic andlegal claim to Judea and Samaria (the West Bank) and Gaza, itwould have to be bent on suicide to accept the &quot;land forpeace&quot; formula, withdraw to the 1967 lines 10 miles from thesea, let a hostile, irredentist people control the Samarianand Judean hills -- which overlook 80% of its population and60% of its industry -- and make itself invitingly vulnerableto occupation.   As the Gulf war proved once again, missiles can do damage,and an air force -- particularly if it can operate unopposed-- can wreak enormous havoc; but only occupation by groundforces can bring defeat, surrender and national demise. Ifnothing else, the events of the past year should have madeclear how irrational it is to demand an Israeli withdrawal ina hostile Middle East environment.   Had Israel adopted Washington's variously named plans ofthe past 23 years and retreated to the 1967 lines (with minormodifications), Saddam Hussein would have controlled thewhole land mass from the Iranian border to the outskirts ofTel Aviv. Absent Israel's control of the Jordan River and theSamarian-Judean Heights, nothing could have preventedpro-Saddam Jordan, and the Palestinian state that would havearisen in the evacuated areas, from joining forces with him.   Israel's control of the Golan is no less vital for itssecurity. The strategic Golan Heights, used as a launchingpad for the 1967 assault on Israel, dominate Israel's north.To demilitarize them would be useless -- they can betraversed on the ground in less than an hour. Nor can Israelrely on repeated assurances that it can safely retreat fromthe Golan because Syria's President Hafez Assad is a man ofhis word. It is not Assad's scruples that have kept Syriafrom violating the cease-fire on the the Golan but the factthat Israeli tanks are in a position there to threatenDamascus. For 18 years before 1967, the Syrians shelledIsraeli towns and villages from the Golan in daily violationof the 1949 armistice agreement.   In Lebanon, Assad broke his word to Secretary of StateGeorge Shultz to honor the Israel-Lebanon treaty of May 1983and discarded countless agreements with Lebanese andPalestinian militias. The very idea of trusting a country'sfate to one dictator's word is ludicrous. Assad's iron ruleand ruthless brutalities, which arguably surpass Saddam's,have kept Syria stable for 20 years. But even if he is notoverthrown by a fanatic, and joins the two or three Arableaders in the area who have departed this world throughnatural causes, it is reckless to assume that his successorwill honor his agreements. The ruling Baath party's articlesof faith reject Israel's right to exist just as explicitly asthe PLO charter does.   Those who realize that no Israeli government -- whetherLabor or Likud -- can agree to withdraw to the 1967 lines,and that the likelihood of any Arab state accepting less atthis point is slim, advocate Israeli talks with thePalestinians. But the current bickering over Palestinianrepresentation, now the main impediment to convening thepeace conference, should disabuse them of this notion.   There is a transparent charade at work. The U.S. pretendsnot to talk to the Palestine Liberation Organization, but itis talking almost daily to its declared Jerusalem surrogates,led by Feissal Husseini. Israel pretends not to understandthe implications of these American-Palestinian meetings andstill insists that the PLO must be excluded from the peacetalks. Yet all sides know that no matter who the Palestinianrepresentatives to the peace talks will be, neither they northeir families will stay alive unless they get PLO approval.The U.S. has openly recognized this rule of the gun as animmutable fact of Palestinian life and is acquiescing in it.The only reason the PLO is still unhappy is that it wants itsparticipation acknowledged.   But the PLO represents only some of the Palestinians. InGaza -- which contains almost half the territories' Arabs --Hamas, the Islamic fundamentalist organization, has anoverwhelming majority. And if the recent elections to theHebron Chamber of Commerce are any indication, it is morepopular than the PLO in some parts of the West Bank as well.And Hamas, like the radical factions of the PLO, considerstalks with Israel tantamount to treason. In fact, both thefundamentalists and the radicals have threatened FeissalHusseini's life.   Even if Israel reaches an agreement with the PLO-approvedelements, others -- who may constitute a majority of themilitants if not the population -- will not deem it binding.Nor will these rejectionist Arab factions lack for sponsors.Even if Syria agrees to withdraw its support from the radicalJibril-Habbash-Hawatmeh groups, Iraq and Libya will continueto sponsor them; Saudi Arabia will continue to be the mainpatron of Hamas; and non-Arab Islamic Iran will continue todeploy the Hezbollah against Israel.   Clearly the prospects for peace in this environment arefar from bright. But even the little hope for progress hasbeen dashed by the American-European insistence on the &quot;landfor peace&quot; formula. The Arabs -- and most of the world --perceive it as a code for a total reversion to Arab controlof all the lands Israel gained in 1967, including EastJerusalem. With the world's expectations thus raised,Israel's refusal to withdraw will inexorably be deemedintransigent. Syria and Jordan can then quit the talks,pointing an accusing finger at Israel. The resultantbreakdown will isolate Israel and escalate tensions.   At the beginning of his shuttle diplomacy efforts,Secretary of State James Baker seemed to understand that Arabhostility and Israel's fears had to be ameliorated beforetalks could be launched. The Gulf war, the Palestinians' andKing Hussein's support for Saddam, and the postwarrevelations of Iraqi non-conventional capabilities have onlyconfirmed the worst Israeli fears: that the &quot;peace&quot; sought bythe Arab regimes is designed to shrink Israel and deprive itof strategic advantage, in preparation for a final Arabassault on the dwarfed state.   With this in mind, Mr. Baker called forconfidence-building measures. These could have included thelifting of the Arab boycott -- particularly the secondaryboycott that has effectively deterred American, European andJapanese companies from doing business with Israel.   Israel suggested collaboration on water problems, touristprojects and disease control, and the promotion of freemovement between countries, now available to Arabs enteringIsrael but not to Israelis wishing to visit Arab countriesother than Egypt. A direct telephone connection between theSyrian and Israeli general staffs to prevent unintendedincidents was also proposed. Above all, a halt to the armsrace could have promoted confidence and trust.   But all these were rejected out of hand by the Arabcountries. And Mr. Baker, correctly assuming that it would beeasier to pressure a democratic country whose populationthirsts for peace than dictatorships that care little aboutit, abandoned the incremental track in favor of the &quot;land forpeace&quot; slogan. The same calculation has dominated White Housethinking on the loan guarantees. Arab threats to boycott theconference if the administration grants them promptedPresident Bush to ask for their suspension. The incidentmakes one wonder what kind of negotiating partners are thosewho make attendance at peace talks contingent on the housingof refugees; and what kind of impartial sponsor is he whoyields to such blackmail.   If there is hope that the current process will yield anyresults, it lies in the one Arab concession Israel hasachieved: the agreement that the conference will launchdirect, bilateral negotiations in which the sponsoring powerswill not intervene. If Syria, Jordan and the Palestinians areconvinced that no coercive pressure will be exerted on Israelby the world community, they may agree to suspend thediscussion of territory and try to dismantle the wall ofhostility piece by piece. Such talks will be arduous, longand undramatic, but they are the only way tonon-belligerence, coexistence and a semblance of peace.   ---   Mr. Bar-Illan is the editorial writer and a columnist ofthe Jerusalem Post.</TEXT></DOC>