<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900509-0102</DOCNO><DOCID>900509-0102.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Cashless Society   May Be Inching   Toward Reality   ----   By Michael Allen and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   LABOR KM J.NOM</CO><IN>CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)BANKS (BNK)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The fabled cashless society may have inched closer toreality with an agreement by MasterCard International Inc.and Visa U.S.A. Inc. to abandon their national debit-cardjoint venture.   The agreement -- part of a settlement of an antitrustlawsuit filed by the attorneys general of 14 states -- callsfor the two credit-card companies to scuttle plans for ajoint, nationwide card that would have allowed consumers toinstantaneously deduct amounts from their bank-accountbalances to purchase products. The suit alleged that thecompanies violated antitrust laws in an effort to control thedebit-card market; the companies denied it.</LP><TEXT>   Several people familiar with the industry predict that,with the lawsuit behind them, both MasterCard and Visa willmove quickly to introduce their own versions of the nationalcard. Competitive pressures, they argue, will force them toresolve major hurdles that have impeded the development ofelectronic point-of-sale payment systems, such as who willpay for them and who will convince consumers that they reallywant them.   &quot;This is the first important step in establishing a morecompetitive environment in the nation's electronic paymentsystems,&quot; said New York Attorney General Robert Abrams.   Denny D. Dumler, executive vice president of RockyMountain BankCard System Inc., a Denver credit-card issuer,agreed, noting: &quot;When you only have one choice, you can waitaround and decide later whether to do it or not.&quot;   Under the settlement, filed yesterday in federal court inNew York, MasterCard and Visa agreed to notify hundreds offinancial institutions that joined the program, calledEntree, that it will end Oct. 1. However, the program hadn'tbeen launched with retailers, so no consumers were actuallyusing the cards.   A spokesman for New York-based MasterCard declined to sayhow much money the two companies spent developing Entreesince the joint venture began in 1987, but said it was a&quot;significant amount,&quot; running into millions of dollars.   &quot;The American consumer is the real victim here. Eventhough we feel that Entree would have prevailed in thecourts, the threat of long-term litigation caused banks tolose interest in the program,&quot; said a spokesman for SanMateo, Calif.-based Visa.   Both companies said they plan to continue marketing theirseparate debit products, MasterDebit and Visa Debit Card.These have been available for several years but aren'ton-line systems. Merchants process these cards as if theywere credit cards, turn in their slips to the banks and laterreceive their payments after the banks deduct the amountsfrom consumers' bank accounts. Twenty million Visa DebitCards have been issued world-wide, including 6.8 million inthe U.S. MasterCard said it issued 1.3 million cards in theU.S., according to figures compiled at the end of 1989.   But the cards have several drawbacks. Banks that peddleoff-line cards risk overdrawn accounts, since the plasticfunctions much like a check. For that reason, they typicallygive the cards only to upscale customers. And they can't beused in grocery stores, where consumers spend much of theircash, because the stores' thin profit margins makecredit-card terminals uneconomical.   In contrast, the Entree program would have provided direct&quot;on-line&quot; access to a consumer's funds at the time of a sale.Under the plan, for example, a Floridian vacationing inCalifornia would eventually be able to use his automaticteller card to purchase groceries or gasoline.   And neither type of debit card provides a one-month graceperiod before a payment is required, as credit cards do.   Industry observers agree it will take a strong marketingpush from retailers and banks to prod the public into usingdebit cards of any sort. In many ways, proponents face aclassic chicken-or-egg problem: Merchants won't installcostly hardware if there aren't many consumers with thenecessary plastic, and banks won't push the plastic if therearen't many merchants accepting it.   As for the buying public, &quot;There isn't anywhere in thecountry where consumers are running around with neon signssaying, `I've gotta have on-line point-of-sale' debit cards,&quot;says Thomas Bennion, chairman of Florida Interchange GroupInc., Orlando, Fla., which runs the Honor ATM network inFlorida.   Just 4% of the nation's supermarkets accept debit cards,according to Progressive Grocer, an industry magazine, upslightly from 3% in 1988.   Most on-line debit-card use is confined to regionalpockets. Although the cards have been modestly successful inplaces such as California -- where Lucky Stores Inc., Dublin,Calif., among others, markets them heavily -- they areunknown in much of the country.   Both Visa and MasterCard said they haven't made any finaldecisions on creating their own &quot;on-line&quot; systems comparableto Entree.   The suit had alleged that the companies sought astranglehold on the national debit-card market -- withoutactually putting the system in operation -- in order toprotect their own well-established credit cards fromcompetition. The states contended the companies would offertheir programs to retailers only if other companies tried tobreak into the national market and threatened to cut intocredit-card purchases.   The suit also charged that to prevent the entry of anyother competitors, Visa acquired control of Plus SystemsInc., a national network of automated teller machines, andInterlink Network, the nation's largest regional debit-cardnetwork, and MasterCard acquired Cirrus System Inc., anational automated-teller network. The suit sought to compelthe divestiture of Cirrus, Plus and Interlink.   The states agreed to drop their opposition to thoseacquisitions as part of the settlement. But if either companyacquires another automated teller or debit-card network, thestates would consider filing suit to seek divestiture, saidLloyd Constantine, chief of the antitrust bureau in the NewYork attorney general's office.   As part of the settlement, the companies also agreed toprovide advance notice to the 14 states regarding any futurejoint ventures into the debit-card industry or separatedebit-card programs that would permit a bank to be a memberof both MasterCard and Visa, among other circumstances. Theserequirements are designed to give the states time todetermine whether antitrust suits should be filed.   The states have also formed a Payment Systems Task Forceto oversee compliance with the agreement. Mr. Abrams saidconcern about possible price-fixing in the credit-cardindustry had emerged during the states' investigation andthat the committee will explore why interest rates and feescharged to consumers for use of the cards are uniformly high.   The American Bankers Association said the demise of Entreewas a setback for the debit-card industry. But in a writtenstatement, Entree Management Committee Chairman DouglasFreeman said the program had helped create operationguidelines that would aid the industry.   ---   RULING COMPELLING FIRMS to give business to lawyers getsangry response.   Employer groups are lobbying to override the MissouriSupreme Court's recent decision requiring corporations tohire attorneys in administrative appeals ofunemployment-compensation cases. In its ruling, the courtsaid individuals may act as their own legal counsel in suchappeals but corporations may not.   &quot;The law allows an individual to bear the risk thatrepresentation without an attorney may entail,&quot; the courtsaid. But it added that corporations are creatures of statuteand, thus, are subject to various restrictions. &quot;One suchrestriction in Missouri is that a corporation may notrepresent itself in legal matters but must act solely throughlicensed attorneys,&quot; the court declared in an opinion byJudge William H. Billings.   The decision stems from a dispute between K mart Corp. andMarjorie Reed, who was discharged by the company and filedfor unemployment benefits with the Missouri Division ofEmployment Security. A division deputy upheld her claim,prompting an administrative appeal by the company that washandled by K mart's unemployment-compensation manager, whoisn't an attorney. The case wound up in the Missouri SupremeCourt, whose decision reversed a longstanding practice ofpermitting non-lawyers to handle administrative appeals ofsuch matters.   &quot;It is axiomatic that a corporation must act through anattorney in all legal matters,&quot; the court declared.   While some lawyers contend the court simply is trying toprotect the public, business groups, such as the MissouriMerchants and Manufacturers Association, contend the rulingcreates unneeded legal costs that will especially burdensmall businesses. As a result of the ruling, the MissouriLegislature is considering two proposals that would eliminatethe need for corporations to retain lawyers in administrativecases.   &quot;It all boils down to economics,&quot; says a spokesman forstate Sen. Jim Mathewson, who introduced one proposal.   The Missouri Bar Association opposed the legislativemoves, contending they infringe on the state Supreme Court'sright to decide what constitutes illegal law practice.However, the association appointed a committee to reviewcurrent rules on when non-lawyers can appear inadministrative proceedings.   ---   MULHEREN'S LAWYERS are denied access to Boesky's overseasbankers.   Federal Judge Miriam Cedarbaum in New York denied arequest by John Mulheren's lawyers to seek pretrial testimonyfrom bankers and others abroad who the lawyers believe hadfinancial dealings with Ivan Boesky, convicted formertakeover speculator.   Mr. Mulheren is scheduled to go on trial Monday in federalcourt in Manhattan on charges of parking stock with Mr.Boesky. Parking occurs when an investor sells securities withthe understanding that they will be repurchased, usually at aprearranged time and price. The government has alleged Mr.Mulheren used the tactic to conceal the true ownership of theparked securities. Mr. Mulheren has pleaded innocent to thecharges.   Thomas Puccio, a New York attorney for Mr. Mulheren, hascontended that as a witness against Mr. Mulheren, Mr. Boeskywill be &quot;biased in favor of the government&quot; because &quot;thegovernment allowed Mr. Boesky to hold on to many millions ofdollars&quot; after he paid a $100 million fine to settle chargesagainst him in 1987. Mr. Puccio sought to get testimony fromoverseas bankers in an attempt to ascertain the extent of Mr.Boesky's holdings abroad.   Judge Cedarbaum said she rejected the request because Mr.Puccio had presented no evidence that any financialinformation the attorney was seeking would prove bias on Mr.Boesky's part.   Mr. Boesky is expected to be the government's star witnessin the case against Mr. Mulheren. Assistant U.S. Attorney E.Scott Gilbert said that New York financier Carl Icahn mayalso be called as a witness for the government in the case.Mr. Icahn has never been a target of the investigation but hewas involved as an investor in one transaction that is asubject of this case.   Mr. Gilbert also said the government will drop one of the42 counts in the indictment. The dropped count alleges thatMr. Mulheren and his co-defendant, Leonard DeStefano,illegally used the U.S. Postal Service to mail payments byMr. Mulheren's firm to Mr. Boesky for services that werenever provided by Mr. Boesky.   ---   RANDOM DRUG-TESTING of jail guards is upheld by New York'shighest court.   In a 4-3 decision, the New York Court of Appeals ruledthat New York City corrections officers' constitutionalrights aren't violated by random urinalysis drug-testing. Inreaching its decision, the majority balanced the officers'Fourth Amendment expectation of privacy against thegovernment's need to control its prisons. The court cited adrug-abuse problem among a significant number of the officersas a compelling need for random testing.   &quot;By choosing to work in the paramilitary milieu of theCity Correction Department, guards voluntarily sacrificecertain cherished freedoms,&quot; the court held.   The dissent by Chief Judge Sol Wachtler, however, arguedthat the court had carved out a &quot;general warrant permittingthe government to intrude in the most offensive manner.&quot;   Judge Wachtler wrote: &quot;Following this precedent, it wouldbe difficult to imagine how any officer, or anyone employedin the world of law enforcement or even anyone associatedwith the criminal justice system, would be free of therequirement of random, suspicionless urine testing oncesomeone in authority found it desirable.&quot;   The 10,000-member Correction Officers BenevolentAssociation may seek review by the U.S. Supreme Court, saysIrving Anolik, the group's attorney.   ---   HARVARD LAW SCHOOL said Nomura Securities Co. of Japangranted it $3 million to fund a professorship ininternational financial systems. The professorship isintended to advance the study of banking regulations and thedevelopment of securities markets and new internationalfinancial products, Harvard Law School said. The school addedthat its dean, Robert C. Clark, is expected to name theNomura professor next fall.   ---   Wayne E. Green and Arthur S. Hayes contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>