<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910702-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>910702-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Financial Shift:   In a Major Reversal,   Bank of Japan Cuts   Its Key Interest Rate   ---   Just Why Its Governor Ended   Long Resistance To Move   Stirs Considerable Debate   ---   Bursting a `Bubble Economy'   ----   By Marcus W. Brauchli and Clay Chandler   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/02/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AND MONETARY INDICATORS (IEI)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)</NS><GV>FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   TOKYO -- Yasushi Mieno, the governor of the Bank of Japan,has long been under fire as a tough man with a yen.   Antsy Japanese investors and policy makers at home andabroad have accused him of reckless intransigence forpersisting with tight-money policies to control -- and, theyfear, stall -- the world's second-biggest economy. They havelong been calling on him to act to reduce Japanese interestrates. And he has long refused.</LP><TEXT>   But yesterday, in an abrupt about-face that stunnedmarkets and set economists abuzz, the Bank of Japan trimmedits discount rate -- its charge on loans to financialinstitutions -- to 5.5% from 6%. The cut was the first sinceMr. Mieno got the top job in December 1989. In fact, it wasthe first since February 1987, when the central bank loweredits rate to a historic low of 2.5% to prop up a then-saggingeconomy.   In economic terms, the rate reduction is consideredlargely symbolic; the Japanese discount rate has become moreof a lagging indicator than a baseline for other interestrates. However, banking sources say Japan's 11 leadingcommercial banks will cut their short-term prime lending rateby about 0.25 percentage point to approximately 7.625%.   Perhaps more important, the rate reduction could bolsterthe economies of other major countries by alleviating upwardpressure on their own interest rates. Because Japan is theworld's largest capital exporter, international capital flowsare especially sensitive to Japanese rates.   That's why, earlier this year, Washington was pressing Mr.Mieno and other officials here to cut Japanese interest ratesto enable the Federal Reserve to lower U.S. rates withoutrisking flows of capital out of the U.S. Now, though, thatpush may ease off a bit. With America's recession apparentlyending, the Fed may be less eager to trim U.S. rates.However, it is still worried that slowing growth abroad mayeventually crimp American exports.   News of the discount-rate cut bolstered the Japanese stockmarket, which had long been depressed by the series ofinterestrate increases. The Nikkei average of 225 majorstocks that trade on the Tokyo Stock Exchange shot up 817.80points, or 3.5%, to 24108.76 in heavy trading. On WallStreet, stock prices were propelled higher by the action inTokyo and by a bullish report from U.S. purchasing managers.The Dow Jones Industrial Average surged 51.66 points to2958.41.   The rate cut found widespread support within Japan.Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, who hasn't always agreedpublicly with the bank's tight-money policy, called thereduction &quot;a timely step at a time when prices arestabilized.&quot; He added, &quot;It will help sustain economicgrowth.&quot;   For Mr. Mieno, yesterday's sudden policy reversal appearsto be something of a retreat from his reputation as theworld's toughest central banker. The 67-year-old Mr. Mieno,who joined the central bank after graduating from prestigiousTokyo University, had long been brashly defying both Japan'sbusiness establishment and the powerful Finance Ministry in away that, associates say, really just underscores hischaracteristic independent streak.   Within a month of becoming the bank's top officer, helaunched a tight-money campaign. The interest-rate increasetriggered a nasty spat with the Finance Ministry anddevastating plunges in the stock and bond markets, plungesthat echoed around the globe. Nevertheless, he raised ratesagain in the spring of 1990. Then, after Iraq invaded Kuwaitin August, he did it again -- earning himself the sobriquet&quot;Hussein&quot; from some Japanese bankers who feared he woulddestroy the economy much as Saddam Hussein wrecked Kuwait.   Mr. Mieno's tight-money policies have been blamed forbankrupting multibillion-dollar companies, have embarrassedpowerful banks and securities firms and have even sparkeddeath threats against him. One associate says the governor'soffice recently received a mock bomb mailed to the bank'sgranite headquarters in Tokyo. The police stepped up theirprotection, but Mr. Mieno, until yesterday, left his policiesunchanged.   Just why Mr. Mieno has now eased up isn't entirely clear.He was vague about his reasons, saying the cut was promptedby changes in Japan's economy and money supply that suggestedinflation is coming under control.   &quot;The economy keeps slowing down but still is at a{relatively} high level and certainly isn't stalling,&quot; Mr.Mieno said at a news conference. His comment seemed aimed atdeflecting criticism that the central bank's longstandingtight-money policy might soon halt economic growth.   In fact, Japan's economic juggernaut, which in the firstquarter charged ahead at a phenomenal 11.2% annual rate ofgrowth, is slowing somewhat; inventories are rising, businessconfidence is declining, and auto sales and housing startsare slowing. Inflation is relatively subdued -- consumerprices in Tokyo were up 3.5% in June from a year earlier. Butthe economic expansion, now in its 57th month, will becomepostwar Japan's longest boom if, as expected, it continuesthrough this month.   However, Mr. Mieno had long been urged to act byeconomists abroad as well as in Japan; they worried thatJapan's high rates could trigger a global financial crisis.Japan's banks, which now include seven of the world's 10largest, are highly exposed to the country's property andstock markets, into which they have lent hundreds of billionsof dollars.   When Mr. Mieno took over at the central bank, the stockmarket was rapidly nearing what would become its all-timehigh -- 38915.87 on the Nikkei average at the end of 1989.Property prices towered far above those in otherinternational cities. A square meter of land in Tokyo's Ginzadistrict went for more than $300,000.   Mr. Mieno took away the sake bowl just as the partystarted getting rambunctious. He became the point man in anassault on the speculation that swept through Japan's marketsin the late 1980s.   With an abundant supply of money and low interest ratesput into place by Mr. Mieno's predecessor, Satoshi Sumita,companies and individuals had begun speculating on stocks,bonds and property on a vast scale. That easy-money policy,which was partly inspired by U.S. pressure, now is seen asone of the central bank's dark chapters. Last year, thebank's reports openly criticized Mr. Sumita, a former viceminister of finance, for his policies.   So Mr. Mieno set out to puncture what he termed the&quot;bubble economy&quot; -- as distinct from the real economy of themanufacturing and service industries -- through risinginterest rates and careful guidance of bank lendingpractices. It was a bold gambit for a career Bank of Japanofficial, especially to correct imbalances created by aformer official of the more powerful Finance Ministry.   Even though tight money tends to be politically unpopular-- it usually slows growth of incomes and raises costs forhome buyers -- Mr. Mieno managed to sell the notion that hispolicies would prove beneficial by controlling land pricesand discouraging speculation. Besides, he told associates, hewas determined to keep the inflation from soaring into doubledigits, as it had when he was a young central-bank officialduring the 1973 oil shock.   Responding to higher rates, the stock market plunged 48%in the first nine months of 1990 and property prices began totumble in some regions. The business establishment wasalarmed. Some well-known companies -- EIE InternationalCorp., Itoman andamp; Co., Shuwa Corp. -- began hurting, and dozensof others ran to their banks for debt restructurings. Othercompanies -- such as Kyowa Corp., a steel-frame maker, andNanatomi Corp., a resort developer -- collapsed with enormousdebts. Some banks, including two giants, Sumitomo Bank Ltd.and Fuji Bank Ltd., had to publicly bail out clients and lostexecutives to the ensuing scandals.   But Mr. Mieno held out for more.   Last week, some stock-market participants believe that hegot what he may have wanted: the scalps of the presidents oftwo of Japan's biggest brokerage firms. The two men,Yoshihisa Tabuchi of Nomura Securities Co. and Takuya Iwasakiof Nikko Securities Co., had symbolized the excesses of thelate 1980s. Both men's companies were accused of financinggangsters and improperly compensating big clients for lossesincurred during the crash Mr. Mieno engineered last year.Messrs. Tabuchi and Iwasaki both resigned last week.   &quot;Mr. Mieno has had a crusade against the speculators . . .since the start,&quot; says Stephen D. Barber, managing directorof Invesco-MIM K.K., a British-owned fund-management companyin Tokyo. Like many stock-market participants, Mr. Barberlinks yesterday's rate cut to last week's scandal. AnotherWestern observer discerns &quot;a morality play,&quot; in which topexecutives at Nikko and Nomura &quot;fall on their swords, and allis forgiven. The brokers learn their lesson, and Mr. Mienorelents on rates to show his approval.&quot;   Mr. Mieno himself denies that the stock-market scandalentered into his decision. He says the rate cut came afterthe central bank's Policy Board, meeting in emergency sessionat midday yesterday, &quot;judged the situation comprehensively.&quot;   Moreover, Mr. Mieno says that the days of tight moneyaren't over, despite the rate cut, and that the move was a&quot;minor modification&quot; of policy. That's consistent with theview of many economists, who remember that the lastdiscount-rate increase, a 0.75-percentage-point move lastAugust, was described by officials as a preemptive strikeagainst the possibility that higher oil prices resulting fromthe Persian Gulf crisis could feed domestic inflation. Butoil prices soon fell.   Nevertheless, the rate cut leaves some central-bankwatchers perplexed. Some see it as another sign of the bankchief's remarkable power. These analysts and some FinanceMinistry officials suspect that Mr. Mieno laid the groundworkfor the rate cut in close coordination not only with hisonetime rival, Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, but alsowith the economic leaders of other major industrializedpowers. These people believe Mr. Mieno sought support inadvance from finance ministers and central-bank governors ofother Group of Seven countries at the meeting in London 10days ago.   But some economists also worry that yesterday's rate cutmay signal that Mr. Mieno has been the victim of a palacecoup. Robert Alan Feldman, an economist at Salomon BrothersAsia Inc., notes the lack of any fresh economic indicatorsjustifying a cut right now. A survey of Japanese businesseslast month showed that, despite waning optimism among majormanufacturers, capital spending was likely to increase 7.1%in the year ending next March 31; that was up from a 1.1%projection three months earlier. With capital spending nowthe major force behind Japan's economy, that projection, andMr. Mieno's hard-line comments, had persuaded many economiststo retract forecasts of a rate cut anytime soon.   &quot;All of a sudden, he's changed his tune,&quot; Mr. Feldmansays. &quot;So, what's going on?&quot; Mr. Feldman suggests an ominousanswer: The turnabout &quot;makes it clear that Mr. Mieno is notrunning the policy show anymore.&quot;   Who, then, is calling the shots? One suspect is Mr.Hashimoto, now a strong candidate to be Japan's next primeminister. Mr. Mieno may have yielded to his wishes in hopesof retaining some leverage should the Hashimoto bid for thepremiership succeed. Also involved could be officials at theMinistry of International Trade and Industry and at Japan'sFederation of Economic Organizations, who have been pushingfor lower rates to ease pressure on manufacturers hurt byhigh capital costs. All these organizations praised the ratecut.   But other economists think Mr. Mieno knows what he'sdoing. &quot;Mieno's historic role is to take the cap off of oneof the most impressive speculative markets we've had anywherein the world since the war,&quot; says Kenneth S. Courtis, senioreconomist at Deutsche Bank AG's capitalmarkets division inTokyo. &quot;He has to do it without provoking a global marketcrisis. And he isn't out of the woods completely yet.&quot;   ---   Staff reporter Masayoshi Kanabayashi contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>