<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910705-0060</DOCNO><DOCID>910705-0060.</DOCID><HL>   A Separate Peace:   IBM and Apple Open   New Front in PC Wars   With Strategic Alliance   ---   Old Foes Take on Microsoft,   Intel With Plans to Foster   Increased Compatibility   ---   Real Gains May Be Distant   ----   By G. Pascal Zachary and Laurence Hooper   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AAPL G.SIE IBM INTC MOT MSFT SUNW</CO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIAL (IDD)SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><GV>FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)GERMANY (GE)ILLINOIS (IL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The world's two largest personal-computer makers havedeclared war against the two companies that currently controlthe industry's direction. It looks like a pretty even fight,with the only sure winner the computer user.   International Business Machines Corp. and Apple ComputerInc., which between them control about one-third of the PCmarket, on Wednesday announced a wideranging alliance thatcould change the balance of power among computer sellers,software companies and microprocessor purveyors. They willattempt to create a new operating system that makes computersinherently easier to use, that allows users of theirdifferent machines to link up and swap information easily,and that taps the immense and so far underused power of thelatest microprocessors, the brains of PCs.</LP><TEXT>   It's the equivalent of General Motors and Ford agreeing tooffer cars sharing the same engines and designs. IBM andApple are heading off talk of collusion by offering othercompanies a chance to join up or use their products.   Whether or not the alliance succeeds, it will drive theentire industry toward the goal of complete compatibility ofcomputer systems -- and more-powerful applications -- through&quot;object-oriented software&quot; and improvements inmicroprocessors.   The agreement is as much as anything a challenge to theman who dominates the industry, William Gates III, chairmanof software giant Microsoft Corp., which provides theoperating system for 90% of the world's PCs and dominatesapplications that run on Apple's operating system. The35-year-old multibillionaire's runaway success has frightenedcompetitors, and he has personally angered top IBM and Appleofficials by assiduously promoting his own products insteadof theirs.   The alliance will also try to break the lock of anotherfeisty industry giant, Intel Corp., on all themicroprocessors that run PCs with Microsoft's operatingsystem. It will also try to leapfrog rapidly growingcompetitors like Sun Microsystems, which leads the market inworkstations -- powerful machines originally designed forengineers and scientists but increasingly used in moregeneral business applications.   Even companies that could be gored by the alliance, suchas Intel, think it might lead to an enormous leap forward forthe industry because it attempts to solve two major problemsthat have begun to slow growth: too many confusing andincompatible PC systems, and the lack of powerful andappealing new uses.   &quot;Finally, there's a light at the end of the tunnel,&quot; saysPhilippe Kahn, chief executive officer of BorlandInternational Inc., which is developing software inpartnership with IBM. &quot;I really hope it'll happen, becauseit's the only thing that can take the industry out of the rutthat it's been in.&quot;   In a sense, both companies are entering the alliance outof weakness, not strength. Apple needs a break-out strategyto increase its market share. Its tactic of grabbing share byslashing prices has proven very costly. IBM is losing marketshare hand over fist. Its machines aren't sufficientlydifferent from those of competitors who can offer much lowerprices because of far lower overhead.   In principle, at least, some of the tentative agreement'sprovisions are revolutionary and hold great promise. How soonthey can be achieved, however, is an open question; alliancesin the PC industry have been notoriously unproductive.   IBM has agreed to tie Apple's Macintosh personal computersmuch more closely to its own product line, and will evenconsider selling Macintoshes if IBM customers want to buythem. Both moves are earth-shaking for IBM, which untilrecently had dismissed Apple as a niche player that had someinteresting ideas about software but would never compete inthe corporate environment. IBM, based in Armonk, N.Y., hasbeen under tremendous pressure from poor financial resultslately, and has been breaking all its own rules -- especiallyits tradition of doing everything by itself. (Yesterday, IBMagreed to produce next-generation memory chips jointly inEurope with Germany's Siemens AG.)   Apple's part in the deal is perhaps even more heretical:Apart from cooperating on object-oriented software, theCupertino, Calif., company will consider selling IBM hardwareand will work with IBM to develop a way to allow Macintoshprograms run on top of a modified version of IBM's Unix-basedoperating system. Apple computers that use IBM technology andIBM software could appear as soon as next year, an IBMspokesman said.   For aficionados of Apple, which has jealously guarded itsindependence and has openly scorned IBM as cumbersome andboring, such a commitment may sound like a sellout. &quot;Applepurists will never understand this,&quot; said Tim Bajarin ofCreative Strategies Research International, a consultingfirm. Echoed Jeff Tarter, who publishes an industrynewsletter: &quot;Apple is so determined to be acceptable tocorporate customers that it's selling its soul.&quot;   As expected, Apple will also consider using someleading-edge IBM microchip technology -- known asreduced-instructionset computing, or RISC -- for use infuture models of its Macintosh computers. IBM said it willwork with Motorola Inc., Apple's traditional chip supplier,to develop more-compact versions of the RISC technology,which currently powers IBM's speedy RS/6000 workstations.   Perhaps most important, the firms will establish anindependent, jointly owned company to create the newoperating system based on object-oriented technology, whichallows prefabricated chunks of software to be combined inmany different ways. An operating system controls the basicfunctions of a computer.   In late trading Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange,IBM shares were quoted at $98.125, down $1. In nationalover-the-counter trading, Apple shares rose $0.875 to$43.125; Microsoft shares fell $4.125 to $64; and Intelshares were unchanged at $42.875.   Despite their enormous market clout, IBM and Apple facedaunting odds in developing an operating system, hardware andother products that give them any kind of enduringcompetitive advantage. Advanced operating systems areenormously complicated and technically treacherous. IBM hasjust spent five years trying to develop a system called OS/2,which has proven a market dud so far and still can't tap themost powerful features of the most advanced microprocessors.   Their offer to let other companies use the new productsraises the question of whether they are just developing acommodity which will still be sold most successfully bycompanies with far less overhead, who can innovate morequickly on the margin or bundle different products at lesscost. That is the kind of competition that is currentlyeating into IBM's market share and Apple's profits.   Moreover, IBM and Apple say it will take up to three yearsto deliver the first version of the new operating system anda speedy new microprocessor. Meanwhile, Microsoft, Intel andSun don't plan to stand still. Millions of computer users arelocked in to their particular systems, and the companiesintend to increase their market penetration with much moreadvanced products. IBM and Apple have to find some way to hita rapidly moving target: compatibility with (and superiorityover) the rival products. Without compatibility, users willbe reluctant to flock to the new machines.   Scott McNealy, Sun's chief executive, dismisses thealliance as mere posturing. He asserts that any products itdevelops wouldn't make an impact on the market until thelatter half of the decade and that by then Sun will have ahuge lead in advanced hardware and software. &quot;We're short onpress releases but long on product shipments,&quot; Mr. McNealysays.   Microsoft Chairman Gates says &quot;The deal doesn't makesense. You've taken everything that's unique to Apple and putit in this joint venture. What's left? . . . Apple has soldits birthright. That's sad.&quot; As for IBM, Mr. Gates believesthe company, once his closest ally, is &quot;attacking {us} in anumber of ways,&quot; but that by aligning with Apple may actuallyhave relieved pressure on him. &quot;I have two competitors whohave decided, maybe, to be one,&quot; he says.   The Federal Trade Commission has been looking intocompetitive practices in the personal-computer industry forseveral months now. Microsoft itself has confirmed that it isbeing investigated by the FTC, as has Intel. A spokesman forthe FTC said the commission had no comment on the IBM-Appleannouncement, but he noted that it would likely take morethan a tentative agreement to trigger a governmentinvestigation.   The alliance acknowledges a new reality in the once go-gohigh-tech industry, marking the end of a 20-year span inwhich fortunes were created almost overnight by novices andbig companies took huge risks at the outer edge ofelectronics. &quot;The stakes are getting bigger and bigger, andthe companies are getting less and less confident they canpull it off on their own,&quot; says Stewart Alsop,editor-in-chief of Infoworld, a trade weekly. &quot;So theopportunity to make joint ventures appears to them as a wayto reduce risk.&quot;   There is also a highly personal side to the alliance. Mr.Gates appears to have inflamed IBM and Apple. Until recently,IBM relied on Microsoft almost exclusively to supply it withbasic software for its PCs. The trouble with this arrangementis that Microsoft sells the same software to all comers,making it impossible for Big Blue to offer unique products.After years of trying to privately mold Microsoft'sstrategies, IBM in April publicly split with its erstwhileally on system software.   Apple has its own vendetta with Microsoft. John Sculley,Apple's chairman, still rues his decision of several yearsago to license to Microsoft rights to Apple's Macintoshsoftware -- a decision Mr. Sculley reportedly made onlybecause he depended so much on Microsoft's applications. Lastyear, Michael Spindler, a veteran Apple manager and thecompany's newly anointed chief operating officer, convincedMr. Sculley to consider a grand plan to turn the tables onMicrosoft. Mr. Spindler, long a critic of Apple's lone wolftactics, convinced Mr. Sculley that the company could breakout of its low-end position in the market and deal a blow toMicrosoft by convincing IBM to join forces with it to createa venture that would sell system software in directcompetition with Microsoft.   Mr. Sculley himself was attracted to the idea of sharingthe burden of software development with a well-heeled rivalbecause Apple's internal development group, code named&quot;Pink,&quot; was running behind schedule and over budget.   IBM, frustrated with Microsoft's freewheeling style andcovetous of Apple's proprietary software, was impressed witha demonstration of Pink. The seeds of an alliance to thwartMicrosoft -- and invade Sun's turf -- were sown.   Although IBM is contributing its market clout and its RISCchip to the alliance, Apple may wind up playing a moredominant role. The most important products will be softwarethat looks and acts like Macintosh software, including theoperating system and the applications that run on it.   Mr. Gates, the main target of this alliance, may not be asdiscomfited as might be supposed. From the beginning, he haspositioned Microsoft to win whether Apple's system orMicrosoft-IBM's prevailed in the PC industry. Perhaps thatimpregnability won't be diminished all that much. Microsoftdominates the market for Apple applications (programs likeword processing and spreadsheets); indeed, its applicationbusiness is now much bigger and grows much faster than itsoperating-system business, the chief goal of the Apple-IBMalliance. The more a Macintosh-type operating system andapplications become dominant, the more applications Microsoftwill sell.   Even if the two companies succeed in grabbing half ofMicrosoft's $600 million-a-year system software business, Mr.Gates notes, &quot;that's pocket change for these two guys.&quot;   Not that Mr. Gates is conceding the system-softwarebusiness. He never concedes anything. Microsoft's Windowscommand system, which provides ease-of-use similar toMacintosh's, has taken the PC world by storm, and he intendsto use it to draw customers to Microsoft's future operatingsystem. That new operating system, like that of Apple-IBM, issupposed to employ object-oriented software enhancingdevelopment and compatibility.   &quot;What we're going to do is keep pushing Windows-improve itin any way we can,&quot; Mr. Gates says. He admits, though, that&quot;we now have IBM attacking Windows, and that's scary.&quot;   The other monopoly power in the PC industry, Intel, hasalso angered many customers by keeping microprocessors inshort supply, maintaining high prices and competing withcustomers by selling computer systems of its own. But, likeMr. Gates, Intel Chief Executive Officer Andrew Grove may betoo nimble for the IBM-Apple alliance. Intel got the twocompanies to state that their software would be developed torun on Intel's future chips.   Microprocessor experts say Intel, with its enormous cashflow, is capable of producing microprocessors that rival orexceed the latest RISC chips in performance, staving offMotorola's bid to become the supplier to IBM and Apple. Mr.Grove's persuasiveness is a repeat of his performance ingetting another alliance of computer makers, called theAdvanced Computer Environment (it includes Compaq Computerand Digital Equipment Corp.), to develop products based onits chips as well as that of another rival, Mips ComputerSystems.   And there is always the chance that all Mr. Gates and Mr.Grove have to do is wait for IBM and Apple to fail, whilecontinuing to push their own products. Alliances have amiserable track record in the desktop computer business,especially when they involve IBM. IBM and several otherpowerhouses teamed up several years ago to offer analternative to the Unix operating system supported by Sun andAmerican Telephone andamp; Telegraph Corp. Since then, the group,called the Open Software Foundation, has failed to deliver asignificant product, and Sun's share of the workstationmarket has jumped by about 50%.</TEXT></DOC>