<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910829-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>910829-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Lobbyists' Smelt-and-Bird Campaign Is Assault   Against Endangered Species Act Itself, Some Say   ----   By Charles McCoy   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERIOR DEPARTMENT (INR)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Some federal scientists fear that politics is starting tooverwhelm science in the growing debate over the impact ofthe Endangered Species Act on economic development.   Faced with an extraordinary lobbying campaign bybusinessmen and politicians, the Fish and Wildlife Servicehas taken the unusual step of watering down the findings ofits own field scientists that a tiny California fish, thedelta smelt, is heading for extinction and should be listedas endangered under the Endangered Species Act. The servicenow is weighing whether to recommend listing the smelt as athreatened species, a lower-priority category under the actthat gets significantly less protection than an endangeredspecies. Some federal scientists involved in the case believethat the threatened status, even if granted by the agency,isn't enough to prevent the smelt from being exterminatedwithin two or three years.</LP><TEXT>   Federal scientists also say the service is consideringsimilarly overruling or diluting recommendations ofscientists that a small songbird, the California coastalgnatcatcher, be granted endangered-species status as well. Afinal decision on the smelt had been due June 29 and now maycome any day. The gnatcatcher ruling is scheduled for nextmonth.   Such altering of staff recommendations is relatively rare.Under certain circumstances, it can be illegal: TheEndangered Species Act requires that only scientific dataabout the health of a species -- not economic, social orpolitical considerations -- figure into whether a species isgranted endangered-species status.   There's nothing illegal about going to Congress to argueopenly that water, housing or other human needs are moreimportant than the fate of some animals. Indeed, that issueis the core of the escalating debate over whether theEndangered Species Act should be revised; the act is up forreauthorization next year, in what now promises to be abloody political brawl between environmentalists who haveused the act to restrain growth and business interests whothink wildlife preservation is going too far.   But in the California cases, contend scientists familiarwith them, business interests, politicians and some top-levelbureaucrats are engaging in a backroom end run aroundestablished procedures and law. They assert that Fish andWildlife brass are wavering on protecting the two animalsbecause of a lobbying blitz from well-connected Californiareal-estate and agricultural companies, with an unusualbehind-the-scenes boost from California state politicians andthe staffs of such administration figures as Vice PresidentQuayle. The companies have been galvanized by the belief thatensuring the survival of smelt and gnatcatchers would havefar-reaching and costly implications for water, agricultureand land development in California.   &quot;Political science, and not biological science, isdetermining the fate of these species,&quot; says Felix Smith, arecently retired biologist with the service's Sacramento,Calif., office who is familiar with both studies. Anotherfederal scientist who worked on one of the studies adds thatthe alleged political influence &quot;is frustrating, and it isnot supposed to be permitted under the law.&quot;   Both the White House and the Interior Department, of whichthe Fish and Wildlife Service is an arm, deny that anyunusual influence is being leveled against listing theanimals. Mr. Quayle's office acknowledges that a staff memberattended an Interior Department meeting regarding thegnatcatcher, but adds that the staffer didn't make anycomments during the proceeding. &quot;We have weighed in not atall,&quot; says David Beckwith, Mr. Quayle's press secretary.   However, some federal scientists and veteran environmentallobbyists describe as unusual any contact betweenadministration staff and wildlife officials over a speciesunder consideration for listing as endangered; they say thatis a form of pressure in itself. &quot;What we're seeing here isthe beginning of an attack, not on delta smelt or Californiagnatcatchers, but on the Endangered Species Act itself,&quot; saysWilliam Davoren, founder of the Bay Institute, a Sausilito,Calif., environmental group.   Federal scientists involved in both the smelt andgnatcatcher cases say they can recall few other instances inwhich agency higher-ups rejected recommendations onprotecting a species. One was in the mid-1980s, when theservice, under pressure from Northwest timber interests,doctored early staff studies to play down indications thatthe spotted owl was in trouble. The General Accounting Officeand two federal judges later cited that action as an apparentviolation of the Endangered Species Act.   Environmental groups frequently accuse wildlife agenciesof similar acts, but in this case, several of the agency'sown scientists have leveled the charge. Bob Walker, anInterior Department spokesman, says, &quot;No one {from Californiaor representing smelt and gnatcatcher opponents} met withanyone who is on the team working out the final decisions&quot; ortried to exert any unusual influence. There is evidencesuggesting otherwise.   Exhibit A, say some federal scientists, is the smeltstudy. The minnow-like creatures live only in the deltasystem formed as the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers flowinto San Francisco Bay. After a year of study, biologistswith the Fish and Wildlife Service's Sacramento officeconcluded that the smelt population had plunged to about200,000 from two million in the 1970s and could be extinctwithin a few years. Regional headquarters recommended thatthe smelt be listed as endangered.   Normally, such dire staff findings are expeditiouslyapproved by Fish and Wildlife brass back in Washington. Butthe smelt report languished as lobbying groups representingpowerful farm interests and water agencies fanned out overWashington. Those interests would be hurt by a listing,because protecting smelt would almost certainly sharplyreduce the amount of water that could be drawn from the deltaand pumped southward, particularly for irrigation. The hugepumps suck in and mince tens of thousands of smelt annually.   Douglas Wheeler and Michael Mantell, director and deputydirector, respectively, of California's Department ofResources, acknowledge that they met in Washington withRichard Smith and other Interior Department officials todiscuss, among other things, concerns about the impact ofprotecting the smelt on the state's water system. Mr. Smith,a deputy director of the Fish and Wildlife Service, isdirectly responsible for overseeing the smelt and gnatcatcherstudies. (The Californians say they're neutral on the twospecies, and merely met with agency officials to keep theminformed of various state environmental issues.)   Earlier this month, six weeks after the original deadlinefor ruling on the staff findings, Mr. Smith kicked the smeltreport back to the service's Western regional headquarters inPortland, Ore., instructing officials there to lower theirrecommendation to threatened from endangered. For the smelt,the distinction could be crucial, because threatened statuswould allow continued operation of the smelt-killing pumps,while endangered status would halt pumping or require otherdrastic steps to avoid killing smelt.   In a rare show of bureaucratic defiance, the service'sSacramento scientists refused to participate in there-evaluation of their original findings. But last week, theservice's regional office sent back a revised recommendation:Threatened.   Mr. Smith says he based his decision purely on his reviewof the scientific data, which he believes don't warrantlisting the smelt as endangered at this time. Hecharacterizes the lobbying around the smelt issue as heavierthan in most proposed listings, but says that hasn'tinfluenced the agency's actions. &quot;Political pressure has notbeen a factor,&quot; he says. But several federal scientists don'tbuy that: &quot;It is sad to see the agency prove so vulnerable tooutside pressure,&quot; says one. As for the smelt, manybiologists, inside and outside the government, don't thinkthreatened status will be enough to prevent its extinction.   The agency is waffling on the gnatcatcher, the scientistsassert, because of similar high-powered lobbying. Thefour-inch songbird lives in the so-called &quot;coastal sagescrub&quot; that borders the Southern California coast. Somefederal scientists fear that it could be exterminated becauseits habitat is rapidly being bulldozed under to make way forhousing tracts. The Fish and Wildlife Service believes thereare only about 2,000 pairs of coastal gnatcatchers left inthe U.S. California wildlife officials are also consideringlisting the gnatcatcher as endangered under stateenvironmental laws.   Much of what remains of the gnatcatcher's habitat is ownedby Southern California real estate concerns such as IrvineCos., Baldwin Co. and Santa Margarita Co., which are amongthe nation's biggest developers and Republican campaigncontributors. Hank Hankla, a Washington lawyer heading uptheir lobbying campaign against listing the gnatcatchers,says his group has spent nearly $1 million in the last yearto refute scientific data indicating that the gnatcatchershould be listed as endangered.   Mr. Hankla says his group has argued its case in audienceswith everyone from Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan to staffmembers of Mr. Quayle's Council on Competitiveness. Thedevelopers' position also got a nudge from Messrs. Wheelerand Mantell, the California officials; they believe thatlisting the bird might torpedo an embryonic state plan forprotecting coastal habitat that depends on the cooperation ofdevelopers.   A federal official says the agency was initially preparedto move fast on the gnatcatcher study because of fears thatsome of the developers might try to plow under as much oftheir coastal habitat as possible before any protections gointo effect. He says top agency officials were ready to signoff on the gnatcatcher recommendation until the meetings withMessrs. Wheeler and Mantell. &quot;Now, it's in limbo land,&quot; saysthe official.</TEXT></DOC>