<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910307-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>910307-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Counterpoint:   Daily News Scoop: Busting Labor Is Bad Economics   ----   By Jack Sheinkman</HL><DATE>03/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><CO>   LABOR TRB U.MXC</CO><IN>MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   This morning, Robert Maxwell sits down withrepresentatives from unions of the New York Daily News towork on a deal to purchase the newspaper. The Maxwellmeetings may bring an end to a chapter in the long trials ofthe New York newspaper. Since October, when the paper'sworkers took to the streets to protest the management of theChicago Tribune Co., the Daily News has neared death time andagain. It is ironic that the executive who has the vision tosee the paper's importance as an American institution is aBritish publishing magnate.   Whether Mr. Maxwell's rescue has a happy ending or not,the story of the Daily News is part of an American tragedy.American industry is trying to compete in the globalmarketplace. Yet tens of thousands of American workers havelost their jobs in the past few years due to speculativeinvestment policies and management decisions to bust unions.Even though some pundits claim we are already emerging fromthe recession, this damage will be hard to right.</LP><TEXT>   If Robert Maxwell buys the Daily News, the paper will be adifferent one, one that has lost some of the spirit -- and,at least at first, many of the advertisers -- it onceboasted. If the paper folds, a part of New York will besilenced forever by the irresponsible tactics of the TribuneCo.   The Tribune Co., under the leadership of Charles Brumbach,was never committed to the collective bargaining process. Inthe 1980s, Daily News unions made important concessions atthe request of the Tribune Co. after the company bought thepaper. The unions enabled the company to go public, enrichingmuch of its management. Labor scarcely benefited from thechange. And it gave up $30 million in concessions in 1987based on an unrealized promise of new production facilities.   The company agreed to modernize the printing facilitieswhen it bought the Daily News. Instead, it took the paperapart to serve its own purpose. Shortly after the purchase,the Tribune Co. sold off the paper's most valuable resource:the historic Daily News building on 42nd Street, which mostAmericans know as the Daily Planet building in Supermanmovies. To whom did they sell it? To the Tribune Co.   Such behavior was part of a trend we first saw in the1980s -- the trend in which companies acquire newsubsidiaries and then systematically ransack their assets.Frank Lorenzo did the same thing when he bought Eastern andsold its assets immediately to his own holding company. Weare still seeing the sad result of his work in the EasternAirlines Chapter 11 court proceedings.   Chief executive officers like Messrs. Brumbach and Lorenzoalso ran down their own companies in a second way. Theydecided that busting unions by using cheaper replacementworkers improves a business's operating margins. The TribuneCo. used the same union-busting strategy at all of theirsubsidiaries: let contracts expire, make superficialnegotiating attempts, ignore past agreements, hirereplacements and file a lot of lawsuits.   When the nine unions at the Daily News were forced tostrike on Oct. 25, they didn't strike over wages. They struckfor one overriding reason: the right of workers to be treatedwith dignity on the job.   The Tribune Co. spent $25 million for strike preparationsat the Daily News in the first 10 months of 1990. All of thecompany's energies went into destroying the paper and thepeople who made the paper great, instead of trying to saveit. The company spent millions of dollars keeping scabs inhotels, training them and awaiting the moment when thepermanent work force would be forced outside the plant gates.   Reporters were forced to work with gun-toting securityguards, plant workers with watchdogs. Within 20 minutes of amanagement lockout last October at the Brooklyn printingplant, busloads of strikebreakers drove through the gates.While the Tribune Co. tried to blame workers' intransigenceand &quot;feather-bedding&quot; for the trouble at the News, thecompany refused to bargain in good faith, according to acomplaint issued by the National Labor Relations Board, animpartial federal agency.   It didn't have to be this way. One little-known secretabout the Tribune Co. is that when it's forced to deal withunions, it does. In Canada, where the company owns papermills, it recently settled with its unions. Why? Because thelaw of the provinces where the mills are located outlaws theuse of permanent replacement workers.   Yet the trend here seems to continue. The beginning ofMarch marked the one-year anniversary of anotherunfair-labor-practice strike -- against Greyhound. LikeMessrs. Lorenzo and Brumbach, Fred Currey of Greyhoundresorted to replacement workers instead of collectivebargaining. Today, that company is a shadow of itself andmany communities across America that were dependent on theGreyhound bus for travel are disenfranchised.   How did this all happen? A historic trust among labor,business and government, a trust in the collective-bargainingprocess, is being undermined by tactics like those used atthe Daily News. Since a 1938 Supreme Court ruling, employershave had the right to fire and replace strikers, a right theyrarely exercised until President Reagan started firing airtraffic controllers in 1981. Since then, we've seen a decadeof corporate assaults on American workers to hire permanentreplacements -- or scabs. This recycling of one work forcefor another is not only inhumane. It is terriblyshortsighted. A nation that sits by while its airlines, buscompanies and hometown papers self-destruct is a nationbehind the times.   That the U.S. has lost international competitiveness inthe same years that it permitted such policies is noaccident. What are the labor policies of economies bypassingours? Both Germany and Japan have strong labor movements andco-determination among labor, government and management. TheGerman trade union movement, for instance, represents 41% ofthe workers in that country. German management spends timeworking to improve productivity alongside labor, instead offighting the workers and causing unemployment and socialdisintegration. German wages and living standards are high,contrasted with an American corporate policy of the pastseveral decades to decrease workers' wages and livingstandards.   The time has come for corporate America to figure out howAmerica can compete. New strategy must include motivatingAmerican workers by engaging their creativity and loyalty,not instilling fear and insecurity into the workday.Organized labor is open to working with management andgovernment to revive our nation's economy. American workerswant nothing less than a secure future for themselves andtheir children. But corporate America must recommit tomaintaining a dedicated work force and renounce the tacticsof those executives who would rather fight their employeesthan negotiate.   ---   Mr. Sheinkman is president of the Amalgamated Clothing andTextile Workers Union, which has 250,000 members.</TEXT></DOC>