<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920204-0102</DOCNO><DOCID>920204-0102.</DOCID><HL>   Strong Medicine:   How Local Businesses   Got Together to Cut   Memphis Health Costs   ---   Coalition Made Hospitals Bid,   Leading to Huge Savings   In a Burst of Competition   ---   Idea Is Spreading Across U.S.   ----   By Ron Winslow   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/04/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)LIFE INSURANCE (INL)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)TENNESSEE (TN)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Five years ago, a coalition of employersfrustrated by rising health costs put hospital care for their25,000 employees out to bid. Four hospitals spurned theinvitation. One, Baptist Memorial, responded, and got thebusiness. When bids went out again two years later, everyhospital replied.   The Memphis Business Group on Health stayed with Baptist,and today its 32 members count total savings in the tens ofmillions of dollars. But others in Memphis have benefited aswell. Methodist Hospital, Baptist's chief rival, educateddoctors on cost-effective medicine and held prices steady forthree years. It recently beat out Baptist for the cityemployees' health-care contract. St. Francis Hospital formeda physician network and launched a top-to-bottom qualityimprovement program.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;There's no doubt we've had an influence on the wayhospitals are doing business in this town,&quot; says BonnieMcKeever, managing director for employee benefits at FederalExpress Corp., which is based here. Now the coalition isshifting its emphasis from cost to quality of care.   Led by Federal Express, First Tennessee National Corp. andSeessel's Supermarkets, a local grocery chain, the Memphisgroup is at the forefront of a growing corporate effort touse purchasing power to restructure the health-care system.Across the U.S., companies are flexing their collectivemuscle not just to win discounts for themselves, but in anattempt to build more efficient, higher quality health carefor their communities.   &quot;Employers have been elected by default to take theleadership in health-care reform,&quot; says Edwin L. Childs, whoheads Buyers Health Care Cooperative in Nashville, Tenn.   President Bush will draw attention to business-ledapproaches to health care on Thursday when he travels toCleveland to announce his own health agenda. Oneadministration proposal is patterned after the Council ofSmaller Enterprises, a group that buys health care foremployees of 8,500 small businesses in Cleveland.Encouragement of group health-care purchasing is included inseveral bills introduced in Congress by both parties.   &quot;Employers are very much concerned about a national agendathat will support what they have to do to get the job done atthe local level,&quot; says Mary Jane England, president of theWashington Business Group on Health, which represents morethan 200 large U.S. companies on health issues in thecapital. Adds Mr. Childs: &quot;The health-care problem may be anational epidemic, but it's a local illness.&quot;   Local remedies vary widely, but those on the cutting edgeshare common elements. Many coalitions are led by majorcorporations that could have negotiated their own discountsand then left others to fend for themselves -- but, instead,have taken a long view, recognizing that their self-interestlies in fostering improvement in health-care deliverycommunity-wide. &quot;If all you do is cut your own deal, youcreate an increase in costs for someone else,&quot; says JamesMortimer, president of Midwest Business Group on Health inChicago. &quot;The system gets worse.&quot;   In addition, some business groups are developinginformation systems that will enable purchasers to comparehospitals and doctors on quality measures and steer patientsto cost-effective providers. &quot;Our goal isn't to provide anemployer with a big discount,&quot; says Louise Probst, managingdirector of the Colorado Health Care Purchasing Alliance inDenver. &quot;We believe what you really need to know is who theefficient providers are.&quot; The idea is that such doctors andhospitals won't do tests and procedures that have littlebenefit to patients, yet, by some estimates, account for upto 30% of the $800 billion the nation spends a year on healthcare.   The National Business Coalition Forum on Health, an arm ofthe Washington business group, lists more than 90 coalitionsaround the U.S., says its director, Cathy Certner, and manyof their efforts are beginning to bear fruit. For instance:   -- Companies representing 350,000 Cleveland-area employeesand dependents are working with the city's 30 hospitals todevelop uniform standards that purchasers will use to compareinstitutions on quality. The first comparative reports willbe distributed later this year, and health-care purchasesbased on the information could begin early in 1993.   -- The St. Louis Area Business Health Coalition, whichincludes McDonnell Douglas Corp., Monsanto Co., and GeneralDynamics Corp., analyzes and publishes comparative hospitalcosts and financial data so members as well as otherconsumers can make better decisions. In one case, publishingcomparative prices for outpatient surgery prompted severalfacilities to reduce charges.   -- The Health Care Network of Greater Milwaukee, whichcontracts with a network of selected hospitals and doctors,allows insurers who sell policies to small businesses to buyspecial memberships. That gives about 500 small employersbig-company purchasing power.   -- In Moline, Ill., an alliance led by Deere andamp; Co. hasfocused on the unused capacity of the area's hospitals,contributing to a process that led to two mergers.   These and other experiments are in their infancy, andchallenges are enormous. For instance, many communities arestill wrestling with the question of how to involve smallbusinesses, which employ the bulk of the nation's 35 millionuninsured.   Moreover, health-care providers and insurers are potentpolitical and economic forces, and many coalitions havelacked either the backbone, corporate commitment or resourcesnecessary to become effective purchasers. Valuecare, acoalition in Connecticut led by United Technologies Corp.,collapsed last year -- in part, say participants, becauseTravelers Corp., a major health insurer, joined and soughtamong other things to sell its products to the group.Travelers says it provided technical advice and data analysisand no other services, and disputes that its involvementcontributed to the coalition's demise. A Travelersspokeswoman says the group couldn't attract enough doctors orguarantee enough employees to make the effort work.   The biggest problem for many business groups is the memberthey don't have: the U.S. government. The federal Medicareprogram for the elderly accounts for nearly 40% of healthexpenditures in most markets, and its cost-containment policyhas led to a process known as cost-shifting, in whichhospitals charge higher prices to private-sector customers tomake up for a shortfall from their Medicare patients.Medicaid programs, financed by federal and state governments,compound the problem. &quot;Even if I did nothing else, if I couldhelp make the public sector more efficient, I could save mymembers at least 15% or 20%,&quot; says Donna Miller, chiefexecutive of the Memphis coalition.   The Memphis cityscape is dominated by the sprawlingcomplexes of two of the largest hospitals in the world.Baptist has 1,417 beds, Methodist 1,022. St. FrancisHospital, the third largest with 651 beds, would be No. 1 inmost U.S. cities. Health care is the city's largest employer.   The coalition began its challenge to such power with dataand nerve. In 1986, 11 companies, including Federal Express,jointly commissioned a study that showed that some hospitalscharged as much as 80% more than others for the same service.The group called a press conference to release the results --ranking hospitals by name -- and announced it would invitehospitals to bid competitively for its business.   &quot;We didn't want to start an open war,&quot; says Fred Bowman,chief financial officer of Seessel's Supermarkets. &quot;But mostcompanies felt they had been on the outside looking in at thehealth cost issue. We wanted the medical community toacknowledge we were important and that we needed input.&quot;   At first, the hospitals -- even Baptist, which came inwith lowest costs -- rejected the study as absurd. ButBaptist was the only one that didn't greet the bid invitationwith silence. So Baptist won the contract.   In return for discounts of up to 20%, members agreed tosteer employees to Baptist and an affiliated network ofdoctors by making them pay more out of pocket if they wentelsewhere. The business group established a sophisticatedarray of &quot;utilization review&quot; services to monitor use ofmedical care. One result: Members report $4 to $6 in savingsfor every dollar they invest in the group.   When the first contract took effect in 1987, Baptist hadabout half the inpatient business from coalition employees.Today its share is more than 80%, and that's a significantdifference considering that the group's membership nowincludes 32 companies whose 100,000 employees and dependentsaccount for nearly 20% of the entire private-sector market.&quot;It's really taken a lot of dollars away from the otherfacilities,&quot; says Dr. Miller.   &quot;It's a very significant block of business,&quot; acknowledgesMaurice Elliott, president of Methodist Health Systems.   During the bidding process, Methodist's own analysisdisclosed that its costs were 15% to 20% higher thanBaptist's. That prompted a productivity drive that includeduse of a computer program to show doctors how widely theyvaried in use of resources in treating similar cases toachieve the same results. At St. Francis Hospital, everythingfrom heart surgery to admissions procedures is undergoing aquality review, and a physicians group was set up tonegotiate contracts with employers. Both hospitals say othermarket factors also prompted such steps, but they acknowledgethat the business group's actions served as a wake-up call.   Whatever the case, Dr. Miller says the coalition hasaccomplished its first goal: a price-competitive market.&quot;They're doing exactly what we said they had to do to get ourbusiness,&quot; she says. Now, with the Baptist contract expiringat year-end, the coalition wants to open its business to allproviders again and shift the competitive focus to quality.To do that, the group plans to establish its own &quot;fair andreasonable&quot; price schedule, Dr. Miller says, and employeescan use anyone who agrees to the rates. &quot;Then we'll evaluate{doctors and hospitals} based on patient outcomes instead ofcost,&quot; she says.   It's a risky proposition. Other providers may welcome thebusiness opportunity, but Baptist and its doctors, who standto lose under the new arrangements, say, among otherreservations, that it's the promised volume of patients thatmakes discounts possible. &quot;She speaks about doing away withwhat got her where she is,&quot; says Bill Fleming, executivedirector of Baptist Health Services Group.   But a more open system is crucial to the Memphis group'snext big project: an ambitious plan to establish a communityinformation system that will process and record everyhealth-care transaction in the city. Based on technology thatunderlies automated teller machines and other bankingtransactions, the system, in theory, would eliminateinsurance forms and speed reimbursement to doctors andhospitals. It would also create a data base that a communityagency would use to produce public cost and qualityperformance reports on all of the city's hospitals anddoctors. Purchasers and patients would use the reports tohelp choose providers.   &quot;If it works, it will influence all of health care, notonly in Memphis but nationwide,&quot; says Dr. Miller, whose groupis one of four around the U.S. just awarded grants by theJohn A. Hartford Foundation to plan development of theinformation systems. But success depends on participation ofevery provider in the community, and that means looseningcontracts that bind the coalition to a particular hospital orphysician group. &quot;Do you think they're going to pour datainto my system if I block them off from my patient business?&quot;she asks.   Meanwhile, Dr. Miller is fighting battles on other fronts.When nearly all of the city's 50 urologists got together topurchase a mobile kidney-stone-smashing machine called alithotripter last year, the charge for the procedure nearlydoubled to $7,100. Her public protest caused an uproar inMemphis and prompted an offer of a price cut to $5,000 tocoalition members. She flew off to Washington to describe thecost impact of physician-owned medical facilities to acongressional committee.   Dr. Miller is also working on a so-far-fruitless effortwith the Chamber of Commerce to provide small businesses inMemphis with health-care purchasing power. Indeed, as her20-member staff has helped member companies save millions, ithas paid a personal price for its success: Thanks in part tocost shifting from coalition discounts, the staff's ownhealth-insurance premium soared 72% last year.   Dr. Miller says much more needs to be done. &quot;This is acommunity-wide issue,&quot; she says. &quot;What we want as employersis to sit at a table with providers and government officials,look at the options and help come up with a solution.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>