<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900830-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>900830-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Israel Still Must Talk to the Palestinians   ----   By Abba Eban</HL><DATE>08/30/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   TEL AVIV -- If there is no certainty that economic anddiplomatic sanctions will dispose of Saddam Hussein, the sameis true of a massive air strike. I was a member of agovernment that decided on a very successful air strikeagainst Nasser in 1967, but he remained in office and hisarmaments were replenished within six months.   The Gulf situation today has no quick fix. If the U.S. isnot prepared for phased action and perseverance in pursuit ofits declared aim, it cannot hope for success. The anti-Saddamcoalition will be more likely to endorse armed action if itis proposed after exploring the slender prospect of successby watertight quarantine. And if armed force is to beeffective either as a deterrent or as a means of ultimatesanction, it must be, and appear to be, invincible. Thus boththe advocates of military action and those who believe,however skeptically, that blockades and interdiction willsuffice have an objective interest in a patient attitude totime.</LP><TEXT>   Meanwhile, the foreign media have done Israel no servicein portraying it wrongly as a source of agitation forimpatient courses. Conspicuous unobtrusiveness is not afamiliar Israeli posture, but in this case it has its ownlogic. The task of resisting major international aggressionsmust be carried on shoulders broader than ours. Israel's roleconsists in an increase of vigilance, a serene andunprovocative projection of its strength -- and clarity indefining the points at which its vital interests would beengaged. All this has been well accomplished in a mood ofbipartisan understanding between the major elements in theIsraeli parliamentary system. If there have been occasionalstrident departures by individuals from those limits, thisonly proves that lunatic fringes are universal.   The fact that Iraq is not contiguous to Israel is of greatimportance. It means that Saddam could engage us directlyonly by inaugurating a missile exchange that would expose himto untold devastation. The other theoretical option would beavailable only if he were to obtain a base for action inJordan. This would mean multiplying his adversaries, of whichhe seems to have more than enough already, and he cannotrealistically believe that he would be able to avoidencountering Israel far away from his own ground and fromours.   The paradox of Jordan is that its integrity is safeguardedby Israel's deterrent power, not by an illusory alliance withBaghdad. King Hussein should look westward across the narrowriver for his kingdom's safety, not eastward toward the Gulf.His anxiety about the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gazawould be more understandable if it were less self-righteous.He is the architect of that problem through his decision tofight Israel in 1967 and should therefore take a role in itssolution.   Geopolitical realities are stronger than passions, andthese realities tell us inexorably that Jordanian andPalestinian destinies have an Israeli context and are bytheir very nature remote from the tumult of the Gulf.Jordanians and Palestinians will have to rediscover theIsraeli dialogue, for they have nowhere else to look.   The Gulf crisis is not Israel's only or main problem. Itdoes not weaken our national structure, our democraticprinciples, our Jewish vocation, our national unity, oureconomy, our society, our regional peace or our internationalrelations. All these are weakened by the burden of enforcingour jurisdiction over a Palestinian population half the sizeof our own, without being able to offer them civic equalityor any expression of their national identity.   Israel is one of the 160 countries whose parliaments orgovernments have never committed themselves to recognizingthe permanent legitimacy of this situation. It is thereforeencouraging to note that the suspended peace process may bediscussed next week between the U.S. and the Israeli foreignministers. It is tendentious to assert that peace betweenIsrael and the Arab states is more urgent than progress inIsrael-Palestinian relations. These two issues areinseparable. Does anyone know the name of an Arab state thathas either the will or the capacity to discuss peace withIsrael without placing the boundary question and the statusand identity of the 1.8 million Palestinians in the West Bankand Gaza at the head of the agenda?   Secretary of State James Baker's proposal for a Cairodialogue with Israeli, Egyptian and Palestinian participationwas the most innocuous, safest and least hazardous proposalever submitted to Israel by a foreign power. It had majoritysupport in Israel. It could lead in time to a communitystructure in which Israelis, Palestinians and Jordanianscould maintain separate juridical and cultural identitieswhile closely integrating in all other domains. What Europecan best offer Israel and its neighbors is the example of itsown community structure, which evolved after wars morefrequent and lethal than all the conflicts of the MiddleEast.   Saddam's squalid maneuvers must not only be resisted byinternational condemnation. They must also be discredited bycompeting models of national freedom, social harmony andinstitutionalized regional cooperation. Only thus can MiddleEastern nations emerge from deadlock into the movement andimpulse of the modern age.   ---   Mr. Eban has served as Israel's foreign minister, deputyprime minister and ambassador to the U.S. and the U.N.</TEXT></DOC>