<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900430-0074</DOCNO><DOCID>900430-0074.</DOCID><HL>   Brain Child:   Computer Gets Good   At Outwitting Experts   In Ventures Like Chess   ---   IBM `Deep Thought' Stresses   Speed Over Knowledge,   In Revival of `Brute Force'   ---   Training for Champ Kasparov   ----   By Laurence Hooper   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/30/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   IBM</CO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><LP>   HAWTHORNE, N.Y. -- The chess grandmaster sits on thelaboratory floor, quietly replaying variations on recentgames. Nearby perch his handlers, boasting of past and futureconquests.   Although he has beaten some of the world's top players andis touted to topple world champion Gary Kasparov, this playernever brags.</LP><TEXT>   He can't: He is less than two years old. And he is acomputer.   Known as Deep Thought, the silicon prodigy is theoffspring of five graduate students from Pittsburgh'sCarnegie Mellon University, long a cradle of artificialintelligence -- AI, as its practitioners call it. The machinealso challenges the conventional wisdom in an overhyped fieldthat has long promised, but never delivered, computers thatcan &quot;outthink&quot; their human creators.   Financed by International Business Machines Corp., DeepThought comes close to that goal. If IBM's claims prove out,it will soon exceed the goal. But although it duplicates afeat that humans generally deem intelligent, Deep Thoughtdoesn't know much -- and therein lies its significance.   Deep Thought uses custom-built circuits to sift through amillion possible board positions per second. In 18 months,with better chess instincts and a specially designed set ofchips, IBM expects to have it considering one billionpossibilities a second.   This &quot;brute force&quot; approach to AI was largely abandoned 25years ago in the belief that it is more efficient to beef upa computer's knowledge than its speed. Now, Deep Thought andits ilk are turning that approach on its head. Speedycircuits look like a key to intelligent behavior -- and notjust in chess.   At Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc. in Waltham, Mass.,AI pioneer Raymond Kurzweil calls computing horsepower themagic ingredient that will enable his machines to understandhuman speech. Students at Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology have used brute force to help identify proteinsand control a robot arm. Carnegie Mellon researchers recentlyfound that special brute-force circuitry recognizes voice andimage patterns 10 to 100 times faster than traditionalmethods.   &quot;AI grew up in an era when machines were pretty puny,&quot;says David Waltz of Thinking Machines Inc., a Cambridge,Mass., maker of special AI-oriented computers. &quot;Powerfulmachines like Deep Thought will make everyone re-evaluatetheir assumptions.&quot;   Back in the lab, Deep Thought shows why -- as it follows amatch in progress halfway around the world, between formerworld champion Anatoly Karpov and Dutch grandmaster JanTimman.   Murray Campbell, a Canadian programmer, keys in Mr.Karpov's latest move. Faster than you can say &quot;Indiandefense,&quot; Deep Thought zips through myriad versions of thenext few moves and isolates combinations that score for Mr.Timman. Then, it tracks promising scenarios through as manyas 40 sets of moves and countermoves, narrowing its focusthrough a process called &quot;singular extension&quot; until it findsthe best outcome. Twenty seconds later, Deep Thought's answerpops up on a nearby screen. It's the same move Mr. Timmanchooses -- after several minutes.   &quot;Some people say that brute-force searching isn't `real'intelligence,&quot; muses Edward Fredkin, a computer-science guruwho has offered a $100,000 prize for the first machine tobeat the human world chess champion. &quot;They might just as wellsay that flying with an engine isn't real flying because thatisn't how birds do it.&quot;   Patrick Winston, the director of MIT's ArtificialIntelligence Laboratory, concurs. &quot;It's misadvised to supposethat intelligence will turn out to be one sort of thing,&quot; hesays. Using another nonstandard approach to AI, hiscolleagues have built robots that aren't very smart but learnto walk through a trial-and-error process that is eerilylifelike.   Though limited in its applications, chess has long beenpopular in AI circles because it illustrates a classictrade-off between knowledge and processing power.   The average board position offers roughly 35 possiblemoves; checking out just the next three moves andcountermoves involves looking at more than one billionpossible positions. Humans, of course, ignore almost all this&quot;search space&quot; to concentrate on a minuscule number of moves,the moves that seem promising.   During the mid-1960s, people became convinced that givingcomputers a little knowledge -- telling a sock-findingmachine to ignore sweaters, for example -- would do just aswell as turbocharging them to search faster. Once the verystuff of AI, searching fell into neglect while researchersdevised software to teach computers human feats such asrule-following, learning, logic and inference.   Once that task was accomplished, they promised, computerswould outdo humans in many routine &quot;intelligent&quot; tasks --guarding buildings, interpreting X-rays, summarizingdocuments, steering ships. But progress toward these goalshas been painfully slow: Even the most sophisticated &quot;expertsystems&quot; stumble when faced with the unexpected and areoutperformed by well-trained humans. Nevertheless, many AIresearchers still believe that programming computers withknowledge is the road to intelligence.   &quot;Current machines are perfectly adequate,&quot; asserts DouglasLenat of Microelectronics andamp; Computer Technology Corp., aTexas research consortium. &quot;The hardware solution is clearlyhere. AI is almost completely a matter of software.&quot;   But this view never caught on in computer chess. Instead,a handful of researchers continued to work on solutions that,like Deep Thought, use massive number-crunching.   &quot;There really haven't been many advances in computer chessfor a long time, except speed,&quot; says Ken Thompson, aresearcher at American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.'s BellLaboratories and designer of the first chess computer to beata master-level player. &quot;You put in the meat, crank the crankand sausage comes out. People have tried other approaches,but they always get beaten by brute force.&quot;   This pragmatism is echoed by the Carnegie Mellon team thatbuilt Deep Thought, an extremely powerful machine thatconquered the chess world almost by accident. Like manyprodigies, Deep Thought had humble roots. His father waslittle more a testing device for a specialized computer chipdesigned by Feng Hsiung Hsu, a disheveled, Taiwan-borncomputer-science graduate student. But &quot;Chiptest&quot; startedbeating highly rated chess computers, Mr. Hsu recalls, &quot;andsomehow we got ambitious.&quot;   With four other graduate students who had worked onChiptest, Mr. Hsu scrounged parts from other projects anddesigned a machine that best used the team's limited chessexpertise. Built with only $5,000 of equipment, Deep Thoughtwas born in May 1988. Almost immediately, the Hsu team becamethe frontrunner in the race to wrest the world chess titleaway from Gary Kasparov with a computer.   Nearly two years later, Mr. Hsu sits below a board listingDeep Thought's &quot;scalps,&quot; including Bent Larsen, the firstgrandmaster ever to be beaten by a computer; former U.S.champion Robert Byrne, who writes on chess for the New YorkTimes; and former British champion Tony Miles.   On the U.S. Chess Federation scale, which is based on whomyou have managed to beat, Deep Thought is rated at 2,552 andhas performed lately at about 2,650, which would make him, ifhuman, a grandmaster. But he still is nearly 300 points belowMr. Kasparov, who whipped him last October and recentlybecame the highest-rated player in history.   Even so, Deep Thought is good enough to stomp on all butabout 200 players world-wide. He recently gave Mr. Karpov,Mr. Kasparov's perennial challenger, a scare during anexhibition game in Boston. Deep Thought could have drawn thatgame but threw away the opportunity by failing to realizethat sacrificing some pieces could have yielded long-termbenefits.   Such blind spots have taught the Deep Thought team thatthey can't depend on brute force alone. Even checking amillion positions a second, Deep Thought's special hardwareusually looks only 10 moves and countermoves into the future.Thus, it sometimes misses the long-range impact of hischoices.   Not that it is stupid: Along with special searchingtechniques, Deep Thought is programmed with quite a bit ofchess knowledge. It knows, for example, that a piece usuallyis worth more when it is in the center of the board. Rightnow, it may use such knowledge to follow certain sequencesthrough as many as 40 sets of moves and countermoves; in thefuture, this horizon will extend to 60 sets.   And soon, it will get another infusion of knowledge. MaximDlugy, a grandmaster and one of the top 10 U.S. players, ishelping Mr. Campbell develop new opening strategies andevaluation procedures. By year-end, Mr. Campbell says, DeepThought should be rated around 2,700.   But brute force will continue to be the machine's forte.Mr. Hsu says a single next-generation chip will be five timesas fast as Deep Thought's current pair of chips and will havea rating between 2,800 and 2,900. Hooking 1,000 of thesechips together will increase even that speed by a factor of200. That's enough, in theory, to raise the machine's ratingto about 3,500 -- more than enough to challenge the commonwisdom about the trade-off between knowledge and search.   The new machine will cost IBM about $300,000 in equipment,Mr. Hsu says, and will probably be different enough from DeepThought to merit a new name. (Leading candidate: Blue Chip.)The souped-up hardware, he thinks, will make victory over Mr.Kasparov all but inevitable.   More significant, Mr. Fredkin says, will be Deep Thought'srole in the overthrow of AI's 25-year software fixation.&quot;It's purely a matter of evolution,&quot; agrees Carnegie Mellon'sRaj Reddy, director of the university's robotics institute.   Within a few years, Mr. Reddy predicts, Deep Thought'stype of brute force will solve such mature AI problems ascomputer vision, speech recognition, language understandingand knowledge processing. Already, Carnegie Mellon has builta car that drives itself by using television cameras foreyes. Brute-force circuits process the visual information andrapidly search video frames for threats and obstacles. Ifresearchers were to tackle the same task with conventional AIsoftware, Mr. Reddy says, the programming would take forever-- and the car would probably move at a snail's pace.   At Mr. Kurzweil's firm, researchers found that computersequipped with conventional AI can understand human speechonly if the speaker pauses between words. To understandnormal speech, as well as different accents and slurredwords, they must emulate Deep Thought and &quot;throw a lot ofcomputer at it,&quot; Mr. Kurzweil says.   And Randal Moulic, who oversees IBM's Deep Thought team,says brute force also will prove invaluable for hugescheduling problems, such as those at airlines. Jugglinghundreds of planes among many destinations -- and lots ofgates at those destinations -- generates as manypossibilities as Deep Thought faces in chess.   Luckily, Deep Thought has proved that brute force isrelatively cheap. &quot;We are talking about a world where someonewith a Cray (supercomputer) can get blown away by a fewgraduate students from Carnegie Mellon,&quot; Mr. Moulic says.   Indeed, Hans Berliner, a leading Carnegie Mellon computerscientist and inventor of a chess computer ranked second onlyto Deep Thought, thinks that the government should try totransfer the chess talents of specialized brute-forcecircuitry to areas of national importance. Candidates forsuch an approach, according to Mr. Berliner, are otherproblems with large &quot;search spaces.&quot; Molecular structure,weather forecasting and human genetics top his list.   &quot;If Mr. Hsu's chip were focused on some real-world problemrather than chess, it would already be worth a fortune,&quot; hesays. &quot;IBM isn't doing this for the fun of it.&quot;   But IBM's Deep Thought team members -- a third CarnegieMellonite, Thomas Anatharaman, has joined Messrs. Hsu andCampbell at the company's Hawthorne facility -- say theydon't much care about debates in the AI world. They just wantto beat Mr. Kasparov. While visiting New York, the27-year-old Soviet genius generously praises the progressmade by computers. But he is too cocky to believe a machinewill defeat him soon. &quot;Chess is intuition, it's in yourhead,&quot; he says. &quot;How can a computer copy this process? Even Idon't know how I do it.&quot;   However, he worries that eventually a computer may triumphby outlasting him and making fewer mistakes. The oldest hewants to be when he next does battle, he says, is 30. &quot;Thatis the key in playing a computer, to be young and strong,&quot; heexplains. &quot;The computer is always young and strong.&quot;   Mr. Kasparov says his next face-off with a computer --probably the 1,000-chip version of Deep Thought -- will be&quot;the most exciting challenge I will face,&quot; and he talks ofdefending the honor of the human race. But even if he loses,he won't be impressed by the brute-force approach.   &quot;I am not afraid to lose to such a computer,&quot; he says. &quot;Iam more afraid of what people will lose by working only onsuch computers. You could lose your soul with such acomputer.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>