<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910208-0113</DOCNO><DOCID>910208-0113.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Chile's Labor Pains May Slow Economic Progress   ----   By Daniel Gressel</HL><DATE>02/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   LATAM LABOR</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><LP>   SANTIAGO -- In 1981, Chile's free market economic teamfaced a dilemma. Years of deregulation and liberalization oftrade laws had led to an explosion in its production ofexportable goods. However, the country's ports were clogged.And increases in exportable goods do no one any good if theycan't be exported.   The reason the country's ports were clogged was because ofa highly inefficient and noncompetitive labor force. Dockworkers had what amounted to a monopoly on labor. Previous,democratically elected, governments had granted each dockworker a license that entitled him to an above-market wage.These licenses became prized possessions, which could even berented out to others willing to work for a lower wage. Whilemany labor laws had been overhauled by the economicministries, this hold over from the days of populistdemocracy remained.</LP><TEXT>   But under the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet, problemssuch as this were not as insurmountable as, say, a New YorkCity municipal labor dispute. The ministry of labor simplycalculated how much the monopoly of labor was worth to thedockworkers and paid them off in cash. The elimination of thelicenses along with inefficient workrules led to an explosionin port productivity.   Not a bad solution for breaking up a labor monopoly --even in a democracy. But that's just the point. Chile at thattime wasn't a democracy. And despite the brilliance ofChile's &quot;Plan Labororal&quot; it was designed and implementedunder a dictatorship. Now that a democratically electedgovernment is in power, Chile's market-oriented labor lawsare in danger. As efficient as they may be, these laws do notalways please the politically powerful pressure groups thathave been reactivated in the newly democratic atmosphere.   The labor law that Patricio Aylwin inherited when hebecame president in 1990 was formulated for the most part in1979 by then labor minister Jose Pinera. Mr. Pinera's plancreated a system whereby productivity gains would cause wagesto rise. The union movement could not use its power to hurtconsumers nor impede corporate flexibility in hiring andlaying off workers. It both enabled the economy to grow andprovided for the legalization of trade unions, which had beenoutlawed after the overthrow of Salvador Allende in 1973. Thelaw is one of the main reasons Chile has been the leadingexample of Latin American development.   The plan made the union movement free and democratic: Theclosed shop was forbidden, workers were free to create unionsand a vote of the membership was required for all importantunion decisions. Prior to 1973, protectionist barriers hadexcluded many imports, so that the country was paralyzed whenpolitically motivated strikes hit entire industries. Thefree-market labor plan prohibited industrywide strikes andforbade bargaining about anything other than the workers'economic conditions. At the end of their contract, workerswere free to strike, but employers were free to hirepermanent replacements after two months.   Today, the recently elected government is changing theplan. Jose Pinera fumes at seeing his formulations tamperedwith: &quot;This is appeasement. This is Munich.&quot; He says thechanges will do nothing to help the 88% of Chile's laborforce who do not belong to a union, nor even most unionmembers (although it will help the politically potent laborleaders). He also warns that the government may guide unionsinto politically motivated strikes. The fear is that thegovernment could attempt to punish businessmen in theopposition through labor unrest.   Current Minister of Labor Rene Cortazar has spearheadedthe drive to change the laws. His initial proposals were awish list for labor leaders. Given that the Chilean Senate iscontrolled by the conservative opposition and was sure tostop any major outrages, Mr. Cortazar proposed whatever madehis labor supporters happy, knowing full well that the Senatewould never implement the more egregious proposals.Nevertheless, after much debate and compromise, the new law,which should receive final approval in March, incorporatestwo major changes that may hurt the economy.   The first is that industrywide bargaining will be allowedagain. Every firm's union members must agree through a secretballot to be part of the negotiation, as must every companyin the industry. Mr. Cortazar argues that people should befree to bargain however they want. After all, unions havemaster contracts in the U.S.   But the U.S. economy is diversified enough so thatindustrywide strikes generally have little effect on theoverall economy. In Chile, on the other hand -- where 40% ofexport earnings come from copper alone -- industrywidestrikes can be used by politically motivated unions to shutdown the country. Chile's history of union involvement inpolitics generates nervousness about this prospect.   The new law also allows for indefinite strikes, whereasthe old law limited strikes to 60 days. Under the new system,temporary replacement workers may be hired. If and when theunion settles, the returning workers have first rights totheir job. And only if 51% of the workers cross the picketlines does the new law acknowledge termination of the strike.   Unlimited strikes without the right to hire permanentreplacements could lead to de facto destruction of propertyby inflexible unions. But since the membership has to vote ona strike through a secret ballot, most members will notnormally choose to vote themselves out of a job.   Luis Larrain, of the free-market economic think tankInstitute of Liberty and Development, says, &quot;The law is bad;how bad depends on how it is used. However, I am sure that noone will hire additional workers because of this law. Thegovernment is legislating for pressure groups, not theordinary worker who doesn't belong to a union, nor for theconsumers.&quot;   Perhaps this is true. However, it must be remembered thatthe architects of Chile's dramatic transformation to a marketeconomy didn't have to worry about the complaints of interestgroups, whose special favors were removed for the benefit ofsociety as a whole. They were mainly concerned with therights of producers and consumers, not of favored groups.   In contrast, the new laws follow extensive debate and avote by a democratically elected legislature. And the factthat so many of the free market changes implemented duringthe 16-year military dictatorship remain intact signifiessociety's acceptance of the majority of Gen. Pinochet'sreforms. Says Labor Minister Cortazar, &quot;The new laborlegislation will contribute to a better working of theChilean economy. Because of the democratic process, they arefairer rules and hence more stable rules. This stability willlead to more foreign and domestic investment.&quot;   Chile has come a long way since the 1973 military coup. Asocial market economy was created that Chile's new democracyhas not reversed. While the new labor law is not animprovement on the old, its defects are relatively minor ifthe government maintains its respect for the private sector.The new law might then become a democratic pillar in theconstruction of a free-market democracy.   ---   Mr. Gressel is a director of the GT Chile Growth Fund,managed in San Francisco.</TEXT></DOC>