<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910920-0011</DOCNO><DOCID>910920-0011.</DOCID><HL>   World Business (A Special Report): Cover   ---   Returning to the Third World:   Emerging Nations Revive as Investment   Hot Spots, but the Risks Are Hard to Assess   ----   By Bernard Wysocki Jr.</HL><DATE>09/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>BRAZIL (BR)CZECHOSLOVAKIA (CK)CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)HONG KONG (HK)HUNGARY (HU)INDONESIA (IO)JAPAN (JA)MEXICO (MX)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)PHILIPPINES (RP)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)THAILAND (TH)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   THE FIRST WORLD is rediscovering the Third World.   It wasn't long ago that the flow of new money fromindustrialized nations had slowed to a trickle, a victim ofthe debt crisis of the early 1980s. Bankers, multinationalcorporations, individual investors -- they all felt safersticking close to home, or at least to countries that weremore like their own.</LP><TEXT>   That was yesterday. Today, investors once again aresetting their sights on the frontiers of development -- inparticular, on Southeast Asia, Latin America, Eastern Europeand the Soviet Union. Multinational corporations and smallentrepreneurs are building factories. Institutional investorsare pouring billions of dollars into foreign ventures. Andindividuals are playing Third World stock markets, some ofwhich have seen gains so far this year of 50% or more.   A couple of years ago, for instance, Gene Pian of NewRochelle, N.Y., didn't even know where Malaysia was. Today,he has a factory there. He made the investment because hissemiconductor-tool company, Semicon Tools Inc., was beingdestroyed by Japanese competition. He had to get &quot;close tothe customer,&quot; he says, which meant putting a plant near thebig semiconductor makers. In this case, they were clusteredin the exotic Malaysian resort area of Penang.   &quot;The response I've gotten has been incredible,&quot; says Mr.Pian, who says the start-up has been successful, despite aslew of unexpected difficulties -- including unrealisticpromises by Malaysian partners, the lack of some supplies ona timely basis, and problems with one of his local managers.   &quot;Having an actual manufacturing facility here is the onlyway to compete with Japan,&quot; says Mr. Pian.   Perhaps. But as Mr. Pian's experience makes clear, therisks of operating on the far side of the globe aren't easyto assess. Political coups, currency devaluations, unreliablelocal partners -- the list of things that could go wrong inthese countries is nearly endless. Is it really such a goodidea to invest in Indonesia if you don't know whether thecompany is connected to the powerful Suharto family? Is itsmart to pour millions of dollars into China, where memoriesof the 1989 crackdown in Tiananmen Square are still fresh, orshould be? Will emerging nations turn out to be simply thegreat stock-market fad of 1991?   A wiser investment might be to open a distribution channelin Seattle. Or to put your money in a bank, depending onwhich bank.   Still, many investors -- corporate, institutional andindividual -- are forging ahead. After all, they say, theseare some of the most dynamic economies on earth. Not toinvest in them would be foolhardy.   &quot;Too many people are waiting for political stability,&quot;says Donald Kendall, retired chairman of PepsiCo, which isopening Pizza Hut restaurants all over the Soviet Union. &quot;Ifyou wait for stability in the Soviet Union, in India or inChina, somebody else will be there first.&quot;   Clearly, a lot of people agree. During the first half ofthe 1980s, money tended to slosh around primarily in thealready-developed world. Japan and Europe invested heavily inthe United States. The U.S. invested heavily in WesternEurope.   But as the memory -- if not the effects -- of the debtcrisis began to fade, foreign capital began once again movinginto the most promising developing nations. And as the 1980scame to a close, the pace quickened.   Foreign direct investment in the developing countries roseby 22% a year between 1985 and 1989, reaching $30 billion in1989, according to a study released by the United Nations inJuly; that compared with only 3% a year between 1980 and1984. In Asia, the growth rate was 37% annually between 1985and 1989. Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, Mexico and othernon-Asian nations also enjoyed a huge surge of outsidecapital.   Lately, an enormous amount of attention has been focusedon Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, although so farthere's been a lot of talk and relatively little action. Inpart, that's because of uncertainty over the politicalenvironment. Last month's failed coup in the Soviet Unionserved as a clear reminder of how difficult it is it gaugethe political risk. One minute, President Gorbachev was underhouse arrest, and the coup leaders appeared at a televisedpress conference. Investors shuddered. But the coup quicklyfailed, and suddenly the Soviet Union reappeared as a risky,but perfectly rational, investment opportunity.   For example, Parker Drilling Co., Tulsa, Okla., begandrilling for oil in western Siberia four months ago. Afterthe failed coup, company executives were more optimistic thanever about the future. Similarly, KMPG Peat Marwick wentahead with a plan to lead 30 defense and aerospace businesseson a tour of Russia. And portfolio investors, such asBatterymarch Financial intend to press on with plans toinvest in several Soviet companies.   If the money keeps flowing to the emerging nations, whatwould this mean? The quick answer is that nobody knows, butthe possibilities include some unpleasant consequences forthe United States. Some economists argue that the developingnations will absorb so much of the world's money that theU.S. will have trouble borrowing to finance its mighty budgetdeficit. This, in turn, could drive up interest rates andchoke off economic growth for the U.S. in the 1990s.   Peter Rogge, chief economist of Swiss Bank Corp., predictsthat Germany, a significant capital exporter of the 1980s,will focus almost all of its investment on eastern Germany inthe immediate years ahead. And Japan, the great capitalexporter to the U.S. in the 1980s, will diversify itsinvestments, concentrating much more on Asia and Europe, aswell as on its own economy.   This competition for capital &quot;will force a lot of cuts inprojects in the U.S.,&quot; predicts Mr. Rogge. &quot;It will put abrake on economic growth.&quot;   But there's another side: The renewed flow of money to thedeveloping world could mean rising standards of living thereand new markets for foreigners selling everything fromtractors to toilet tissue. Successful growth would pay offfor investors, too.   In the meantime, though, the only thing that seems certainis that the money will keep flowing, and for a simple reason:Many developing countries are embracing market-basedcapitalism. Privatization, liberalization of trade, awelcoming attitude toward foreign investment, and arelaxation of the tight grip of state control -- these areall enthusiastically embraced by investors. More concretely,these are the measures that make investments possible, byputting companies on the block and allowing foreigners intothe market.   Mexico's policies under President Carlos Salinas offer anearby glimpse of the trend. About 75% of the 1,200government-owned companies have been sold, including thestate telephone company and two airlines. Investment ruleshave been relaxed, trade barriers reduced.   Ford Motor Co., for example, recently announced it wouldspend $700 million to double engine capacity at its Chihuahauplant. International Business Machines Corp., which makespersonal and midrange computers in Mexico, anticipates thatrevenue will double over the next several years from thecurrent $460 million. And a free-trade agreement between theU.S. and Mexico could vastly increase the investment in allsorts of industries; pharmaceutical firms, to cite oneexample, have long worried about protection of patents andother intellectual property in Mexico.   Foreign capital is rushing into Asia even more quickly,particularly from Japanese investors. Japanese autocompanies, for example, have begun making heavy investmentsin the Philippines, Indonesia and Thailand, in hopes ofdeveloping a fully integrated Asian automotive industry.   In fact, so much foreign investment has funneled intoThailand in the last few years that traffic gridlock is adaily nightmare in the capital of Bangkok. The overloadedinfrastructure may create opportunities, however. The Frenchfirm of Credit Lyonnais Securities is promoting Thai steel,cement and construction-company shares to U.S. investors.   Asia and Mexico are clearly on the minds of money managersof Fiduciary Trust International, a patrician New York firmwith more than $20 billion under management. It has a $2.3billion pool of money invested in overseas stocks, with awhopping 23% of that invested in Southeast Asian companies.   Every Wednesday, a committee of international moneymanagers convenes at Fiduciary Trust's headquarters on the94th floor of the World Trade Center in New York City. At onerecent meeting, Kara Tan Bhala, a vice president of the firm,had just returned from an Asian trip and was especiallybullish on Hong Kong. She said, partly in jest, that she wasso bullish that Fiduciary should put its entire portfolio inHong Kong stocks.   That didn't happen. At the meeting, though, thecommittee's Mexico specialist, Francois Gour, spokeeffusively about economic developments there. The committeethen voted to shift some funds out of South Korea, where theeconomic and stock-market outlook has turned a bit cloudy,and into Mexico, increasing the total invested in Mexico to5% of its portfolio.   &quot;We might invest regularly in Mexico,&quot; Mr. Gour suggestedat one point. He noted ongoing talks about a U.S.-Mexicofree-trade package, and a recent surge of large foreignbusiness investments that could make the Mexican economy morecompetitive. &quot;These might be the tip of the iceberg,&quot; hesaid. &quot;The first wave of a lot of foreign investment inMexico.&quot;   Clearly, some other institutions are similarly sold on thevirtue of investing in emerging nations. &quot;If you ask me whichis riskier, investing in Nestle Malaysia or some IPO {initialpublic offering} of an American company making plasticbusiness cards, I'd rather be in Nestle Malaysia,&quot; says GaryBenanav, president of Aetna International Inc., a unit of theHartford insurance giant. Aetna International already managesmore than $2.5 billion in cross-border investments, a largepart of it in emerging nations.   But, Mr. Benanav adds, there are plenty of holdouts amongU.S. institutional investors. Today, only about 4% of U.S.pension-fund assets are invested abroad.   &quot;Americans are incredibly home-focused,&quot; says Mr. Benanav,&quot;and probably further behind all other countries inunderstanding the interdependencies.&quot;   At the very least, though, investment flows have forcedAmerican strategists to identify the pattern that investmenttakes as countries develop. There is broad agreement that thepattern goes something like this: In phase one, multilateralagencies and multinational corporations make directinvestments. In phase two, institutions begin buyingsecurities, such as stocks and bonds; Mexico and Brazil mightbe entering this phase. In phase three, the small investorpiles in. That seems to be occurring in Asia.   Eastern Europe is still in the earliest stage of phaseone, which means that the potential payoffs, and thepitfalls, are probably the greatest.   The collapse of communism has brought bankers,industrialists and deal makers into the hotels of Warsaw,Budapest and Prague. There have been some results: Volkswagenrecently announced a $6 billion investment in theCzechoslovak auto company Skoda. But so far there's been moretire-kicking than anything else. The caution is well-founded.Even mighty General Electric Co. has encountered unimaginabledifficulty in its takeover of the Hungarian light-bulb makerTungsram.   In Eastern Europe, hardly a day passes without some newstate enterprise going on the block. Not without difficulty,though. In much the way that many Americans railed againstthe sale of Rockefeller Center to a Japanese investor, so theaverage Czech or Hungarian tends to be highly defensive aboutselling off his homeland, especially when it sells for whatis often regarded as a ridiculously low price.   Enter the American lawyers offering the governments ofEastern Europe something from the go-go years of Wall Street:the controlled auction.   White andamp; Case, the New York law firm, recently organized anauction of the Praha Hotel, high above Prague on a choice 22acres of land. More than a dozen initial bids were submitted,and four finalists were selected. The winning group includedthe Hyatt Hotel chain as well as British and Swiss interests.   The lawyers involved believe that the Praha Hotel deal maybe a forerunner of the privatization models in EasternEurope. At the least, it illustrates the kinds of problemsinvolved in carrying out the deal. &quot;The Czechs came to us andsaid, I've got a property and I can't pay you {any legalfees}. I have no money. But can you help me?&quot; recalls MarionEpley, senior partner in charge of the Eastern Europepractice.   The deal allows the local government of Prague Six, amunicipal borough, to put up the building and land and thushold 46% of the stake. The Westerners agree to put up $15million in equity. Czech institutions have invested $3million. (The lawyers will extract fees from futureoperations.)   Just as all of these things seemed settled, however, thefederal government in Prague announced that it owned the landand that Prague Six only owned the building, a snafu that waseventually worked out but typifies the harrowinguncertainties that bedevil business transactions in EasternEurope these days.   More ominous yet is the half-hearted way that severalcountries in Eastern Europe have gone about their movestoward market economies. Although Poland has taken manydrastic measures, both Hungary and Czechoslovakia havehesitated. And some Western experts fear that the momentumcould be lost as angry, hungry, jobless people begin to souron free-market economics.   Richard Debs, former head of Morgan Stanley Internationalwho headed a recent study of Eastern Europe for the Group ofThirty, an independent Washington think tank, worries aboutthe trend. &quot;Unless they open up to foreigners, it isn't goingto work very well,&quot; says Mr. Debs. &quot;And if they don't do itfast, they aren't going to do it.&quot;   ---   Mr. Wysocki, a Wall Street Journal news editor, served ascontributing editor of this Wall Street Journal Report.</TEXT></DOC>