<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900921-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>900921-0049.</DOCID><HL>   White House   Renews Debate   On Oil Reserve   ---   U.S. Officials Voice Doubts   About New Arab Effort   To End Gulf Standoff   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST FORGN</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration renewed its debateover whether to draw down some oil from the StrategicPetroleum Reserve, while U.S. officials voiced deepskepticism about the newest Arab diplomatic effort to end thecrisis with Iraq.   President Bush's national security advisers met to discussthe strategic reserve, which President Bush has beenreluctant to use in the current crisis, administration aidessaid. A senior official said Mr. Bush hasn't made any newdecisions, but indicated that the administration intends tomonitor the current escalation in oil prices carefully as itweighs its policy toward the reserve.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;While there have been ups and downs and spikes, the pricehas been increasing, and we'll have to watch that verycarefully,&quot; the official said. Crude oil futures reached arecord high yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange.   A key meeting of the International Energy Agency, anorganization that monitors oil supplies to industrialnations, is scheduled for next week. The session could helpdetermine whether there is a consensus among the U.S. andother countries about drawing down emergency oil stockpiles.   Meanwhile, American officials disparaged a new effort byJordan's King Hussein to end the international confrontationwith Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein. King Hussein plans to visitIraq soon, along with the foreign ministers of Algeria andMorocco, to take to Saddam Hussein ideas for ending Iraq'soccupation of Kuwait, Algerian radio announced.   King Hussein just finished a meeting with the leaders ofAlgeria and Morocco in an attempt to find an Arab planacceptable to both Iraq and the international community thathas condemned the invasion.   But administration officials said they believed KingHussein's latest proposals include concessions to Iraq thatwon't be acceptable to the U.S.   &quot;Like all the other plans that involve rewarding SaddamHussein, they can't be accepted,&quot; a senior administrationaide said. He added that the Bush administration is assertingin its talks with Arab leaders that any steps that appear toreward Saddam Hussein for his invasion of Kuwait willincrease the danger for other Arab nations by encouragingsimilar aggression later.   Reports from Jordan indicate that the latest ideas carriedby King Hussein would link an Iraqi pullout from Kuwait witha withdrawal of U.S. and other foreign forces from thePersian Gulf region, and also would call for a plebiscite inKuwait six months after the Iraqi withdrawal, to determinethat country's future. It isn't clear what the other elementsmight be.   As the Arab diplomatic maneuvering continued, the UnitedNations Security Council moved closer to imposing an airblockade on Iraq. That would expand trade sanctions the U.N.already has imposed. The Security Council has prepared adraft of a resolution that is being reviewed by governmentsof its member nations and could be voted on today ortomorrow, U.S. officials said.   Such a resolution also might include provisions imposingpenalties on countries that circumvent the U.N.-mandatedembargo on trade with Iraq.   U.S. officials continue to insist that Iran, potentially abig embargo-buster, isn't showing any signs of helping Iraqin a significant way.   If Iran would agree to take Iraqi crude oil and ship itonto the world market, either by building a spur connectingthe two countries' oil pipeline systems or by carrying oilfrom Iraq to Iran on barges, it might be able to move out200,000 barrels of Iraqi oil a day, one senior U.S. officialsaid. Saudi Arabian officials have expressed concern thatIran might agree to do that.   But the U.S. official said that there isn't any indicationTehran has agreed to help Iraq, and he asserted that Iran'sinterests wouldn't be served by helping Iraq consolidate itshold on Kuwait. He also noted that oil exports of themagnitude Iran could facilitate wouldn't be enough toalleviate Iraq's economic problems.   Separately, the propaganda war between the U.S. and Iraqcontinued yesterday. Iraq said it wants to send the U.S. ataped address by Saddam Hussein for use on Americantelevision, answering the address by President Bush shown onIraqi television this week. Iraq's ambassador went to theState Department to discuss sending such a tape.   The White House and State Department indicated that theU.S. government would be willing to pass it on to Americantelevision networks, but they noted the networks would decidewhether to broadcast it.   White House officials also indicated that there is achance President Bush will visit the Middle East in November.Mr. Bush is likely to travel to Europe in mid-November tosign a new East-West treaty cutting conventional arms.   Officials said he would like to go to Saudi Arabia tovisit American troops and to Egypt, which has supported theU.S. in the Gulf crisis, on his way home. But such a tripwon't be firmly set until it is clearer what the Gulfsituation will be in November, the officials said.   The question whether to draw down oil from America'sstrategic reserve has split Bush administration officials.Some officials in the Energy, State and Defense departmentshave pushed for at least token use of some of the oil to dampmarket speculation about tight oil supplies, which is helpingpush up oil prices. But officials in the Treasury Department,and some in the White House, oppose using the reserve simplyto affect prices, and Mr. Bush himself seemed to suggest thisweek that it should be tapped only to alleviate genuineshortages, rather than to cool market speculation.   &quot;I think that when you have a real shortage of a productor you see an external event that is going to guarantee thatthere be a shortage, then would be the time when you mostcertainly should use the SPRO,&quot; Mr. Bush told a group ofreporters at the White House Monday. &quot;It is my judgment thatthere isn't such a shortage at this time.&quot;   But Mr. Bush also acknowledged that some people arepushing him to authorize a symbolic tapping of some reserveoil, or to allow a demonstration drawdown for psychologicalpurposes, and he said he is listening to those arguments.   A senior official said that the Bush administration isn'tconvinced that a symbolic use of reserve oil would have muchimpact, but he suggested that price as well as supply will bea consideration as the U.S. sets its policy. The White Houseintends &quot;to keep a finger on the pulse&quot; of the oil situationand continue considering use of SPRO oil, he said.   Meanwhile, in Saudi Arabia, U.S. and Saudi militaryofficers said there is new intelligence that Iraq's expandedforces in Kuwait have dug into defense positions. Many Iraqiaircraft and missile units, according to these officers,recently have increased night training and switched radar andcommunication frequencies -- moves apparently designed toconfuse the U.S. and prepare for defending against airstrikes at night.   In addition, U.S. officers said that many top-of-the-lineIraqi fighters have been moved further away from the Saudiborder, apparently to protect them from U.S. bombardment andgive them more flexibility to respond if fighting erupts.   The comments by commanders on the ground, which follow thePentagon's announcement that Iraq now has some 360,000 troopsand 2,800 tanks in and near Kuwait, are among the mostpessimistic so far about the chances the crisis will beresolved quickly.   ---   Andy Pasztor in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>