<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910117-0016</DOCNO><DOCID>910117-0016.</DOCID><HL>   Whatever the Result, War Alters   Equations All Over the World   ----   By David Shribman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST JAPAN EUROP FREST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The U.S. air strikes on Iraq mark thebeginning of a war that tests American resolve and power inthe post-Cold War era and unleashes irresistible andunpredictable waves of change not only in the Middle East butaround the globe.   The stakes in the fighting are huge. The war against Iraqinvolves the largest concentration of U.S. forces and mightsince Vietnam. It will determine the political fates ofSaddam Hussein and George Bush. The security of Israel willbe challenged. The &quot;Palestinian question&quot; may be at leastpartially answered. &quot;Whatever the lessons of this war,&quot; saysMichael Schudson, a sociologist at the University ofCalifornia at San Diego, &quot;we'll be living them for years anddecades to come.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   U.S. civilian leaders and military commanders confidentlypredict that the American-led force will prevail. Indeed,early reports suggested that last night's air strikes metstartlingly little resistance. However, early war reportstend to be optimistic.   The ultimate meaning of this desert war -- especially forAmerica's position in the world and for its friends in theregion, including Israel -- is far more worrisome. Even avictory may carry burdens that Americans won't wish toshoulder.   &quot;If the war is extraordinarily short and very decisive,American prestige will be very, very high,&quot; says formernational security adviser Zbignew Brzezinski, a leadingcritic of the war option. &quot;America would be perceived ashaving accompliushed something awesome.&quot;   But a failure to dispatch a Third World nation quickly,even a muscular one, would badly erode the American title ofsole world superpower, earned only last year with thecollapse of the Soviet empire. And it could prompt bystandersGermany and Japan, already economic titans, to seek tocompete with the U.S. in political terms as well.   Despite the apparent early U.S. successes, the challengeof dislodging Iraqi troops from Kuwait remains, and beforethe war is over the casualty toll may be extremely high. Oilprices will rise, and even if they later settle at lowerprices, the U.S. could be in for deep recession if the wardrags on. The U.S. military's confidence in its high-techweaponry will have its most severe test in a war that willpit American agility and electronic sophistication againstIraqi armor and masses of heavily fortified troops. And thestruggle between forces in the Mideast pushing for socialliberalization and those advocating a return to orthodoxywill step up -- with jarring, and perhaps violent, results.   Lawrence Goldman, a historian at Oxford University, saysthat war &quot;takes changes that are already in progress, givesthem more impact and makes them more visible, and this warwill be no different. The political structures that exist inthe Gulf will never be the same.&quot;   In this case these changes will extend not just to Iraqand the feudal Arab regimes that have been useful to Americanforeign policy, if sometimes distasteful to Americans. Theywill also affect the Western alliance and perhaps even theSoviet Union, which has seen a massive quantity of weaponspumped into a region on its southern periphery at a time whenits own restive national groups are on the edge of civil war.War near the southern rim of the Soviet Union is simply ahuge unknown for a troubled power that is struggling toretain its geographical and political integrity.   As the likelihood of war grew stronger in recent weeks,the Middle East of the late 20th century increasingly lookedlike the Balkans of the early 20th century, a naturalbreeding ground of international intrigue and trouble. TheBalkans came to symbolize how local disputes can mushroominto international crises. Historians now regard the onset ofWorld War I, which began as an obscure Balkan conflict, asthe symbolic beginning of the 20th century. They may come toregard the desert war that just got under way as the symbolicbeginning of the 21st century.   No one is suggesting that the Gulf war will lead to globalhostilities. But it is sobering to recall the sweeping changewrought by the war of 1914-18. That war drew down the curtainon the Russian, German, Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empireswhile spurring nationalist movements in China, India and theMiddle East. Before the war there were only three republicsin Europe; after the war the republics outnumbered themonarchies. The modern map of the Middle East itself is aconsequence of the collapse of the Ottoman empire and thepeace treaties at the end of the war.   In the course of the 20th century, war transformed theairplane from a sportsman's curiosity into a social, economicand military force; changed the atom from an element oftheory to a threat; and made radar and computers familiarparts of modern life. In this war, however, Americanillusions about high technology could be among the victims.   The U.S. is fielding a host of costly new weapons --Stealth fighters, Apache attack helicopters, electronicdefenses -- that have never been tested in battle but thatare expected to deal a crushing blow to the enemy. If theweapons don't work as advertised and don't protect U.S.forces from heavy losses, the disillusionment may be so greatthat the U.S. won't soon risk another Iraq-styleconfrontation.   As the U.S. girds for Iraq's response to last night'saerial barrage, American commanders are aware that Iraq'sarmy is a formidable force, led by experienced, intelligentand -- surprisingly -- flexible commanders. &quot;They have shownbefore that they can adapt quickly to chaotic situations,&quot;says Anthony Cordesman, who wrote a book on the lessons ofthe IranIraq war. And they will be facing a U.S. commandstructure, adapted hastily from the one used in Vietnam, thatattempts to coordinate a coalition of Arab and nonArabforces. The potential for allied confusion is so great thatground forces have been assigned different sectors to avoidattacking each other in the heat of battle.   Regardless of its outcome, this war will create a sharp,dangerous new schism in the Arab world. The U.S. will beidentified more closely than ever with a handful of friendlyMiddle Eastern states, and will become more directlyresponsible for their security. Because of the alliance thathas taken shape in the sands of Saudi Arabia, the U.S. isclosely bonded at least for the short term with the regimesruling both the Saudi kingdom and Egypt, and will have totake whatever steps are necessary to protect them from theadverse reactions to a U.S.-led war against an Arab country.   &quot;The repercussions of that are a huge question mark,&quot; saysGene Garthwaite, a Dartmouth College expert on Middle Eastsocial structures. &quot;Conservative religious leaders, not onlythe fundamentalists, already think that most of the badthings that have happened in the world can be blamed onWesternization.&quot;   As war unfolds, the terrible if's accumulate. If Jordanbecomes a battleground, or if passions among its largePalestinian population boil over, can the Hashemite kingdomsurvive? Jordan could become another Lebanon, a menace tohopes for regional stability. What if Iraq collapses, andIran, Turkey and Syria all leap for pieces? What if Syriaemerges from the war as the region's pre-eminent power? IfIraq attacks Israel and attempts to thrust the Palestinianissue into the center of the crisis, will the conflict betransformed from an international fight with Iraq into anArab battle with Israel and its American patron?   Once the war concludes, the geopolitics of the post-ColdWar era should come into sharper relief. Even before thefirst shots were fired, U.S. relations with a host of nationswere altered. Ties to traditional allies Germany and Japanhave been strained by their faint contributions to the wareffort. Historic adversaries such as the Soviet Union andeven Syria have won gratitude from Washington that maytranslate into future concessions for breaking with theirestablished postures and backing the U.S.   Similarly, administration attitudes toward France, whichhas sent more than 10,000 troops, and Italy, which hascooperated strongly diplomatically and sent a small jetfighter squadron, have grown much warmer. Turkish-Americanrelations are already soaring, which could imply a shift awayfrom the traditional tilt toward Greece in foreign aid.   The war is being conducted in the period in whichpresidential contenders customarily make their firstsoundings, and the progress of the war and its result willbear heavily on next year's campaign. President Bush'sre-election prospects and the fortunes of the Democrats whohave criticized his approach will be determined in part inthe desert war. &quot;Now we have one focal point for politics,&quot;says Linda DiVall, a Republican political consultant.   The immediate effect will be to transform foreign policyfrom a secondary into a primary concern in presidentialpolitics. &quot;There will be a short-termrally-around-the-president feeling,&quot; says Harrison Hickman, aDemocratic political pollster. &quot;But if the war isn't overquickly and cleanly, there's going to be a huge fight overwhether we should have been involved or whether we foughtthis correctly.&quot;   A more imminent debate will be over the question of amilitary draft or a national-service plan that offers youngpeople the choice of enlisting in the armed forces or takingon a project of social or economic importance at home. &quot;Thecall-up has brought home the importance of having a broadcross-section of the country in the military,&quot; says AlvinFrom, executive director of the Democratic LeadershipCouncil, a group of moderate Democrats who have called for anational-service program.   Adds Rep. Dave McCurdy, an Oklahoma Democrat: &quot;Theall-volunteer force in war dramatizes the unequal burden inthe military, and it's likely there will be a call fornational service.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>