<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911106-0068</DOCNO><DOCID>911106-0068.</DOCID><HL>   Identity Crisis:   With Cold War Over,   CIA and KGB Ask   What Comes Next   ---   Spies May Lose Leading Role   To Analysts Using Reams   Of Easily Acquired Data   ---   One Likely Target: Terrorists   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Mikhail Lyubimov, a white-haired former Sovietintelligence agent, looks back with some nostalgia on thegolden days of spying, when it was the KGB vs. the CIA andboth sides knew it.   Though nobody let on, each side usually knew exactly which&quot;diplomats&quot; in the other's embassies were really spies, hesays. They shadowboxed as they tried to steal secrets andrecruit each other as double agents. Sometimes they literallyplayed games with each other: Mr. Lyubimov recalls scoringthe only goal in a 1979 KGB vs. CIA soccer match inCopenhagen.</LP><TEXT>   Today, the old game is up for both the KGB and the CIA.   The collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and the endof the Cold War have radically altered themultibillion-dollar world of intelligence gathering. Thechange has thrust the KGB and the Central Intelligence Agencyinto parallel identity crises and shown how much the twoenemies actually fed off each other to grow in size andstature.   To boost its own budget and influence, Mr. Lyubimov says,&quot;the KGB tried to exaggerate the importance of the CIA andCIA interference with Soviet affairs.&quot; And though the CIAdidn't dwell on any KGB threat, critics charge that itconsistently overestimated the economic power of the SovietUnion and therefore its ability to keep its military machinehumming. &quot;When it comes to the Soviet Union, they missed itbadly,&quot; asserts Sen. Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat onthe Senate Intelligence Committee.   The mirror images of the two organizations are likely tocontinue as both of them are revamped. The Americanintelligence community, a sprawling giant with an estimatedannual budget of $30 billion, will emerge from thistransformation smaller, sleeker and more centralized, saymost American officials and lawmakers.   Robert Gates, who after stormy hearings was confirmed bythe Senate last night as the new director of centralintelligence, will be the man largely responsible foroverhauling this intelligence machine. Though a 25-yearveteran of the CIA, Mr. Gates insists he isn't opposed toreshaping it; in fact, one of his principal selling points athis confirmation hearings was that because of his experience,he won't need time to bone up before making changes. But itisn't clear what his master plan will look like.   The KGB's fate is even less certain. Its very existencehas been thrown into question by the failed August coup. Atthe very least, it will be cut back drastically. If it islucky, it will survive to remake itself in the image of itsold adversary, which it now sees as more professional andless politicized than itself.   In the future, both the Americans and the Russians willprobably devote less money to intelligence, and the way thatmoney is spent will change significantly. The new model forintelligence agents on both sides probably will be less JamesBond than Sherlock Holmes. That is because &quot;by the end of thenext decade, 80% of what a policy maker wants to know will beavailable overtly,&quot; predicts Theodore Shackley, a formersenior CIA official.   In such a world, adds David Whipple, a former CIA stationchief, &quot;the important person in the intelligence business isno longer going to be the spymaster, it seems to me, but theanalyst&quot; -- the expert able to sift and make sense of anavalanche of information freely available in the globalvillage of the 21st century.   And in perhaps the ultimate irony of the new order, thetwo spy agencies are taking the first tentative steps towardworking together as they search for new roles.   &quot;I think there's no reason why we cannot engage&quot; the KGBon a select set of issues such as combating terrorism, saysRichard Kerr, who has been the acting director of U.S.central intelligence.   The changes in the KGB are more traumatic. In the wake ofthe August coup it helped launch, the KGB has beendecapitated and quartered, with its leadership cleaned outand its foreign intelligence operations spun off into a neworganization. Moreover, its secrets are beginning to dribbleout. One Soviet weekly publication reported that the KGBemployed a staggering 486,000 people.   The Lubyanka, the dreaded office building cum prison notfar from the Kremlin that has long been the KGB'sheadquarters, now even has a &quot;Press Bar&quot; along one corridor.There, Vladimir Maslennikov, deputy head of the agency'spublic-affairs department, downs a glass of vodka and talkswistfully about the need for the rival spy organizations toerase the old &quot;enemy&quot; image of each other. &quot;Tell ourcolleagues in the CIA that, in our opinion, they ought torestructure themselves, too,&quot; he says.   At the heavily wooded CIA headquarters overlooking thePotomac northwest of Washington, the changes aren't nearly sodramatic, but they are potentially just as profound. Mr. Kerracknowledges that the American intelligence community --which extends beyond the CIA to a dozen other bureaucraciesunder the supervision of the director of central intelligence-- &quot;will be reduced, and I think it needs to be consolidatedto a much greater degree.&quot; As the Red menace fades, thisintelligence apparatus is beginning to refocus on terrorism,the proliferation of chemical and nuclear weapons in theThird World and narcotics trafficking, which are seen as themain threats of the 1990s -- at least to those looking for anew intelligence mission.   At the same time, a potentially emotional debate isshaping up over whether the U.S. intelligence communityshould begin concentrating on gathering economic intelligencethat would help America in the economic competition likely tosupplant the military competition of the Cold War.   The idea would be for the CIA and other intelligenceagencies to closely track global industrial trends,technological advances abroad and foreign nations' tradestrategies. &quot;We're not talking about Junior James Bonds withM.B.A. degrees spying for Big Blue,&quot; says Rep. Dave McCurdy,an Oklahoma Democrat who leads the House IntelligenceCommittee. &quot;But we are talking about people who understandeconomics and technology.&quot;   However, he, as well as Mr. Kerr and other top CIAofficials, worry about the vexing questions that any big moveinto collecting economic intelligence would raise: How farshould the U.S. go in spying on friends such as Japan andGermany, and how would it decide which companies will enjoythe fruits of its spying? Because of such problems, puttingthe intelligence apparatus into economic spying &quot;would be anutter disaster,&quot; Sen. Bradley warns.   The U.S. intelligence community may face more fundamentalproblems as critics charge that it is merely seeking ways tojustify its existence. Sen. Daniel Moynihan, a New YorkDemocrat and former leader on the Senate IntelligenceCommittee, has even proposed that the CIA be absorbed intothe State Department.   Such a proposal would have been unthinkable in the days ofnonstop global competition between the Soviet Union and theU.S., when the jobs of the KGB and CIA were clear. Nobodyunderstood the rules of the grave, yet strangely gentlemanly,competition between the two agencies better than Mr. Whipple,the retired agent who was a CIA station chief in fivecountries from the 1950s through the 1980s. He recalls once,early in his career, spotting at a party and befriending ashy Soviet diplomat who called himself a vice consul at theSoviet embassy but turned out to be a KGB agent.   Three decades later, the two crossed paths again inGeneva. This time, the KGB man returned Mr. Whipple's earlierkindness by launching an operation to blow the American'sdiplomatic cover and expose him as a CIA agent. Mr. Whipplewasn't offended: &quot;My intentions toward this guy weren'thonorable anyway.&quot; His goal all along had been to recruit theSoviet as a double agent working for the CIA.   Nobody thinks the KGB is going to say goodbye to all that.But, in its first attempt to work with the U.S., the KGBrequested American advice on how to break its intelligenceoperations away from its internal-security apparatus, much asthe CIA and its foreign intelligence tasks are separate fromthe Federal Bureau of Investigation and its domestic securityjobs.   Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev has put Vadim Bakatin,a liberal former aide, in charge of the KGB breakup and namedYevgeny Primakov, an academician and Gorbachev adviser whoformerly headed a foreign-policy think tank, to head theseparate new foreign intelligence unit. Russian PresidentBoris Yeltsin has taken control of government communications,once a KGB function, and the Soviet foreign ministry ismoving to prevent spies from using diplomatic status ascover. What remains of the old KGB, mainlycounterintelligence and anti-crime squads, will continuefunctioning but under a yet-to-be-devised system in whichindividual republics will have a say in the organization'soperation and funding.   Many officials in Moscow say only such a breakup coulddestroy once and for all the KGB threat to the state. Yetimplementing such a sweeping transformation would be verydifficult because the KGB's tentacles stretch all across thenation.   Artyom Borovikh, the editor of a monthly called &quot;TopSecret&quot; that specializes in reporting on crime and the KGB,recalls visiting a small village of 300 reindeer herders onthe Kola Peninsula, inside the Arctic Circle, and finding, tohis astonishment, a KGB station with five full-time staffersthere. &quot;Then I understood that the KGB really is everywhere,&quot;he says.   The giant organization also became expert atdisinformation, at actively discouraging truth-telling. Mr.Lyubimov, the former KGB station chief, recalls a time whenhe was covering British affairs and spotted an interestingBritish newspaper article about the Soviet leadership. Hesent a Russian translation to his then-boss, VladimirKryuchkov, who later headed the agency. Mr. Kryuchkov, inturn, passed it on to his boss, KGB chief Yuri Andropov. ToMr. Lyubimov's consternation, he received the article backwith just one word scrawled over it in Mr. Andropov'shandwriting: &quot;Destroy]&quot;   So far, reform efforts have been concentrated at the topof the organization. The matter of how to deal with thehundreds of thousands of officials in the field has barelybeen addressed. Given the devious ways and reactionary bentof many of these officials, who now stand to lose their jobs,an ill-conceived reform could backfire and perhaps sparksocial upheaval or even another coup.   Yet at the same time, some worry that Mr. Bakatin, the newKGB chief, may be giving up too much too soon for reformers'own good. The KGB's military intelligence unit, for example,kept a close watch on the Soviet army. If the unit is handedover to the defense ministry, nobody will know what mischiefmight be brewing there, especially because many generals areupset over the nation's disintegration.   As a result, Mr. Borovikh worries, the KGB may survivethis round of reorganization by pressuring Mr. Bakatin:&quot;They'll say if you want to avoid another coup, you need us.If you destroy us, you won't know what's going on.&quot;   Such lingering suspicions about the KGB are one reasonthat the U.S., despite its professed willingness to work withthe new KGB, is likely to move cautiously. &quot;I think we willbe very reserved about dealing with the KGB,&quot; says Ray Cline,a former senior CIA official. He participated in the firstserious effort to begin a cooperative relationship when heattended a meeting in California with two top KGB officialslast year.   Mr. Cline says the KGB officers seemed most interested inusing their overture to the U.S. to clean up their image. &quot;Ifthe CIA would cooperate with them, they'd get a certainamount of credit,&quot; he believes.   Although the U.S. intelligence community also facesquestions about its future size and shape, nobody seriouslythinks that the U.S. should quit maintaining a big, elaborateintelligence system in its new role as the world's onlysuperpower. A complex multipolar world may well require moremanpower than the Cold War's bipolar competition. In fact,both Mr. Gates and leaders of Congress's intelligencecommittees talk of increasing the number of clandestineintelligence agents abroad to better track political trends.Intelligence pros note that the CIA, when set up in 1947,wasn't invented solely to battle the Soviets, despite thepopular perception.   &quot;The CIA was invented,&quot; says Richard Helms, a formerdirector of central intelligence, &quot;to prevent another PearlHarbor&quot; -- that is, a surprise foreign threat of any kind.Now, rather than focusing on one dominant Soviet threat, theU.S. intelligence apparatus may have the tougher job oftracking dozens of loose cannons -- of Saddam Husseins --around the world.</TEXT></DOC>