<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900511-0173</DOCNO><DOCID>900511-0173.</DOCID><HL>   MEDICINE andamp; HEALTH (A Special Report): Red Flags   ---   Exercise in Futility:   If You're Counting on the Stress Test   To Alert You to Heart Problems, Think Again   ----   By Sue Shellenbarger</HL><DATE>05/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R7</SO><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)MEDICAL SUPPLIES (MDS)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><LP>   WHEN DONALD PIZZIFERRO, a hard-driving 53-year-oldinsurance executive from Bloomingdale, Ill., took a stresstest for heart disease during a routine physical in 1988, theresults were reassuring.   &quot;I had a little shortness of breath, a little weakness inthe legs&quot; after running on the treadmill, &quot;but basically,everything was fine,&quot; says Mr. Pizziferro, a self-described&quot;Type A&quot; personality who worked 60 to 70 hours a week formost of his career. When the electrocardiogram showed hisheart working normally under stress, he says, &quot;I thought,`Well, gee, I got a clean bill of health,'&quot; and he went backto work as usual.</LP><TEXT>   Four weeks later, he had a heart attack.   Unsuspecting, he drove himself to the hospital that nightwith an annoying case of nausea. He was stunned whenphysicians in the emergency room told him he had had a heartattack and swept him into intensive care. He has since hadbypass surgery.   The exercise stress test, one of the most widely usedprocedures in predicting heart disease, is also one of theleast reliable. On the average, the test is accurate indiagnosing coronary-artery disease only 65% of the time; insome age and gender groups, the test has a lower accuracyrate than a coin flip.   Such inaccuracy carries a high price. False positives canhave crippling effects on people who thought they werehealthy -- leading to unnecessary, and perhaps dangerous,follow-up testing. False negatives can keep patients fromundergoing lifesaving surgery, discourage them from adoptinglife-style changes, and make it easier for them to deny theirsymptoms.   &quot;People who want a stress test to see whether they havecoronary-artery disease should realize that they may end upwith the proverbial can of worms,&quot; says James L. Weiss,associate professor at Johns Hopkins University School ofMedicine.   Few people do realize that, however, and the popularity ofthe stress test is growing fast, particularly among agingbaby boomers worried about the nation's No. 1 killer. Theprocedure, which entails walking or running on a treadmillwith electrocardiogram monitors attached to the chest, issimple to administer and is cheap, costing about $165 to$300. It's also non-invasive and safe, causing problems inonly about one in 10,000 cases. The most accurate, widelyavailable alternative, angiography, which entails insertingcatheters through blood vessels, injecting a dye and gettingan image of the heart, is expensive, costing more than $3,000per procedure. Angiograms also can be traumatic andoccasionally are fatal.   Moreover, the stress test is a valuable tool for somepatients. It is more accurate in patients who already have ahigh likelihood of cardiovascular disease, including men over45 and women over 55 with high cholesterol or blood pressure,or a family history of heart disease. It can be helpful insupervising or planning an exercise program for people whohave had a heart attack or heart surgery.   Ken Cooper, president of the Aerobics Research Institute,a not-for-profit fitness center in Dallas, says many stresstests prove wrong because the test giver doesn't make thesubject work hard enough on the treadmill or fails to monitorthe test or interpret the results correctly.   Clearly, though, the stress test is more limited than manypatients realize. Positive results, reflected in abnormalelectrocardiogram readings, actually reflect coronary-arterydisease only 60% to 70% of the time. Negative readings areaccurate only about 75% of the time. In some groups, such aswomen without symptoms, positive readings may be correct only40% of the time.   Test results are even less helpful in predicting symptomsin symptomless people. A recent Baltimore study showed thatonly 19% of 726 symptomless people who had positive stresstest results suffered angina, a heart attack or cardiac deathwithin 6.4 years. Other research indicates that the majorityof people who die suddenly of heart disease without firstexhibiting symptoms will test negative on the treadmill, saysDaniel B. Mark, cardiologist at Duke University MedicalCenter.   &quot;There's no good way, with 1990s technology, to find thosepeople,&quot; Dr. Mark says.   Nevertheless, demand for the exercise test remains strong.Many patients walk into their doctor's office and demand one.Some health clubs require them of members. Cardio-FitnessCorp., a chain of health clubs, asks members over 35 to get astress test from their physician. While the tests yield somefalse results, &quot;it's the best you can do&quot; to protect membersand guard against liability, says Jerome Zuckerman, presidentof the New York-based chain.   The test is lucrative for doctors, providing an addedincentive. &quot;It's a test that many physicians are doingwithout a clear understanding of the limitations andindications for the procedure,&quot; says James Rippe, head of theexercise and physiology laboratory at the University ofMassachusetts Medical School.   Public demand for the test is fostering some large-scalerip-offs of insurers. Aetna Life andamp; Casualty and two otherinsurers recently won an $18 million judgment against twoCalifornia men who were operating 240 mobile testing labs.The men were administering unnecessary stress tests, amongother things, to thousands of patients, says Aetna, which isplanning to study whether it should set standards of reviewfor the procedure.   &quot;The test is being used by a lot of rascals to feathertheir economic beds,&quot; says John H. Renner, president of theConsumer Health Information Research Institute, a Kansas Cityhealth-fraud watchdog.   The problem springs in part from the heart's remarkableability to mask its symptoms. For about half the people withheart disease, the first symptom is a heart attack.Conversely, chest pain isn't a reliable indicator of seriouscardiac problems.   Stress testing offers a way to provoke the heart intorevealing the effects of coronary-artery disease. The patientexercises to exhaustion, to a maximum heart rate for his orher age, or until chest pains occur. The blood pressure ischecked periodically during and after the test, while thephysician watches the electrocardiogram.   But the heart can send cryptic signals. A long list ofpre-existing conditions can cause false results, includinghypertension and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, as well asthe use of some medications. Also, a partially obstructedvessel might work fine during a stress test, then rupture thenext day, causing instant death.   Physical exertion became increasingly difficult in recentyears for Claudine Johnston, a St. George, S.C., housewife;she finally got to the point that she could barely cross thestreet without feeling nauseated and out of breath. But shepassed two stress tests. By the time her family persuaded herto undergo angiography at age 70 a couple of months ago,three of the vessels to her heart were obstructed and sheneeded bypass surgery.   The test's unreliability makes the supervision of askilled physician even more crucial. A suburban Chicagoconstruction executive who was suffering chest pain duringexercise complained repeatedly to his doctors, who cited hisnegative stress-test results as proof that his heart wasfine. He switched in exasperation to a veteran cardiologist,who ordered an angiogram. The diagnosis: coronary arterydisease, with a need for angioplasty.   &quot;He was frustrated that nobody would believe him,&quot; saysthe cardiologist, Arvind Menon of Highland Park Hospital inHighland Park, Ill., who has been conducting stress tests for24 years, although he interprets them with a great deal ofcircumspection. &quot;Time and again he told me this washappening, and I had to listen to him. One can never ignorethe patient.&quot;   Alternatives to the exercise stress test all have majordrawbacks. They are significantly more expensive, and most ofthem carry greater risk.   All of which leaves physicians continuing to grapple withthe shortcomings of the stress test. &quot;If someone coulddevelop a noninvasive, 100% accurate test for the presence ofcardiovascular disease that is also cheap, it would be agreat service to humanity,&quot; says Irwin Silverman, anassociate in clinical medicine at Northwestern University.   Most, however, hold out little hope. &quot;People who have nosymptoms but who want to be able to say with certainty, `Do Ihave heart disease or not?' are chasing a chimera -- aghost,&quot; says the University of Massachusetts's Dr. Rippe.&quot;The medical profession shouldn't fall into the trap oftrying to give people certainty where there is preciouslittle.   &quot;The future lies not in developing ever more sophisticatedtests,&quot; he adds, &quot;but in using our knowledge of exercise toencourage people to adopt life styles that will lower theirlikelihood of getting heart disease in the first place.&quot;   ---   Ms. Shellenbarger is a staff reporter in The Wall StreetJournal's Chicago bureau.</TEXT></DOC>