<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900920-0140</DOCNO><DOCID>900920-0140.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:   African Economic Decadence   ----   By David Roberts Jr.</HL><DATE>09/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Before accepting a two-year assignment (1986-88) asadministrator of a World Bank economic rehabilitation projectin Equatorial Guinea, Harvard economist Robert Klitgaard waswarned by an American aid official that &quot;on a scale of one to10, even an African scale, it's zero.&quot; Mr. Klitgaard wasn'table to change that rating, but on his return he did produce&quot;Tropical Gangsters: One Man's Experience With Developmentand Decadence in Deepest Africa&quot; (Basic, 281 pages, $22.95),which is at once an engaging travelogue into that vaporouslyhot Central African backwater, and a valuable source forexplaining why Third World countries ostensibly committed tothe creation of a market economy frequently fail to make anyprogress toward that end.   During its Spanish colonial days, Equatorial Guinea wasmore prosperous than any of its neighbors, boasting arespectable literacy rate of 60%, a reasonably efficientpublic health system, and a relatively thriving economy basedon the export of hardwood timber, coffee, fish, assortedfoodstuffs and the world's richest cocoa.</LP><TEXT>   By the 1970s, all this was memory thanks to the homicidalreign of Francisco Macias Nguema, who reduced the populationby at least a third, ruined the cash economy and destroyedthe infrastructure to the point where there were only twodoctors left in the land, one of them the president'soverworked personal psychiatrist. Macias's last act of statewas to burn the country's entire stock of hard currency, some$105 million, which he had buried in sacks around hiscompound.   By those standards, the economic program promulgated in1985 by Macias's thuggish nephew and successor, Obiang NguemaMbasogo, seemed promising at first. The government removedprice controls, adopted the convertible CFA franc, sold offmost state enterprises, and rid itself of the Cubaninternationalists who formed the nucleus of Macias's palaceguard. Yet it is evident from Mr. Klitgaard's account thatthe country is light-years from recovering the level ofprosperity and civility that obtained during the colonialera.   Two coup attempts occurred during Mr. Klitgaard's stay,the suppression of which involved the torture of innocentmen, including one of Mr. Klitgaard's most talentedassistants in the restructuring project. The infrastructureis only partially restored, despite the infusion ofsubstantial amounts of foreign aid, which now comprisesalmost half of the GNP. Exports remain at a fraction ofpre-independence levels, and the country now imports evenfish (Macias burned the trawlers to prevent people fromescaping).   Mr. Klitgaard provides a more than adequate explanationfor the country's failure. This tiny nation has 17 cabinetministries, each with a full complement of ill-paidbureaucrats, most of whom sincerely believe that property istheft. Requisitioning of services and capital stocks on theflimsiest of pretexts is common. So is corruption, and, notsurprisingly, doing any kind of business in Equatorial Guinearemains a losing proposition, even if access to water andelectricity was constant, which it is not, never mind theforeign assistance programs described by Mr. Klitgaard. Thisis partly due to the government's indifference to maintenancerequirements, and partly due to the fact that no means existfor monitoring consumption. Government officials typicallyreceive water and electricity without payment, stiffingprivate users with outrageous charges for outrageouslyunreliable service.   The same lack of accountability has been even moredisastrous for the two state-owned banks, which existprimarily to funnel IMF and World Bank funds to the presidentand his camarilla in the form of unsecured loans. The WorldBank's cocoa rehabilitation project, for example, merelyprompted Obiang and his gang to grab the largest cocoaplantations for themselves in order to secure access to loanmoney, which was squandered on luxury cars and videocassetterecorders.   Mr. Klitgaard and his World Bank team, with the aid of theEquatoguinean finance minister and a few other allies in thegovernment, did succeed in persuading the president to adoptan economic restructuring program predicated on a marketeconomy and establishing a rotating fund to financesmall-scale private enterprises. But while this plan looksgood on paper, Mr. Klitgaard gives us ample reason to doubtthat it will be adhered to in good faith.   The fundamental reason why the notions of privateproperty, civil autonomy, limited government and politicalpluralism have fared so poorly in post-colonial Africa isthat the continent lacks that very sense of social cohesionand shared values that the partisans of African socialismclaim as the first attribute of the African character. As oneof his more perceptive Equatoguinean colleagues complains toMr. Klitgaard, &quot;In Africa . . . people do not have a commoninterest.&quot; Instead, &quot;First comes the family, then the clan,then the region, and finally the country. But the countryalways comes last.&quot;   Mr. Klitgaard's account is not without a few bright spots.Many of the Equatoguineans he met compare favorably with someof the ignorant and indolent international aid officials withwhom he had to do business. He also discovered a great dealof human potential and natural beauty as he traveled alongthe country's deeply pitted roads with his surfboard in anultimately successful search for 10-foot waves.   ---   Mr. Roberts is a free-lance writer specializing in Africanaffairs.</TEXT></DOC>