<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910117-0019</DOCNO><DOCID>910117-0019.</DOCID><HL>   Waves of U.S. Planes Attack Iraq   As War Breaks Out in Persian Gulf   ---   Bush Tells Nation   Operation Is Going   `According to Plan'   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP CANDA</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The U.S. went to war in the Persian Gulflast night.   President Bush announced that he had ordered Americanwarplanes to launch a wave of attacks designed to drive Iraqitroops out of occupied Kuwait, throwing almost half a millionAmerican troops into the biggest and most lethal fight thecountry has faced in a generation.</LP><TEXT>   Initial reports indicated the attack, carried out withBritish, Saudi and Kuwaiti aircraft, went extremely well andmet surprisingly little Iraqi resistance. Last night thePentagon was putting out the word that the attack hadvirtually wiped out the Iraqi air force and most of thelong-range missiles that threatened Israel, and had decimatedIraq's crack Republican Guards.   Early reports on any combat action tend to be exaggerated,and it will be impossible to verify most of these claimsuntil they are confirmed by intelligence surveillance indaylight. But the indications suggested that the damage wasfar more pervasive than most analysts expected ahead of time.   Mr. Bush told the nation in a televised address that theattack, launched under the authorization of a United Nationsresolution, was necessary because the 28 nations arrayedagainst Iraq &quot;have exhausted all reasonable efforts to reacha peaceful resolution {and} have no choice but to driveSaddam Hussein from Kuwait by force.&quot;   He described a sweeping drive that will be designed toknock out huge chunks of Iraq's military capability,including its advanced-weapons plants. &quot;We are determined toknock out Saddam Hussein's nuclear-bomb potential,&quot; Mr. Bushsaid. &quot;We will also destroy his chemical-weapons facilities.Much of Saddam's artillery and tanks will be destroyed.&quot;   The attack, code-named &quot;Operation Desert Storm,&quot; openedwhat U.S. officials are promising will be a massive bombingcampaign designed to swiftly force President Hussein out ofthe country he attacked Aug. 2.   U.S. military commanders, in fact, expect the war to beone of the shortest, most intense and violent in history.They are counting on America's huge advantage in militaryhardware, advanced technology and training to end theconflict successfully within two to five weeks.   The first military reports from Saudi Arabia were that theattack was launched against targets in Iraq and occupiedKuwait by F-15E fighters, which can be used either to defendbomber aircraft or to attack ground targets themselves. U.S.television reporters broadcasting live from Baghdad in thefirst two hours of the war reported four or five waves ofAmerican aircraft striking targets West of the city,including a refinery. The initial television reports didn'tcontain any evidence of Iraqi retaliation, either in SaudiArabia or Israel, nor of any U.S. planes being shot down. Thesmall Khafji oil refinery in Saudi Arabia near Kuwait was hitby artillery fire.   &quot;This will not be another Vietnam,&quot; Mr. Bush pledged, andAmerican troops &quot;will not be asked to fight with one handtied behind their back.&quot;   By forcing Iraq to reverse its invasion of Kuwait, Mr.Bush declared, &quot;we have before us the opportunity to forge,for ourselves and for future generations, a new world order,a world where the rule of the law, not the law of the jungle,governs the conduct of nations.&quot;   But Iraq remained defiant after the initial blow. Itsstate radio announced that &quot;the great battle has begun.&quot;   Initial battle reports indicate &quot;that our operations areproceeding according to plan,&quot; Mr. Bush said. The U.S. isallied with 27 other countries in a massive, multinationalmilitary force in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf region.But two-thirds of the troops now confronting Iraq areAmerican. And in the early stages of the air campaign thatgot underway, the key aid is expected to come from warplanesof just three countries: Great Britain, France and SaudiArabia.   By committing U.S. troops to liberate a small Persian Gulfsheikdom, President Bush is taking an enormous political,military and economic risk. He is gambling that his militarycommanders can deliver a short and decisive victory thatlimits domestic opposition at home and Arab ferment in theMiddle East. America could emerge having proven its pointthat the international community won't allow powerfulcountries to take over small ones in the &quot;new world order&quot; ofthe 1990s.   But if the president's gamble fails, the consequences willbe daunting. If an air campaign doesn't work and Americantroops have to enter Kuwait to dig out some 545,000 Iraqitroops in and around Kuwait, that would produce a long andbloody fight that could turn unpopular at home, where thenation already is divided.   American troops have never gone into sustained combatagainst Arab forces before, and nobody knows what thereaction in the Arab world will be. As fighting continues,there will be a mounting risk of anti-American sentiment inthe Arab world, where Saddam Hussein increasingly is seen asa tragically flawed but emotionally appealing Arabnationalist who is fighting Western intruders. And the riskwill mount that the war will spread around the edgy,well-armed region.   Regardless of how the war unfolds, the U.S. now faces thegrave risk of terrorist attacks by Iraqi-sponsored terroristgroups.   For all practical purposes, the decision to go to war wassealed at 7:30 yesterday morning in Secretary of State JamesBaker's expansive, seventh-floor office at the StateDepartment. Mr. Baker summoned Prince Bandar bin Sultan, theSaudi Arabian ambassador to Washington, and told himPresident Bush wanted to move, diplomatic sources said.   Prince Bandar immediately picked up a State Departmentphone and called Saudi King Fahd, whose permission was neededbefore foreign troops could launch an attack from bases inhis country. The ambassador used a pre-arranged code word tosignal the king that the U.S. wanted to attack, and the kingassented, the sources said. Prince Bandar hung up the phoneand told the secretary of state the Saudi kingdom was onboard.   As war begins, the list of unknowns is daunting. The mostimportant questions: Will Iraq succeed in drawing Israel intothe conflict, turning it from a international crusade againstIraq's occupation of Kuwait into an Arab battle against theJewish State and the U.S.?   Will American air power win unchallenged mastery of theskies as quickly as widely predicted? Will America's alliesstand and fight by its side? Will Iraq use chemical andbiological weapons? Does it have a crude nuclear bomb itmight use under duress? And finally, is Saddam Husseinprepared for an all-out fight to the finish, or does heintend to absorb a few blows and then sue for peace?   Some early signs were favorable for Mr. Bush and hisallies. Most important, Iraq didn't launch a pre-emptiveattack on Israel before the U.S. moved. American officialswere afraid that Iraq might make such a move, calculatingthat Syria and Egypt would have to fall out of theAmerican-led coalition once there was a war involving Israel.The U.S. considers it essential that some ground troops,particularly Egyptian forces, participate in any ground moveto liberate Kuwait to make clear that the war doesn't pit theWest against the Arab world.   In addition, Mr. Bush said that no ground forces wereinvolved in the initial fighting, reducing the chances of bigcasualties for now. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen.Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told apress briefing that Iraq had offered little resistanceoverall, and no air resistance at all, in the opening twohours of the assault.   They said there hadn't been any confirmed launchings ofIraqi missiles and refused to discuss American casualties,except to note that early reports were &quot;very, veryencouraging.&quot;   A breathtaking array of soldiers and modern weaponry iscrammed onto some of the most valuable real estate in theworld in the Persian Gulf. The U.S. has 425,000 soldiers,sailors and fliers in and around Saudi Arabia. Its allies --most importantly Great Britain, France, Saudi Arabia andEgypt -- have another 265,000 troops in the region. The U.S.alone now has more than 1,800 combat aircraft in and aroundSaudi Arabia, as well as 1,200 main battle tanks, 2,200armored personnel carriers and 1,700 helicopters. Its alliesare chipping in another 270 or so combat aircraft and 1,200tanks.   Those forces face some 545,000 Iraqi troops in Kuwait andsouthern Iraq, armed with 4,200 tanks, 2,800 armored vehiclesand 3,100 artillery pieces. Iraq has perhaps 700 combataircraft to commit to the battle, though it isn't clear howmany remain after last night's raids.   But Iraq's army has hard-won experience from itseight-year war with Iran. Of greatest concern, Iraqi troopsexcel at precisely what they must do to keep occupied Kuwait:hunkering down in enormous, dugin defensive positions.   The first squadron of U.S. planes took off just before 1a.m. Persian Gulf time from an airbase in central SaudiArabia. They were the F-15E fighter bombers, carrying extrafuel tanks for the long trip north.   &quot;It is absolutely awesome. I mean the ground shook and youfelt it,&quot; said Col. Ray Davies, 44, of New Jersey, whowatched the first groups of planes depart.   The decision to launch the attack on Iraq was made easierby a surge of new political support in the last two days fromallied countries. Ironically, Saddam Hussein himself seems tohave accelerated a trend in allied capitals toward cleardeclarations of readiness to use force. By failing to offerany tangible response to peace feelers from France, theUnited Nations and the Soviet Union over the last week, theIraqi leader made it easier for President Bush to persuadeallied governments. The Iraqi leader's failure to make anydiplomatic move baffled U.S. officials, who had expected somefinal maneuver from him to head off war.   Just yesterday, France's parliament voted overwhelminglyto approve the use of French troops in a military action.Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who has dispatchedships and a squadron of fighter jets to the Gulf, told aspecial parliamentary session that Canada was ready to fight.   Great Britain's House of Commons voted earlier this weekto back the use of force to drive Iraq out of Kuwait. AndItaly's parliament was expected today to authorize thatcountry's small contingent of naval and air forces in thePersian Gulf to participate in action.   France has, however, placed some restrictions on itsparticipation. Prime Minister Michel Rocard said Frenchtroops would undertake only missions of specific durationrelated to freeing Kuwait or destroying military targets inIraq.   One of the biggest risks now facing the country is thehigh probability of terrorism carried out by Iraqi allies andradical Arab groups seething over the American militaryattack on an Arab state. Iraqi officials and leaders ofterrorist organizations have virtually promised a wave ofterrorist attacks at American targets around the globe oncefighting begins.   American intelligence officials expect most attacks tooccur outside the U.S., but fear at least a few attempts tohit targets inside the country as well. U.S. officials havebeen taking precautions, as have American businesses. &quot;I'mconfident that we can deal with terrorist threats,&quot; Mr.Cheney said last night.   In the end, the weather and the moon may have influencedthe decision to launch this high-technology attack now. TheU.N. deadline for action passed at midnight Tuesday, and theWhite House said that Mr. Bush tentatively signed legalpaperwork necessary to order the attack that day. Orders foraction weren't relayed to military commanders untilyesterday, though.   Private weather forecasters said that heavy showers couldstrike the Persian Gulf region starting late tonight andtomorrow, and may not clear until early next week. That mighthave added to American desires to move quickly, before theweather hampered initial operations.   And a new moon arrived this week, meaning skies are darkbut will become gradually lighter over the next few weeks asmore moonlight appears. A darker sky allows American troopsto capitalize on their night-fighting superiority.   (See related story: &quot;A Major Oil Glut Offers a Cushion;Reserve Is Tapped&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 17, 1991)</TEXT></DOC>