<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910506-0014</DOCNO><DOCID>910506-0014.</DOCID><HL>   Bush's Doctors Face Difficult Choices   On Discovering Cause of Heart Problem   ----   By Jerry E. Bishop   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   The problem facing President Bush's doctors over the nextseveral days will be how far to go in trying to find out whythe president suffered his bout of atrial fibrillation.   The erratic, uncoordinated heart beat that afflicted thepresident is experienced by one to two million Americansevery year and doctors follow a fairly standard procedure torestore normal rhythm. This includes theelectrical-stimulation procedure that the White House saidwas being considered by Mr. Bush's doctors. But once theheartbeat returns to normal, doctors still have to decide itscause.</LP><TEXT>   Atrial fibrillation occurs when electrical nerve impulsesoriginating at the top right side of the heart suddenly beginbombarding a kind of nerve &quot;switchboard,&quot; called the AV node,located toward the center of the heart. The AV nodeswitchboard is unable to deal with this unexpected flurry ofimpulses and passes them along irregularly to the lowerportions of the heart, resulting in an irregular heartbeat.   Mr. Bush's doctors followed the usual procedure of firsttrying the drug, digoxin, in an attempt to stop the irregularheartbeat. This drug is related to digitalis, one of theoldest drugs known to medicine. Digoxin is highly effectivein slowing down abnormally rapid nerve impulses but is also atricky drug to use since it is most effective when the dosageis just short of a toxic dose. Doctors have to carefullymonitor a patient with blood tests to keep track of how muchdigoxin is circulating in the blood. A toxic dose producesloss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, and headache.   Procainamide, the drug doctors added to Mr. Bush's therapywhen digoxin alone failed to stop the fibrillation, also is amedicine long used to stop irregular heart rhythms by slowingthe transmission of nerve impulses in the heart muscle. Italso can cause nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite and, inrare instances, confusion.   One of a class of drugs know as betablockers, such as adrug known as propanalol, or one of the so-calledcalcium-channel blockers, such as verapamil, might also betried, according to medical texts.   If drugs fail to restore regular heart beat within threedays or so, the standard practice is to stop the use of thedrugs for 24 hours and then deliver an electrical shock tojolt the heart back into a normal rhythm.   One of the worries in atrial fibrillation is that thelonger the irregular rhythm continues the greater the chancethat a blood clot will form and circulate through thearteries until it hits an artery narrow enough to lodge andblock the flow of blood. If this occurs in an artery leadingto the lungs -- a pulmonary emboli -- it can be extremelyserious. For this reason, anti-coagulant drugs are oftengiven to patients who suffer fibrillation for longer than aweek or so.   Once doctors restore a regular heart rhythm they likelywould prescribe daily doses of drugs like propanalol orverapamil to prevent recurrences of the fibrillation.   But even after the Mr. Bush's doctors restore a normalheart rhythm they face a decision on whether to begin aseries of tests to determine what underlying conditiontriggered the fibrillation in the first place. The arrythmiacan be set off by any number of activities that place astress on the heart and result, even momentarily, in part ofthe heart muscle failing to get enough oxygen. One suchstress could be the jogging that Mr. Bush was engaged in whenhe first felt the symptomatic shortness of breath.   In younger persons, such unexpected fibrillation occursfor unknown and not particularly dangerous reasons or becauseof rheumatic heart disease in childhood. But in olderpersons, atrial fibrillation can be a sign of some underlyingheart disease.   The most common underlying causes of atrial fibrillationare hypertension, which Mr. Bush doesn't have, oratherosclerosis, the gradual clogging of the coronaryarteries that nourish the heart muscle. The president haspassed his periodic health examinations with flying colors,and until now hasn't exhibited any evidence of underlyingheart disease. But atherosclerosis is notoriously difficultto detect until the artery clogging becomes severe enough todeprive portions of the heart muscle of an adequate supply ofblood. Heart specialists suspect that the majority ofAmerican males of Mr. Bush's age have some degree ofatherosclerosis.   Thus, the president's doctors will have to decide whetherthe evidence is strong enough to warrant further tests foratherosclerosis. In addition to an electrocardiogram takenwhile the patient runs on a treadmill, such tests includeusing a scanner to trace radioactive thallium in the blood asit courses through the heart. Such a thallium scan candisclose areas of the heart muscle that are failing toreceive an adquate blood supply because of clogged arteries.   In some patients, particularly those who appear to have ahigh risk of atherosclerosis, a thallium scan that hinted ata weak portion of the heart muscle would lead doctors toconsider coronary angiography. This test, the only sure wayto determine if the coronary arteries are clogged, involvesinjecting a dye into the coronary arteries that is visible onX-rays and watching it flow through the coronaries. The dyecan show up spots that are narrowed by the deposits ofatherosclerosis.   A decision to undertake coronary angiography on Mr. Bush,however, would be rather drastic. Angiography is rarelyundertaken unless the patient and his doctors are consideringsurgery, such as coronary bypass surgery, to correct theartery clogging if it is found. Since the president hasn'tshown any previous symptoms of heart disease it's highlyunlikely that either he or his doctors would consider bypasssurgery a possibility and hence there would be no reason forthe angiography.</TEXT></DOC>