<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900523-0039</DOCNO><DOCID>900523-0039.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>05/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE HOUSE APPROVED sweeping rights legislation for thedisabled.   Voting 403-20, the chamber passed the Americans WithDisabilities Act, which gives equal access to employment,transportation and buildings to about 43 million people inthe U.S. with physical or mental disabilities. The act isviewed as the most sweeping civil-rights measure in over 25years. The Senate has cleared similar legislation. After aHouse-Senate conference to resolve differences, Bush isexpected to sign the bill into law.</LP><TEXT>   The disabled currently are protected by a patchwork ofstate or local laws and a 1973 law covering federalbuildings, contractors and grant recipients.   ---   GORBACHEV WON approval for a transition to a regulatedmarket economy.   Soviet citizens faced the prospect of the doubling of somefood prices as early as July 1 as the president's advisorycouncil adopted a plan for a restructuring of the economy.The program, which favors a massive overhaul of prices, isexpected to be presented to the legislature tomorrow. Adeputy minister, meanwhile, said Moscow is drawing on hardcurrency reserves to help cover the Soviet Union's overduebills for Western goods.   Gorbachev met with the presidents of Estonia and Latvia,but stuck to his demand that the republics either suspend orrevoke their independence bids.   ---   NATO defense ministers met in Brussels and supported theuse of multinational military units in alliance nations, aplan that could result in an overhaul of NATO's militarystructure. The two-day session is aimed at reviewing thealliance's defense strategy amid political changes in EasternEurope.   ---   House-Senate conferees cleared a $4 billion fiscal 1990spending bill that includes $720 million in assistance toPanama and Nicaragua. The action came as the House signaledits support for withholding half of U.S. military aid to ElSalvador, but Republicans succeeded in scuttling theunderlying legislation.   ---   Congressional lawmakers expressed objections to Bush'sexpected call for a renewal of China's most-favored-nationtrade status, citing Beijing's human-rights record. Thepresident reportedly will propose a one-year extension of thebenefits this week.   ---   A U.S. appeals court ruled that any employer with morethan 15 workers must provide a man with unpaid child-rearingleave if the benefit is offered to female colleagues. ThePittsburgh court's decision is binding in Pennsylvania,Delaware, New Jersey and the Virgin Islands, and could beinfluential nationwide.   ---   Thousands of Palestinians demonstrated in theIsrael-occupied territories and in Jordanian cities andrefugee camps in escalating protests against Sunday'sslayings of seven Arab laborer's near Tel Aviv. Four peoplewere reported killed in the latest unrest, which included arally at the U.S. consulate in mostly Arab eastern Jerusalem.   ---   About 300,000 mourners buried Kashmir's senior Islamiccleric, whose assassination Monday prompted secessionistviolence that left 58 people dead in the disputed territory.India's security forces reportedly kept their distance duringthe funeral in Srinagar, where Moslem militants explodedbombs and fired rifles to honor the clergyman.   ---   Romania's Iliescu offered to form a coalition with partiesdefeated in Sunday's national elections. But as hundreds ofanti-government protesters rallied in Bucharest, oneopposition leader ruled out the proposal by the victoriouspresidential candidate, and another vowed to challenge theresults.   ---   North and South Yemen merged to form a single nation, theRepublic of Yemen. The new Arabian Peninsula country,unifying the pro-Western north with the socialist south,recently has located oil reserves and occupies a strategicentrance to the Red Sea.   ---   A Philippine military court charged two generals and 19other officers with murder and rebellion related to theiralleged roles in December's coup attempt against PresidentAquino's government. They are the first defendants to standtrial in the uprising.   ---   Dissidents in South Korea fought with riot police andburned a U.S. flag in the southern city of Kwangju. Studentsin Seoul declared a week of protests against the U.S.presence in South Korea, as police tightened security atAmerican installations.   ---   The Senate Agriculture panel voted for aseafood-inspection program that would put the nation's $30billion seafood industry under a triad of regulatoryagencies. Currently, only a fraction of the seafood consumedeach year undergoes product-grading or inspection.   ---   South Africa threatened to use the full force of lawagainst armed white extremists who have vowed a race war inOrange Free State. Mandela, meanwhile, called Sunday's policekilling of seven blacks in the region a &quot;massacre,&quot; andwarned that efforts to end apartheid would fail unless thePretoria government ends violence by security forces.   ---   Died: Rocky Graziano, 71, former middleweight boxingchampion, in New York, following hospitalization for astroke.</TEXT></DOC>