<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900709-0075</DOCNO><DOCID>900709-0075.</DOCID><HL>   Rough Launch:   GM's Plan for Saturn,   To Beat Small Imports,   Trails Original Goals   ---   Model Due Out in October   Won't Best Rivals on Cost   Or on High-Tech Features   ---   But Gung-Ho Workers Help   ----   By Joseph B. White and Melinda Grenier Guiles   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GM HMC LABOR</CO><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)</IN><LP>   SPRING HILL, Tenn. -- Richard G. &quot;Skip&quot; LeFauve, the topman at General Motors Corp.'s Saturn subsidiary, is listeningto phrases that could describe his operation's brand-newsmall car.   &quot;All-new aluminum engine, fail-safe sophisticatedmarketing research and highly automated assembly technique .. . a revolutionary change from a company and industry thatheretofore have stressed slow, evolutionary change.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Mr. LeFauve smiles and nods. But the passage isn't aboutSaturn at all. It's from J. Patrick Wright's 1979 bestseller, &quot;On a Clear Day You Can See General Motors.&quot; It wasGM's billing for the Vega, its botched 1970 effort to build asmall car as cheap and as good as the imports.   &quot;I'll be darned]&quot; Mr. LeFauve exclaims. Once over hissurprise, he adds: &quot;We've had many letters from peoplesaying, `Don't let this be another Vega.'&quot;   It has been seven years and more than $3.5 billion sinceGM Chairman Roger B. Smith first said Saturn would tackle thevery assignment Vega flunked: to prove that GM could build atop-quality small car in the U.S. At a time when GM thoughtthat the &quot;magic bullet&quot; of technology would solve itscompetitiveness problems, Mr. Smith promised a lot fromSaturn.   The cars would shame the Japanese, he said. He predictedthat Saturn's high-tech wizardry and team-spirit culturewould inspire all American industry in its battle with Japan.Alluding to the moon rockets that inspired Saturn's name, hecalled it &quot;a project of cosmic dimensions.&quot;   But now, as Saturn is about to start building cars for itslong-awaited launch in late October, it clearly won't reachmany of Mr. Smith's ambitious goals.   For starters, Saturn's cars won't offer a revolutionaryadvance over the Japanese. &quot;Two or three years ago, we wouldhave been well ahead of the competition,&quot; says Luther Coggin,a Saturn dealer in Jacksonville, Fla. &quot;By the time we hit themarket, we won't have a giant edge.&quot;   And although Saturn's management, which stresses workerinvolvement in decisions, certainly differs from GM's stodgycorpocracy, labor-management barriers have been coming downthroughout the auto industry. Even within GM, cooperationbetween members of the United Auto Workers union andwhite-collar engineers and plant managers has significantlyimproved quality and productivity at factories such as theBuick City complex in Flint, Mich., and the truck plant inFort Wayne, Ind.   As for beating the Japanese on cost, Saturn hasn't done ityet. One big reason is the enormous expense of the newTennessee factory. For $1.9 billion, Saturn constructed oneof the most highly integrated car plants since Henry Fordbegan building automobiles at his massive Rouge complex nearDetroit in 1927. Saturn's facility will be able to produceabout 240,000 cars -- and their engines and transmissions --a year. But to be profitable over the long term, Thomas G.Manoff, Saturn's vice president of finance, concedes, Saturnwill have to double that capacity.   While Saturn was incubating, Honda Motor Co. spent about$2 billion developing its own U.S. car-building operation.The original Marysville, Ohio, plant started up in 1982 bybuilding an existing model, the Accord. Automation wasmodest; some 35% of the welding was done manually. Hondadeveloped its facilities in stages, adding capacity as demandrequired and more sophisticated automation as workers becamemore adept at using it.   Saturn, in contrast, started out trying to design afacility so automated that much of it would run without humanworkers. But Saturn abandoned much of that goal, partlybecause other high-tech GM operations simply didn't work.   Moreover, Honda, once it got started, moved faster. GMtook more than three years to decide that Saturn should haveits own plant and should locate it in Tennessee. Meanwhile,Honda expanded the Marysville assembly plant and beganbuilding its Ohio engine factory. Then, in 1985, it launchedan all-new Accord whose development had started before theSaturn project was conceived.   The result: For roughly what GM spent at Spring Hill,Honda got not one but two assembly plants with total annualcapacity of 510,000 cars -- more than double Saturn's. Hondaalso got a factory capable of building almost all theengines, transmissions and related components needed by itsauto-assembly operations and its Ohio motorcycle plant.   Thus the question: Does GM need an expensive new operationto do what Honda does as a matter of course -- buildtop-quality cars at competitive prices in the U.S.?   Top GM officials say five years ago, the answer clearlywas yes. GM's traditional car divisions weren't reachingimport-oriented consumers, and the prospects of forgingcooperative agreements with the UAW looked dim. Saturn, withits separate dealerships and radical -- for GM-laboragreement was viewed as a crucial laboratory for conceptsthat could reinvigorate the huge corporation.   Privately, some GM officials concede that they have sincediscovered that the company's traditional operations couldchange on their own, albeit slowly. Not only has progressbeen made on labor relations, but there are signs thattraditional GM marketing divisions can fight the Japanese.Last fall, Chevrolet overhauled the marketing effort for itsstumbling Geo brand to woo Japanese car fans moreaggressively. The result: Geo sales since Oct. 1 are up 59%from the year-earlier period. However, there's a catch. Thehot-selling Geo Storm coupe is made in Japan. But thebest-selling Geo is the Prizm, a sedan built in California byunion workers at a GM-Toyota joint-venture plant.   Nevertheless, GM executives say the company needs Saturn.&quot;It's vital that we have a car marketed squarely to thosepeople who won't even come into our showrooms today,&quot; saysRobert C. Stempel, who is slated to succeed Mr. Smith aschairman on Aug. 1. &quot;That's where Saturn is positioned.&quot;   That's also why Saturn may hold a private ceremony,instead of a public party, for Mr. Smith to fulfill hispledge to drive a car off its assembly line before heretires. Saturn officials worried that television footage ofGM's chairman waving from the front seat would scare off thevery import buyers the subsidiary must attract.   It isn't entirely Saturn's fault that it won't fulfill Mr.Smith's promises. Some of his goals were wildly unrealisticor simply not worth meeting.   Mr. Smith wanted Saturn to be a totally computerized&quot;paperless&quot; operation; Saturn people quickly learned this wasimpossible. He wanted Saturn to build cheap, good-mileagesubcompacts. But since 1983, sales of cheap little cars havedropped along with gasoline prices.   Now, Saturn will offer cars about the size of a ToyotaCorolla. Base prices on Corollas range from just under $9,000to just over $13,000. It isn't exactly clear how Saturnprices will compare, but Saturn officials say they expect themajority of their cars will sell from roughly $10,000 toalmost $13,000 after adding popular options such as airconditioning and radios.   As for the cars, dealers who have driven them praise theirpeppy multivalve, four-cylinder engines, smoothtransmissions, appealing looks and good handling. Theinteriors have such features as windshield-wiper and lightcontrols on easy-to-reach stalks on the steering column. JayWetzel, vice president of engineering, calls the cars &quot;sportstouring sedans and coupes.&quot;   But all this describes nearly a dozen other competingmodels, including the Honda Civic, Mazda MX6 Coupe, ToyotaCorolla and Corolla's twin, Chevy's Geo Prizm. In short,Saturn is headed into a traffic jam, and many dealers say itwill have a hard time fulfilling its vow to grab 80% of itssales from non-GM brands.   That leaves a final goal: sparking revolution in GM'shidebound corporate culture. It's far too early to judgeSaturn on this score. But a decade of like-minded efforts,ranging from multibillion-dollar acquisitions to a sweepingreorganization, shows that change comes slowly and painfullyat the world's largest corporation.   Saturn officials say they routinely share information withtheir GM peers. But some at GM view Saturn both as a tacitrebuke to their competitiveness and as a rival for corporateresources. And not without reason. The billions spent onSaturn helped delay the launch of a new line of four-doormid-sized cars that GM needed in the late 1980s to counterFord Motor Co.'s Taurus and Sable models. That delaycontributed to GM's plunge in U.S. market share from 44% in1983 to 35.7% as of the end of June, and it cost the automaker billions.   At least one GM official wanted to kill Saturn. Elmer W.Johnson, an executive vice president, argued that Saturnneedlessly diverted resources at a time when GM was closingplants and struggling to sell existing brands. He even voicedhis opposition to GM's directors. But Chairman Smith's petproject survived, and Mr. Johnson chose to leave GM.   Now, Saturn officials want to dump all the baggage heapedon them by friends and foes. In less than four months, theymust crank up a new, highly complex factory to build anall-new car for a network of showrooms still largely underconstruction. Even Toyota Motor Corp., the industry'squality-efficiency leader, avoids building new products innew plants.   Saturn is biting off even more complexity. It mustpersuade car buyers already boggled by more than 600different models to go out of their way to find a brand theyknow nothing about. To ice the cake, Saturn is doing all thisin one of the weakest car markets since the early 1980s.   The man in charge of all this, Mr. LeFauve, is asoft-spoken 55-year-old whom co-workers regard as a genuinelydecent person and one of GM's quiet stars. A believer inworker involvement long before it became fashionable in theindustry, he has been known to invite hourly employees aswell as executives to private parties.   In his 34 years at GM, Mr. LeFauve has run severalmanufacturing operations, including the Rochester Productsdivision, where he oversaw a cooperative effort amongworkers, the University of Alabama and GM management in 1983to cut $2 million out of costs and save a carburetor plant inTuscaloosa, Ala.   Mr. LeFauve has thrown himself -- and even hisleisure-time reading -- into his latest challenge. He wasespecially intrigued by C. Gayle Warnock's &quot;The EdselAffair,&quot; an insider's history of Ford's disastrous effort tolaunch an all-new division and car in the late 1950s. Thepeople &quot;responsible for Edsel had no control over actualproduction,&quot; so quality &quot;suffered,&quot; Mr. LeFauve says helearned. &quot;There's where Saturn is strikingly different.&quot;   Saturn is also strikingly different in thealmost-religious fervor displayed by Mr. LeFauve and his3,300 or so co-workers, some 1,600 of whom are union workers.   These people accepted a union agreement without jobclassifications or myriad work rules. They also waived allUAW seniority rights to return to their old plants. GMsalaried workers who joined Saturn didn't have to make thatsacrifice. But both UAW and salaried employees will be paidat least 20% less than their regular GM counterparts -- withthe proviso that they can make up the difference and more ifSaturn meets certain goals.   In exchange for the sacrifices, Saturn employees also haveunprecedented involvement in all of the subsidiary'soperations. For example, Saturn's union workers, like thoseat many U.S. auto plants, help develop factory processes. Butthey also are members of the teams that helped pick dealers,the advertising agency and even the paving material forparking lots (a concrete mixture was chosen over asphalt,which cost more). And workers in each group interview andhire co-workers; Saturn doesn't have a traditional personneldepartment. Its extensive, continuous training program mixessuch esoterica as &quot;Principle-Centered Leadership&quot; with moretraditional fare, &quot;Paint Ovens Overview.&quot;   Employees say all this is crucial to their mission:building not just a car but &quot;systems that will make thecustomer feel very loved, if you will, by the vehicle,&quot; saysJames Bovenzi, a finance manager. But Saturn's gung-hoapproach to people is reminiscent of GM's initiallyenthusiastic, later scaled-back embrace of robots. UAWofficials caution that the Saturn system probably won't workelsewhere.   Saturn's best chance of producing true innovations for GMmay lie in its dealership and distribution network. It's anarea where change is next to impossible in existingoperations because state franchise laws strongly protect thestatus quo. Saturn handpicked dealers whose operations scoredhigh in customer-satisfaction surveys and whose pockets weredeep enough to build up to $2 million in new facilities.Saturn gave the dealers exclusive territories, many of themmore than triple the size of a normal Big Three franchise.   Russell Hand, for instance, will be the only Saturn dealerin the sprawling Culver City-Inglewood-Torrance area southand west of Los Angeles. The wide territory may provideenough sales volume to offset the relatively low per-carprofit inherent in cars selling for less than $13,000.   But because of the exclusive territories, Saturn shoppersmight not see the discounting common in other dealershipsbecause, as Mr. Hand puts it, he won't have to &quot;waste timeand energy trying to steal sales from the Saturn dealer threeblocks away.&quot; Saturn officials insist that they won't offercash rebates.   In return for the huge franchises, Saturn is askingdealers to give their facilities a uniform look, with salesoffices and service bays side-by-side in the front. They alsoinsist that dealer personnel be trained incustomer-satisfaction techniques.   The trouble is, for much of Saturn's first year, manyAmericans won't be able to find a Saturn dealer at all. Tomatch its gradual production phase-in, Saturn plans aregion-by-region launch, starting in the West and Southeast.Even after 12 months, Saturn expects to have only about 110sales outlets nationwide -- a smaller number than Jaguar,which sells fewer than 20,000 cars a year in the U.S.   Saturn also will have trouble outdoing rival auto makers'promises of unparalleled buyer satisfaction. Every month, itseems, yet-another brand announces free roadside service,generous leases, even free maintenance. GM's Oldsmobiledivision last fall gave customers who didn't like their newOlds after 30 days the option of trading it in for fullcredit toward a different Olds model. Oldsmobile's salesnonetheless continued to slide.   To set itself apart, Saturn is counting on somethinghardly revolutionary: advertising. It has a $100 millionmarketing budget. And it has hired Hal Riney andamp; Partners, asmall San Francisco agency known not for car advertising butfor lump-in-the-throat paeans to American values.   Dealers say the early versions of the launch ads followthe tone of a 22 1/2-minute video, made largely for internaluse, that juxtaposes soft-focus images of Tennessee farmers,newborn calves and hackberry trees with shots of the hugefactory and silhouettes of the car. &quot;It's spring, in SpringHill, Tennessee,&quot; Mr. Riney says, in the same distinctive,gruff baritone and cadence he used to say &quot;it's morning inAmerica&quot; for his most famous client, Ronald Reagan. Thesymbolism is similar, too: Saturn promises a rebirth of theAmerican car just as Mr. Reagan promised a new day inAmerican politics.   But, given the odds against them, Saturn officials aretrying to reduce expectations. &quot;Judge us on quality rightaway,&quot; Saturn's Mr. Wetzel says. &quot;Judge us on market share infive years.&quot;   By that time, GM and Saturn may have a better answer forthe question that has dogged the project almost from thestart: Was this really necessary? In the meantime, Saturn'speople are working and worrying with almost equal ardor.   &quot;We're real, real determined,&quot; says Laurie Danko, acontinuing-education coordinator who has been with Saturnfrom the start. &quot;We want this to work real bad.&quot; But, sheadds, the project also &quot;scares the hell out of us. My husbandworks here, too. We have all our eggs in this basket.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>