<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900405-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>900405-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   If Corporations Are Silenced in   Political Debate, Who's Next?   ----   By Michael Gartner</HL><DATE>04/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A19</SO><LP>   It's hard to keep up on all the news these days. So incase you've been concentrating on broccoli -- clearly afront-page story every bit as important as Millie and herpups -- let me tell you what the Supreme Court was up to lastweek.   It was up to no good.</LP><TEXT>   The court said, in effect, that political debate canbecome one-sided and that states can censor it. It saidcorporations, be they for-profit or not-for-profit, can bebarred from telling you what they think about a candidate,and it will take no great leap to expand that thinking toinclude causes and issues.   The court said, in the words of dissenting Justice AntoninScalia, that &quot;too much speech is an evil&quot; that states canstamp out.   As the comedians say, I am not making this up.   Here are the facts:   In 1976, the state of Michigan passed a campaign-financelaw that said, among other things, that a corporation can'tuse its general treasury funds to make so-called independentexpenditures in a political campaign. That means thecorporation can't, for instance, take out an ad or send out abrochure endorsing or opposing this or that candidate.   In 1985, the Michigan Chamber of Commerce decided that aman named Richard Bandstra was the best candidate in aspecial election in Grand Rapids to fill a seat in the statehouse of representatives. The chamber proposed taking out anadvertisement talking about the need for Michigan to changeits workers'-compensation law and to lower its personalincome-tax rate. In that ad it proposed saying, &quot;The StateChamber is committed to job development in Michigan. Webelieve Richard Bandstra shares that commitment.&quot;   But the chamber, reading the 1976 law, decided maybe itsad was illegal. So it sought to find out. A federal districtjudge said yes, indeed, the ad was barred by the statute. TheSixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, saying the statuteviolated the First Amendment. Then, last week, the SupremeCourt, in a 6-3 vote, reversed again, upholding the statuteand ignoring the Constitution.   The opinion was written by Justice Thurgood Marshall, oneof the court's liberals, and was joined by Justice William J.Brennan, the man liberals always look to to defend theirrights to speak or write or gather or pray. They were joinedby the court's moderates and Chief Justice William Rehnquist,a man always ready to rein in the First Amendment. Opposingthe decision -- and thus favoring full rights of free speech-- were Justices Scalia and Anthony Kennedy and Sandra DayO'Connor.   Opposing, too, in friend-of-the-court briefs were suchdisparate groups as the American Civil Liberties Union, theAmerican Medical Association, the National Association ofRealtors, Greenpeace Action, the Fund for the FeministMajority and the American Insurance Association. Clearly, alot of people were worried. And their worries turned out tobe well-founded.   Justice Marshall, in the opinion, said it was OK tosquelch speech because there was &quot;a compelling stateinterest&quot; -- preventing corruption or the appearance ofcorruption in the political arena by reducing the threat thathuge corporate treasuries will be used to influence unfairlyelection outcomes.   This is absurd -- and dangerous.   It's absurd because this is America, and America isn'tsupposed to stifle the speech of man or corporation. (Thefact that corporations amass large treasuries does notjustify the suppression of political speech, Justice Scaliawrote, &quot;unless one thinks it would be lawful to prohibit menand women whose net worth is above a certain figure fromendorsing political candidates.&quot;)   It's absurd because money -- from political actioncommittees and others -- already plays a huge role inAmerican elections. It's absurd because censorship is a fargreater political sin than is overspending or even buying anelection.   It's dangerous because it sets a new course, a course inwhich a government can censor speech that simply has thepotential for causing harm, not speech (like Justice Holmes'sexample of shouting fire in a crowded theater) that actuallycauses harm.   &quot;Today's reversal of field will require adjustment of afairly large number of significant First Amendment holdings,&quot;Justice Scalia said in a dissent that he actually read fromthe bench because he felt so strongly about the issue.   &quot;Presumably the State may now convict individuals forselling books found to have a potentially harmful influenceon minors . . ., ban indecent telephone communications thathave the potential of reaching minors . . ., restrict thepress from publishing information that has the potential ofjeopardizing a criminal defendant's right to a fair trial . .. and compel an applicant for bar membership to reveal herpolitical beliefs and affiliations to eliminate the potentialfor subversive activity.&quot;   Perhaps the bill has a noble objective, Mr. Scalia wrote.&quot;But government abridgement of liberty is always undertakenwith the very best of announced objectives (dictators promiseto bring order, not tyranny), and often with the very best ofgenuinely intended objectives (zealous policemen conductunlawful searches in order to put dangerous felons behindbars).   &quot;The premise of our Bill of Rights, however, is that thereare some things -- even some seemingly desirable things --that government cannot be trusted to do. The very first ofthese is establishing the restrictions upon speech that willassure `fair' political debate.&quot;   The theory behind the ruling is that corporations areowned by their stockholders and those people might not wantthe corporation to spend its money for political purposes.   If that's the case, then it seems logical to rule, too,that no executive -- whose pay comes from general corporatefunds -- can speak out in political debate. And nostockholder can use his dividends for political purposes.That, of course, is absurd, as absurd as last week's ruling.   In a separate dissent, Justice Kennedy wrote: &quot;With theimprimatur of this Court, it is now a felony in Michigan forthe Sierra Club, or the American Civil Liberties Union, orthe Michigan State Chamber of Commerce, to advise the publichow a candidate voted on issues of urgent concern to theirmembers. In both practice and theory, the prohibition aims atthe heart of political debate.&quot;   Twenty states have laws similar to Michigan's. So, inabout half this nation, we now have what Justice Kennedycalls &quot;the rawest form of censorship: the state censors whata particular segment of the political community might saywith regard to candidates who stand for election.&quot;   Any kind of censorship is dreadful. But censorship ofpolitical talk is the worst of all. And as of last week,that's what we have in the United States.   ---   Mr. Gartner is editor and co-owner of the Daily Tribune inAmes, Iowa, and president of NBC News in New York.</TEXT></DOC>