<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920309-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>920309-0092.</DOCID><HL>   The Money Trail:   U.S. Firms Are Linked   To an Israeli General   At Heart of a Scandal   ---   Funds for Defense Contracts   Were Diverted, but Why?   Investigations Broaden   ---   Bundles of Cash in a Mercedes   ----   By Edward T. Pound and David Rogers   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/20/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GE GM IMI UTX</CO><MS>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)CONGLOMERATES (CGL)DIVERSIFIED TECHNOLOGY (DTC)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)INSIDER TRADING (ISD)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>BELGIUM (BEL)CALIFORNIA (CA)CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)CONNECTICUT (CT)PANAMA (CZ)EUROPE (EU)FLORIDA (FL)GERMANY (GE)ISRAEL (ISR)MICHIGAN (MI)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SWITZERLAND (SZ)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   TEL AVIV -- A young star in Israel's Air Force, Rami Dotancame up fast -- and went down the same way.   Last spring, the brigadier general was stripped of hisrank and packed off to prison for skimming millions ofdollars in U.S. military aid. His confession to theft andfraud was the biggest scandal in the history of Israel'selite military.</LP><TEXT>   But the Dotan affair could prove to be as much an Americanscandal as an Israeli one. An investigation by The WallStreet Journal has traced more than $11 million diverted fromGeneral Electric Co. contracts and then passed through anobscure New Jersey front company to bank accounts acrossEurope.   Aircraft engine divisions of United Technologies Corp. andGeneral Motors Corp. also complied with some of Gen. Dotan'sdemands concerning the use of favored subcontractors ordistributors. And smaller U.S. firms that got militarybusiness from Israel paid hundreds of thousands of dollars toa trio of Panamanian shell corporations in the general'senterprise.   The American companies deny any wrongdoing and say theywere duped. In several cases, the record suggests theiremployees failed to raise any red flags as millions ofdollars went to businesses that were non-existent only monthsbefore.   The Israeli government says Gen. Dotan was simply acorrupt rogue officer. The diversion began as early as 1985and continued for five years without detection. And only afraction of the stolen U.S. taxpayer funds secretly held inSwitzerland was ever spent by Gen. Dotan and his associates.That makes some U.S. investigators speculate that thediversion was intended to finance covert operations.   This speculation is fueled by the history of a centralplayer in the Dotan affair, the mysterious Harold Katz. Adual citizen who once practiced law in Boston, Mr. Katz oftentraveled between Israel, the U.S. and Europe, trips thatenabled him to assemble a trail of bank accounts and frontcompanies that served Gen. Dotan's purposes.   Mr. Katz has long had contact with Israeli intelligencefigures and is practiced in the trade of moving money abroad.His Washington apartment, purchased in 1985, was used byIsraeli agents for copying thousands of classified documentssupplied by Jonathan Jay Pollard, a Navy intelligence analystpaid by Israel as a spy. Mr. Katz's banking contacts inSwitzerland included the managers of a Zurich investmentfirm, Ellis AG, which American investigators believe has tiesto Israeli intelligence and insider trading.   &quot;I am not a spy,&quot; says Mr. Katz. But discretion is a badgeof honor for the 70-year-old Harvard-trained attorney. &quot;As alawyer, I don't want to know what my clients do,&quot; he says. &quot;Idon't want to know their secrets.&quot;   Much of the diverted money was drawn from U.S. foreign-aidprograms intended to benefit Israel. American military aid toIsrael amounts to $1.8 billion in cash each year. But theU.S. provides little oversight of expenditures. The Pentagonassigns only one desk officer to review Israeli commercialexpenditures, which involve thousands of direct contractseach year with American companies.   As a rule, this type of transaction is the most vulnerableto abuse. Referring broadly to the world-wide U.S. militaryaid program, a Defense Department report last May warned thatsuch commercial contracts have a &quot;history of impropriety,including fraudulent pricing schemes involving kickbacks.&quot;But neither the Pentagon nor the General Accounting Office,an arm of Congress, has ever conducted a thorough audit of heIsraeli aid program.   Procurement reforms have been ordered by Israel's Ministryof Defense. &quot;These stables are going to be clean and we arecleaning,&quot; say a high official in the Israeli procurementoffice in New York. Indeed, top officials such as David Ivri,director general of the Defense Ministry, and Menachem(Mendy) Meron, who once held the same post, put theirprestige on the line to force the Dotan inquiry on the proudAir Force.   In the past Congress has been reluctant to touch anythingembarrassing to Israel, but Washington has now joined in thepressure for answers. House Energy and Commerce CommitteeChairman John Dingell has begun inquiries about the divertedfunds, and Justice Department and Pentagon criminalinvestigators have directed subpoenas to an array of aircraftcompanies from Florida to Texas and California.   &quot;This appears to go beyond bribery, money-laundering andviolations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act,&quot; says Rep.Dingell, a Michigan Democrat. &quot;There is evidence to suggestthat it may involve insider-trading and espionage.&quot;   U.S. investigators still are tracing how tens of millionsof dollars in American aid to Israel was spent. But theinquiry has been slowed by a lack of cooperation between theU.S. and Israel, and both sides blame the other. &quot;We knowthat American citizens and American companies have done wrongin this case,&quot; says Gadi Watermann, an Israeli policeinvestigator who says he provided information to JusticeDepartment officials in Washington last February.   As the Israeli procurement chief for Air Force engines,Gen. Dotan oversaw not only Israel's ambitious F-16 programbut also the maintenance of lesser U.S.-made jet andhelicopter engines. The 46-year-old general was a dominantforce in designating who won tens of millions of dollars inparts and overhaul contracts each year. And he could bothinitiate purchase orders and control invoices that falselyreported on the nature and progress of the projects underhim.   His alter ego was Yoram Ingbir, a burly engineer whosetravels took him to the U.S. and South America -- and whoseextensive dealings with American defense contractors make hima common thread for investigators.   Central to Gen. Dotan's enterprise was his longtimeassociate Herbert Steindler, a career GE executive who had ahistory of dealings with Israel's powerfulmilitary-industrial complex. In papers filed with Gen.Dotan's indictment, military prosecutors describe Mr.Steindler as Gen. Dotan's &quot;partner&quot; in the illicit schemes.Mr. Steindler's attorney, Earl Silbert, declines comment. GE,which says it dismissed Mr. Steindler last March, says it isconducting its own inquiry and is cooperating with theJustice Department.   Among Mr. Steindler's allies was an old Army friend namedGary Klein, a 56-year-old engineer whose consulting firm, GSKManagement Consultants, was listed at his home in Matawan,N.J. GSK oversaw bank accounts into which GE paid about $35million before the scandal broke.   The first installments of $27.5 million went largely topay for services performed by companies associated with Mr.Ingbir, the Tel Aviv engineer allied with Gen. Dotan. But aportion of the funds, about 13%, was typically held back byGSK and set on a circuitous path through a money market fundand New Jersey bank to Europe.   Beginning in 1989, GE paid an additional $7.8 million intoa GSK account to pay for engine test-support activities inIsrael, but virtually all the money went instead to Europeanaccounts overseen by Mr. Katz for Gen. Dotan and his allies.   &quot;This whole thing has not unraveled yet,&quot; says Mr. Kleinin a short telephone interview. &quot;I had no idea that anythingwas not what it seemed on the surface.&quot;   The millions diverted from GE contracts passed throughbanks in Belgium and Germany before reaching theirdestination in Switzerland, where the money was held in bankaccounts under the names of shell corporations set up by Mr.Katz. The early diversion from GE came in installments ofless than $250,000. But by 1989, single transfers from theU.S. were as big as $2 million.   Quite apart from GE, Mr. Steindler was a principal inanother venture known as ESA Inc., which received more than$7 million in Israeli Air Force purchases. Mr. Steindler'sarmy buddy, Mr. Klein, was in regular contact with ESA'sprincipals. The company's listed officers were relatives ofMr. Steindler who taught reading and history in Queens publicschools in New York through most of this period.   Israeli authorities identify ESA's owners as Messrs.Steindler, Katz and Dotan. Officials estimate that profits ofat least $600,000 were generated by the enterprise, whichhired out work to a one-man shop in Valdosta, Ga., and aHaifa electronics firm that had been a client of Mr. Katz.   Though GE is the dominant corporate figure in the Dotanaffair, its chief jet engine competitor, the Pratt andamp; Whitneydivision of United Technologies, is also entangled. Pratt andamp;Whitney, which knew Mr. Katz from a period when he was alegal adviser in the Israeli defense ministry, subsequentlyretained him for $25,000 a year. The engine maker also facesquestions regarding its extensive dealings with companiesaffiliated with Gen. Dotan's engineer friend, Mr. Ingbir.   As Israel's designated sole source for a piece ofjet-engine testing equipment, Pratt andamp; Whitney agreed in 1988to giving Mr. Ingbir's firm part of the project despite anestimated added cost of at least $200,000. Israeli police arealso reviewing Mr. Ingbir's apparent ties to two New Jerseycompanies, Air Tech Inc. and Yrret Co., which received nearly$6 million as subcontractors to Pratt andamp; Whitney oncomputer-related work.   Yrret Co.'s American owners are believed to be associatesof Mr. Ingbir. Air Force procurement documents include areference to &quot;Yrretco, New Jersey/Ingbir Engineering,Israel.&quot; U.S. investigators believe that Yrret Co.'s veryname may be derived from the Hebrew initials of Mr. Ingbirand his wife, Rivka. Neither Yrret Co. nor Air Tech hadexisted for long in New Jersey before winning the contracts.Investigators say the costs incurred by the New Jerseycompanies were far less than the contract price. But Prattasked few questions, complying with Israel's requests to namethem subcontractors, ostensibly for Israeli security reasons,and taking its usual markup on the contracts. Reached in TelAviv, Mr. Ingbir refuses comment. United Technologies,speaking for Pratt andamp; Whitney, says, &quot;We believe the companyacted in accordance with Israeli and U.S. law.&quot;   The full scope of Gen. Dotan's clout is evident in theinfluence he exercised over the Allison Gas Turbine Divisionof General Motors. In the mid-1980s he intervened to getAllison to adjust its world-wide distributor lineup to haveNational Airmotive Corp. (NAC), a division of publicly heldIntermark Inc., designated as the Israeli distributor for twohelicopter engines.   An Allison spokesman says the change permitted NAC to setup business operations in territory held by anotherdistributor. Security reasons were the stated justificationfor the change, the spokesman says, but when pressed he isunable to explain why these security problems hadn't beenraised in prior years. Although NAC had a proven record,Allison's actions helped Gen. Dotan cut out establishedrivals and led to what police describe as gross abuses.   &quot;Dotan wanted bureaucracy-free money&quot; for his petprojects, says Amnon Shaltiel, a senior Israeli policeofficial. Israeli police allege that NAC prepared falsifiedbills of lading and shipped &quot;fictitious equipment&quot; -- or whatthey bluntly describe as &quot;pure junk&quot; engine parts -- back andforth between Israel and NAC's Oakland, Calif., plant.   NAC, which received more than $80 million in engineservice contracts during Gen. Dotan's tenure, denies thecharge, but acknowledges that it agreed to a specialarrangement to retain credits owed to the Israeli Air Force,rather than returning them to the government. As needs arose,Israeli officers then ordered equipment directly from Oaklandrather than through the ministry of defense. As much as$500,000 in credits were drawn down in this manner over theyears, the company estimates.   NAC paid $1.3 million to Mr. Ingbir's firm for services inIsrael. In addition, nearly $300,000 was paid directly to aPanamanian-registered front company, Mandamp;E Engineering Ltd., inSwitzerland. Mandamp;E was one of three such companies -- the othertwo were named Aerotech Ltd. and VISP -- that Mr. Katzacknowledges he set up at Gen. Dotan's request.   The three companies were established supposedly to selldesign services, typically blueprints for engine testfacilities. But Israeli police and military authoritiesallege that the companies were used as a conduit for payoffsto Gen. Dotan and his clique not only from NAC but also fromJet Power Inc., Miami, and a third company based in Texas.   NAC's attorney, Charles Stevens, denies the company madekickbacks, adding that NAC even refused to make a final$152,000 payment to Mandamp;E because it felt &quot;ripped off&quot; underthe arrangement. Sanford Freed, an attorney representing JetPower, also denies the involvement of any kickbacks, but saysthe Miami-based aircraft company had paid $20,722 to Aerotechfor design drawings. The payment in June 1985 came weeksafter a Jet Power executive met with Gen. Dotan in Tel Aviv.Soon after the company's business blossomed with the AirForce.   In NAC's case, at least, the checks for engineeringservices were sent to Topaz Treuhand, a trustee companyaffiliated with and located in the same offices as theelusive investment firm Ellis AG in Zurich.   Ellis has been the target of a nearly decade-long probe bythe Securities and Exchange Commission focusing on trading inAmerican takeover stocks. Some investigators also believe thecompany has ties to Israeli intelligence. A wealthy Israelibusinessman is cooperating in the U.S. investigation, whichthis year led to charges against a former Merrill Lynchbroker in London who now lives in Israel.   Ellis's managers dismiss the SEC investigation asunfounded, but won't discuss their association with Mr. Katz.&quot;I'm not commenting on names,&quot; says George Dreyfuss, aprincipal in both Ellis and Topaz Treuhand.   Mr. Katz is a longtime acquaintance of Ellis's managers.An Ellis trading entity has identical Panamanian officers asKingstree Finance Corp., the major front company that Mr.Katz says was used as the Swiss depository for the millionsdiverted by Gen. Dotan.   This maze of Panamanian companies and secret Swissaccounts remains a riddle of sorts. Was it all for personalenrichment? After all, $1.1 million of the proceeds was usedto buy apartments in Tel Aviv and Rome for Gen. Dotan andGE's Mr. Steindler, according to Israeli police.   Or was there another purpose that accounts for the manymillions of additional dollars diverted? If the answer is tobe found, it may well be with Mr. Katz, a skilled handler ofmoney who has moved funds through accounts in Zurich undersuch cryptic names as &quot;Hal,&quot; &quot;Freedom,&quot; &quot;Rome,&quot; &quot;Kalmi&quot; and&quot;Shosh.&quot;   In the case of Gen. Dotan, &quot;I was used,&quot; says Mr. Katz,near tears in a Tel Aviv hotel overlooking the Mediterranean.But if so, who used him, and why?   A Romanian emigrant, he says he earned nine battle starsfighting Japan in the Pacific as a deck officer on a U.S.Navy destroyer in World War II. Then, at age 26, privatecitizen Katz went to battle against Britain, leaving hisHarvard Law studies to smuggle Jewish refugees to prestatePalestine on the merchant ship Hatikvah, or hope.   The former college wrestler tells of fighting hand-to-handwith British sailors before being imprisoned in Cyprus. Hesays he was part of a team that later blew up a Britishprison ship at the Port of Haifa on the Mediterranean.Imprisoned again, he joined the legendary Hagana undergroundand returned to school, he says, only after the Britishagreed to pull out of Palestine.   His Boston friends remember him as a first-rate litigatorand ardent Zionist. Mr. Katz jumped into politics, forging aclose relationship with Mayor Kevin White after helping himin his 1967 campaign. But his higher profile, he says, mayhave contributed to his indictment in the collapse of aBoston apartment project in which he held a stake. Thoughacquitted, Mr. Katz decided in 1972 to move to Israel forgood. &quot;I felt the time had come when I had to fish or cutbait,&quot; he says. &quot;I had been a Zionist all my life.&quot;   For a decade, until 1983, Mr. Katz served as a top legaladviser in the Ministry of Defense, using his command ofEnglish and American law to guide important constructionprojects and negotiate contracts with U.S. firms. Theseincluded General Electric and Pratt andamp; Whitney. In the sameperiod, he met Rami Dotan while working on the Lavi program,an ill-fated effort to build a fighter jet from Israel's owndesign and with U.S. money.   Mr. Katz bought an apartment blocks from the IsraeliEmbassy in Washington that became a meeting point for Israeliagents in the Pollard spy affair -- and a place to operatesophisticated copying machines used in the spy caper.   Mr. Katz's ties to Israeli intelligence date back manyyears. His longtime contacts include Rafael (Rafi) Eitan, aformer senior official in the Ministry of Defense and adviserto past Israeli prime ministers, who once worked with Mr.Katz on a counter-terrorism project. It was Mr. Eitan, alegendary former member of Israel's Mossad spy service, whoran the Pollard spy operation. Mr. Eitan won't say whetherthe government asked Mr. Katz to procure the apartment, butsays Mr. Katz &quot;was never a spy for Israel.&quot; Wearing an amusedgrin, Mr. Eitan politely invites a reporter to leave his homeoutside Tel Aviv if he continues to press for informationabout the Pollard case.   One of Mr. Pollard's handlers, Yosef Yagur, who made cashpayments to the analyst and set up a Swiss bank account forhim, says an employee in the Israeli Embassy had asked Mr.Katz for the use of the apartment. &quot;He did a favor,&quot; Mr.Yagur says in an interview in Tel Aviv. Mr. Katz says he had&quot;no notion, no knowledge&quot; of how his apartment was used, butsays he has been instructed by the Israeli government not todiscuss the case.   The U.S. government would like more answers. JosephdiGenova, the former chief prosecutor in the Pollard case,says of Mr. Katz, &quot;He is a central witness. . . . I remain ascurious today as I was four years ago about Mr. Katz's rolein the Pollard case.&quot;   But the U.S. is unlikely to get any information soon, andMr. Katz has gone to some lengths to avoid appearing beforeauthorities. Four years ago, while he was being activelysought for questioning in the spy case, a friend recalls himflying to Montreal and then being driven past U.S. customsand immigration authorities to the Burlington, Vt., airport.From there he apparently caught a flight to an unknown pointin the U.S.   In the Dotan case, a compatriot tells of helping Mr. Katzmove hundreds of thousands of dollars across the streetbetween banks in Konstanz, Germany, to further confuse themoney trail. Mr. Katz came to rely on Willie Rostoker, afeisty, elderly former Hagana underground member who made afortune in steel in Canada. Together they moved wads of cashacross the Swiss border from Konstanz to Zurich in a Mercedes190E.   Mr. Katz says that all the time he believed he was movingnothing more than a family inheritance for Gen. Dotan. Hesays he was Mr. Dotan's lawyer, not his partner in crime.&quot;Not everything I do is suspicious,&quot; he says. &quot;I do have anormal life.&quot;   For Gen. Dotan, the beginning of the end came when aformer buyer in the Israeli purchasing office in New Yorkcomplained that Gen. Dotan was cutting him out of business.Then, in 1990, after becoming concerned that the Dotan fundswere tainted, Mr. Katz's Canadian friend, Mr. Rostoker,disclosed that he had helped move millions of dollars throughEuropean bank accounts. His testimony blew the case open,forcing Mr. Katz to cooperate with authorities. Seized bypolice, Mr. Katz turned state's witness against Gen. Dotanand helped the Israeli government recover millions from thesame Swiss accounts he had managed. U.S. investigatorsbelieve they have yet to get a full accounting.   Today, Mr. Katz bitterly describes Mr. Rostoker as &quot;Judas&quot;and says his friend went to the law only after Mr. Katzrefused to pay him blackmail -- a charge Mr. Rostoker says isabsurd. As for his own involvement in the affair, Mr. Katzlaments: &quot;I committed no crime but I do blame myself forindulging Dotan longer than I should have. For that I amsorry. I'm an experienced, older man. I should have acteddifferently.&quot;   ---   Corrections andamp; Amplifications ESA Inc., a maker of analyticinstruments based in Bedford, Mass., isn't the ESA Inc. thatreceived money from the Israeli Air Force and was mentionedin a page-one article in Monday's edition. (WSJ Jan. 22,1992)   ---   (See related letter: &quot;Letters to the Editor: &quot;All the ManyThings I Am Not and Did Not Do&quot; -- WSJ March 9, 1992)   920120-0004</TEXT></DOC>