<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910208-0060</DOCNO><DOCID>910208-0060.</DOCID><HL>   Deft Steering:   GM's New Boss Runs   Into Many Problems --   But Little Opposition   ---   So Far, Stempel's Cutbacks   Are Being Taken Calmly;   He Tries Hard to Be Fair   ---   Real Debate at Big Meetings   ----   By Paul Ingrassia and Joseph B. White   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GM LABOR</CO><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><LP>   DETROIT -- Robert C. Stempel, the chairman of GeneralMotors Corp., seems destined to deliver bad news to people.Fortunately, he has a knack for it.   Lately, the 57-year-old executive has delivered a lot ofbad news. Topping the list are this week's 47% cut in GM'scommonstock dividend and last fall's mammoth $2.1 billionwrite-off for closing at least seven of GM's 38 assemblyplants in North America. But there is far more.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Stempel virtually eliminated executive bonus paymentsthis year, for himself as well as for other seniorexecutives. That is a tougher move than it may seem. The word&quot;bonus&quot; implies a frill, but GM's top 3,900 employees get 40%to 60% of their total pay from the bonus; so, somehigh-powered people are getting some mighty powerful paycuts. And those are the lucky ones. GM will eliminate 15% ofits salaried work force in North America -- a cutback of some15,000 people -- by 1993. It will start with 6,000 jobs thisyear alone.   Those are the highlights, so far, of GM's Stempel Era,which began last Aug. 1. On the very next day, Iraq invadedKuwait, sending the U.S. economy into a slide that hasdropped auto sales to levels not seen in a decade. &quot;My firstday {as chairman} was great,&quot; Mr. Stempel says. &quot;The rest ofthem could have been a lot better.&quot;   So now Mr. Stempel is asking for sacrifice from anorganization already rocked in recent years by layoffs, plantclosings and declines in market share. The prospect ofanother big round of downsizing is, of course, alreadystirring up a lot of apprehension in the ranks. But perhapssurprisingly, Mr. Stempel's sackcloth regimen is drawingrelatively few protests, and even some praise, from the verypeople who are being discomforted.   &quot;He's going to hang in there, and we're going to hang inthere with him,&quot; says Lewis B. Campbell, a GM manufacturingvice president. Adds Richard G. &quot;Skip&quot; Lefauve, president ofGM's Saturn Corp. subsidiary: &quot;There's no whimpering orcrying. He's doing what needs to be done. He's the kind ofleader who takes the lumps, and we're going to walk throughwalls for Bob Stempel.&quot;   Such sentiments contrast sharply with the angry cynicismthat greeted earlier calls for sacrifice at GM. In part, thedifference is merely in the timing. After just six months onthe job, Mr. Stempel is still in a honeymoon period withemployees and Wall Street alike.   But Mr. Stempel deserves credit as well. Many at GM,including some longdisgruntled managers, say he is earningrespect by displaying fairness in both the style andsubstance of his actions. &quot;It's like very, very early springhere,&quot; says one internal dissident. &quot;I never thought I'd seechanges, but I am. They're slow, but I see fundamentalchanges.&quot;   For example, GM is sharply reducing its matching-fundpayments to employees who invest in its stock-purchase plan.For most salaried employees, the cuts will take effect April1. But for officers, the cuts already went into effect, onFeb. 1. &quot;The commander doesn't eat until the troops are fed,&quot;Mr. Stempel explains.   That attitude is a sharp contrast from the 1980s. In 1982,GM sweetened the formula for executive bonuses shortly afterwinning concessions from the United Auto Workers union.Later, it stoutly defended bonuses during years when workersdidn't get profit sharing and thousands of managers werefired.   Late last year, moreover, Mr. Stempel rejected a proposalto make executive incentive payments in December instead ofJanuary. The switch, designed to beat the federal income-taxincrease on the highest-paid people, would have cut taxes forGM's top-ranking executives but might have increased the taxbite for managers further down the ladder.   Chrysler Corp., in contrast, did accelerate stock-awardpayments to beat the tax increase; its officials contend thatthe benefits to top executives didn't come at the expense ofthose below.   Mr. Stempel also has changed the format of some meetings-- hardly a revolutionary step, perhaps, but something highlysymbolic in tradition -- bound GM. Meetings of GM's top-levelProduct Program Group used to have rigidly formal seatingarrangements: finance staffers on one side of the table andoperating executives on the other. Now, the seating chartsare gone. So are the &quot;pre-meeting briefings,&quot; where all thereal decisions were made. As a result, true debate isbreaking out, and future-product proposals can be sent backfor reworking without their advocates feeling as though theyhave driven into a brick wall.   All this is reassuring many at GM who didn't know quitewhat to expect when Mr. Stempel became chairman. He waswidely popular inside the company as he worked his way up theengineering ranks and into senior management. But during histhree years as president and chief operating officer, Mr.Stempel mostly kept a low profile and carefully courted GM'scontroversial then-chairman, Roger B. Smith.   In 1988, after Mr. Smith was elected chairman of theBusiness Roundtable and the business council in consecutiveyears, Mr. Stempel fired off an obsequious telegram. Itcongratulated Mr. Smith for &quot;a distinction equivalent in oureyes to a political leader being elected successivelymajority leader of the Senate and speaker of the House.&quot;   Many GM managers thought Mr. Stempel, in his quest to landthe company's top job, was playing it safe, like a politicianfar ahead in the polls. And some of them worried that he hadsettled into that role too well. &quot;The question you heardaround here was, `Where's Bob?'&quot; one middle manager says.&quot;`When is Bob going to step up and take charge?'&quot;   Now the people at GM are getting their answer. And Mr.Stempel is acquiring a reputation as a big-time bullet-biter.So he is carefully explaining what he is doing.   On Monday, the day GM announced the dividend and bonusnews, Mr. Stempel sent a letter of explanation to the home ofevery GM salaried employee in the U.S. -- some 99,000 in all.And he is planning to speak soon to all of GM's employeesworldwide via closed-circuit television -- his third suchspeech since becoming chairman.   All this is thrusting the husky Mr. Stempel -- he stands6-foot-4 and weighs over 200 pounds -- into a limelight thathe doesn't relish. &quot;My board of directors doesn't want toread stories about Bob Stempel,&quot; he declares. &quot;We want thefocus around here to be GM and its products.&quot; He adds that heis &quot;not smart enough to run this place by myself&quot; and thatmanaging GM must be a &quot;team effort.&quot;   Teamwork, of course, is the latest management mantra,mouthed by virtually everyone in business these days. But Mr.Stempel, one of four children of a Trenton, N.J., banker,seems to really want to avoid grabbing all the attention atGM. This preference for privacy stems partly from a painful1975 incident: One of his three children was kidnapped (theboy was later returned unharmed).   In fact, both Mr. Stempel and his wife of 35 years, Pat,are independent-minded people who don't put much emphasis onthe social whirl. Although membership in the Bloomfield HillsCountry Club in suburban Detroit is &quot;de rigueur&quot; for GM vicepresidents, Mr. Stempel, who doesn't play golf, waited until1987 to join. He finally did so -- rather reluctantly, it'sunderstood -- only when he was about to become GM'spresident.   And Mrs. Stempel isn't &quot;the leader of the GM wife pack,&quot;as one observer of Detroit's social scene puts it. A strictdevotee of the Pritikin no-fat diet, the tall,striking-looking Mrs. Stempel sometimes turns heads atofficial functions with her choice of fashions. She wore abackless sweater and a miniskirt to the Detroit Auto Show'sblack-tie charity preview a few years ago and has wornstylish pant-suits at other formal affairs.   To relax, Mr. Stempel says he enjoys working with hishands, either in his workshop at home or with his collectionof classic cars. His prize 1974 Chevy Corvette needs &quot;a brakejob and a tune-up&quot; right now, Mr. Stempel says.   Just when he will get around to that isn't clear. He isunderstandably preoccupied with the need to tune things up atthe office. GM has enormous problems.   Next week, it will report a fourth-quarter loss thatanalysts estimate at $1.4 billion, the largest quarterlyoperating deficit ever posted by an auto maker. That, pluslast year's big third-quarter write-off, could give GM a 1990net loss of $1.8 billion. And some analysts predict anotherloss in 1991, for GM's first back-to-back annual deficitssince the company was incorporated in 1917.   The company's biggest problem is the one that dogged itfor most of the 1980s: too many North American car factories.   Mr. Stempel, like Mr. Smith before him, has vowed thatGM's North American assembly plants would be running at fullcapacity by 1992. But now he is starting to hedge. &quot;It'sstill our goal,&quot; he says. &quot;But it's a lot tougher to getthere, given what's happening today. It will probably be1992-and-a-half, but I don't want to call it.&quot;   It's easy to see why. Slow sales have forced GM to cutproduction to one shift a day -- or roughly half capacity --at six U.S. car factories. And most GM plants that scheduletwo shifts a day haven't produced at capacity for two years.Instead, they have shut down for as long as three weeks at atime in an effort to keep inventories under control.   Closing the factories targeted in last fall's bigwrite-off will help a lot but won't solve the problem.Barring an unlikely surge in demand for GM's mid-sizedPontiac Grand Prix and Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme, thecompany won't reach 100% of capacity until it closes one ofthe two plants dedicated to building those cars.   By April, both facilities -- each representing $1 billionin capital investment -- will be running on one shift. GMplans major changes in these cars to make them moreattractive and more efficient to build. But insiders say thechanges have been delayed one year, until the fall of 1994,because of their high cost.   This year, meanwhile, GM will launch a new-product blitz-- redesigned versions of nine cars that now account forone-third of its total U.S. car sales. Among the modelsgetting overhauls: the &quot;near-luxury&quot; Buick LeSabre,Oldsmobile Eighty-Eight and Pontiac Bonneville; and thecompact Pontiac Grand Am, Buick Skylark and Olds CutlassCalais. GM's Cadillac luxury division will roll out new,larger versions of its Seville and Eldorado coupes. And Buickwill introduce its hulking, rear-drive Roadmaster sedan.   The new models will be launched &quot;right into a vacuum,&quot;laments Mr. Stempel, because the market is so soft. The onlyconsolation is that taking the plants out of action toinstall new tooling will be relatively painless because salesare slow anyway.   Mr. Stempel has some other things going for him, too. Thecompany's European operations, which he helped turn around inthe 1980s, are riding a string of product successes. And GM'sElectronic Data Systems Corp. continues to produce solidearnings growth.   Although GM's operating efficiency in North Americaremains dreadful, its vehicle quality has improvedtremendously since the mid-1980s. And though its ability todesign and build attractive new products remains spotty, GMhas bolstered its selfconfidence with such successes as lastyear's Buick Park Avenue, one of the few cars now sellingwithout a rebate.   The big question facing Mr. Stempel is whether he canimprove profits before the patience of his employees andshareholders wears thin. He might have to ask for moresacrifices, including concessions from the UAW -- a requestthat he doesn't rule out.   &quot;We've taken some actions this month,&quot; he says, referringto the dividend and bonus cuts. &quot;We'll see where it leads.&quot;He adds: &quot;This isn't a job for sissies.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>