<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910417-0123</DOCNO><DOCID>910417-0123.</DOCID><HL>   Get Involved:   U.N. Must   Oust Saddam   ----   By Stephen J. Solarz</HL><DATE>04/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)</RE><LP>   With the fate of millions of innocent Iraqis literallyhanging in the balance, it is time for the U.S. to seekinternational support for a Security Council resolutionspecifically calling for the resignation of the currentgovernment in Baghdad and its replacement by a temporary U.N.administration in order to pave the way for free and fairelections. Since it is doubtful that the Baathist governmentwill voluntarily step down, the resolution should alsoauthorize the use of whatever means are necessary to enforcethis demand.   The entire world has been shocked in recent weeks by thebarbarism and brutality Iraq unleashed against its Kurdishand Shiite populations. In the face of such horrors, it wouldbe morally and politically unacceptable for the internationalcommunity simply to stand by and allow Saddam to continuetransforming Iraq into a killing field. Unfortunately, noneof the proposals for dealing with the problem holds out realpromise of ending the suffering.</LP><TEXT>   Parachuting blankets and food into the mountains of Iraq,while providing immediate relief, is not the answer. TheEuropean initiative to establish a safe haven for the Kurdsin northern Iraq, though laudable, is at best a short-termsolution to a longer-term problem. Turkey and Iran are notlikely to accept refugees indefinitely.   It has become increasingly apparent that the only way tobring the slaughter and starvation to an end is to foster apolitical solution to the current chaos in Iraq. The only wayto obtain a political solution is to facilitate thereplacement of the current Baathist regime in Baghdad with aU.N.-supervised interim government representing allsignificant segments of the population, to pave the way fordemocratic elections.   This is not a call for unilateral American action. Thecrisis we confront is not just an American responsibility. Itis an international one. But if the current Iraqi regime isunwilling to step aside, the U.S., having encouraged theKurds and Shiites to overthrow Saddam Hussein, has a specialobligation to provide the leadership for an internationaleffort to remove him.   This is not, however, just a moral and humanitarianquestion. We also have a strategic interest in peace andstability in the region. And we must recognize that with thecontinued flow of hundreds of thousands of fleeing refugeesacross the border into Turkey and Iran, there is a realpossibility that Ankara and Tehran may feel obliged to sendtroops into Iraq to remove the government there in order tobring the refugee crisis to an end. Such a response, whilenot imminent, is certainly not inconceivable.   Given U.S. interest in preserving the territorialintegrity of Iraq, which the administration itself hasemphasized, it would be far better for the regime to beremoved by a U.N. force committed to preserving the unity ofIraq than by Turkey or Iran, either or both of which maydecide to linger on long after Saddam is gone.   I recognize that our original objective was limited to theliberation of Kuwait and did not entail a march to Baghdad toremove Saddam from power. It was our hope that the Iraqipeople themselves would succeed in bringing down his regime.But the lightly armed resistance forces have been largelycrushed by the more heavily armed Iraqi army. If Saddam andhis Baathist associates are to be removed, we can no longercount on the Iraqi people to bring them down. His brutalaction cries out for an international response.   With 330,000 American troops still in the theater, as wellas the military forces of our coalition partners, we have thecapacity to act. And it is extremely unlikely that theremnants of the Iraqi military, after decisive defeat inKuwait, will be able or inclined to face down an overwhelmingdisplay of coalition strength.   An international initiative along these lines would notrequire an American occupation of Iraq. Once the currentregime is removed, there could be a temporary custodianshipby Arab or Islamic forces under the U.N. flag whilearrangements are made for Iraq's political future.   Some fear that the downfall of the current regime wouldlead to the dissolution of Iraq and its transformation into asource of instability in the region. Yet the leadership ofthe Kurdish and Shiite opposition movements have publiclycommitted themselves to the territorial integrity of Iraq,and there is no reason to believe they would forcibly resista U.N. effort to provide a democratically elected governmentwithin the current borders of Iraq.   It is true that a U.N. resolution demanding Saddam'souster would be unprecedented. Never before has the U.N.asked the government of a member nation to relinquish power.But the principle of nonintervention in the internal affairsof other countries is not an absolute. It cannot, forinstance, be allowed to serve as a rationalization forparalysis when a government that clearly lacks legitimacy isengaged in a campaign of mass murder.   In any case, this is no longer just an internal Iraqiaffair, since the presence and policies of the Baathistregime are now generating millions of refugees, who arecreating a continuing threat to the peace and stability ofthe region as a whole. Moreover, until a couple of weeks ago,the U.N. had never formally demanded that a member staterelinquish some if its weapons. But this did not prevent theU.N. from imposing such a requirement on Iraq. Precedents, inother words, are not just to be followed. They are also to beestablished.   We are now witness to one of the great human tragedies ofrecent history. Unless the U.S., together with its coalitionpartners, is prepared to use force to drive Saddam from powershould that prove necessary, hundreds of thousands of Kurdsand Shiites will probably lose their lives. That would hardlybe the way to begin a new world order.   ---   Rep. Solarz (D., N.Y.) is on the House Foreign AffairsCommittee.</TEXT></DOC>