<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900504-0109</DOCNO><DOCID>900504-0109.</DOCID><HL>   The 1990 Civil Rights Bill Is Wrong   ----   By Abigail Thernstrom</HL><DATE>05/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><LP>   Opposing a bill that has been named &quot;The Civil Rights Actof 1990&quot; is not politically easy; the deck has already beenrhetorically stacked. But the proposed legislation is deeplyflawed. The title of the bill and the voices of Coretta ScottKing and others in support of it all suggest continuity withthe great civil rights statutes of the 1960s. In fact, theissues the 1990 bill raises have none of the moral simplicityof those earlier days.   It is the attempt to overturn last term's Supreme Courtdecision in Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio that is mosttroubling. Employment patterns in an Alaskan salmon cannerywere the issue in Wards Cove. The &quot;non-cannery&quot; jobs weregenerally held by whites, while Filipinos, Eskimos and Aleutsfilled most of the unskilled &quot;cannery&quot; positions. Theplaintiffs charged discrimination. But how telling was thedisproportionate concentration of minority employees in thelower paying jobs? Not as telling as the plaintiffs claim,the Supreme Court said.</LP><TEXT>   Civil rights groups depict the decision as a betrayal; thecourt reneged on an earlier commitment, they say. And indeed,Wards Cove has made it harder for minority plaintiffs toprevail. A 1971 decision (Griggs v. Duke Power Co.) forcedemployers to defend their hiring practices as a &quot;businessnecessity&quot; if plaintiffs could point to a &quot;racially disparateimpact&quot;fewer blacks than whites passing, say, an aptitudetest.   The problem with Griggs was the assumption that numbers --the number of blacks in one job category and the number ofwhites in another -- tell much of what you want to know in anemployment discrimination case. And the strength of WardsCove was that it refined -- in an elementary, common-sensemanner -- the statistical rule. Minorities may bedisproportionately concentrated in unskilled positions or maydisproportionately fail an aptitude or other test, the courtsaid, but the relevant question is the size of the pool ofminority candidates qualified to fill the jobs in question.And if the numbers alone tell less than the Griggs courtassumed they would, then a showing of disparate impact shouldnot place the burden of proof on employers to demonstrate the&quot;business necessity&quot; of their hiring procedures. Plaintiffswho charge discrimination should have to prove their case.   Within limits, numbers are telling in discriminationcases. No one would argue otherwise. But only in exceptionalcircumstances should they be regarded as conclusive, ornearly so. The 1965 Voting Rights Act is instructive in thisregard. It was precisely the point of the act to substitute astatistical rule of thumb for the extended and complexjudicial process by which Fifteenth Amendment questions weretraditionally decided. The act identified a violationwherever voter registration or turnout in the presidentialelection of 1964 fell below 50% and a literacy test was usedto screen potential registrants. All states and countiesfitting those criteria were &quot;covered&quot; and thus subject to aset of stringent remedies.   At the time, critics complained that justice could not bemeasured by percentages and that fair enforcement of theFifteenth Amendment required the precise identification ofoffenders, which the statistical formula did not provide. Butin fact the act did not rely excessively on numericalindicators. Framed with meticulous care, informed by years oflitigation experience, the 1965 statute swiftly accomplishedwhat no previous law had achieved: the enfranchisement ofSouthern blacks.   The statistical test allowed the finding of vote denial bya simple formula, eliminating the need to ferret outconstitutional violations in states with abominable recordswith respect to black voting rights. By 1965 the excessivecost and limited effectiveness of the traditional judicialroute had become abundantly clear. And what the framers ofthe act wrote into law was only what the litigators hadlearned in the field. The statistical test simplyacknowledged the proven link -- proven in countless suits --between fraudulently administered Southern literacy tests andlow levels of voter participation. Aware that literacy testswere the chief means of disfranchising Southern blacks, theframers of the 1965 act used voter registration and turnoutfigures to devise a statistical means to identify thediscriminatory use of literacy tests.   But those circumstances were unique. In 1965 low voterregistration rates were an almost infallible guide to theintentionally discriminatory use of literacy tests. Equallyimportant, citizens over 18, with few exceptions, have aright to vote; that's what democracies are all about.Employment is very different. Statistical information is nota comparably reliable sign of intentional discrimination --of a desire to exclude blacks from certain jobs. And no oneis entitled to a particular category of job in a particularplace of employment.   Thus, when it comes to jobs, numbers can serve to alertemployers, employees and courts to the possibility ofdiscrimination. But numbers should only set off an inquiry.Other questions must then take over. Again, the history ofthe Voting Rights Act is instructive. In the enforcement ofthe statute, the initially legitimate use of numericalindicators has expanded to one that is highly questionable.Courts and the Justice Department have arrived at a newstatistical rule of thumb: Where minority officeholding isdisproportionately low in relation to the minoritypopulation, electoral exclusion can almost be assumed. Onlyblacks can represent blacks, it is apparently believed, andblack candidates lose elections for only one reason: race.   Those assumptions last week informed the JusticeDepartment decision to throw out Georgia's system of electingjudges. True, the number of superior court judges in thestate is disproportionately low in relation to the blackpopulation. Even in majority-black Atlanta, only three out of11 judges are black. But how large is the pool of qualifiedattorneys eager for judgeships? How many black voters botherto cast ballots in judicial elections -- contests that areoften ignored by almost everyone? And how often does anycandidate -- white or black -- win against an incumbent?Again, the numbers raise questions. But, as the court inWards Cove understood, they don't provide the answers.   In voting rights cases, electoral defeat is not conclusiveevidence of inadequate electoral opportunity, and opportunityshould be the question. Likewise, the failure to pass anemployer's test is not strong evidence of a system closed tominority aspirations. The point of antidiscrimination laws isnot to protect black candidates from white competition --whether the job in question is in politics or industry. Theirpoint is to provide access, and, again, only in the mostextraordinary circumstances can access be gauged fromstatistical evidence. Access normally raises a question aboutprocess, not results. Is the electoral- or hiring-processdistorted by racism? Has opportunity been blocked by racistassumptions?   An emphasis on opportunity, or fair process, squares withour traditional and continuing understanding of whatAmericans are entitled to. To focus on numerical results isto invite quotas. And quotas amount to reserved seats forscheduled castes, as in India where the horizons of trust donot extent beyond ethnic boundaries. That, too, is a lessoncontained in the history of the Voting Rights Act. We cantake the path of pessimism -- of assuming that members ofminority groups cannot get a &quot;fair shake&quot; and must be giventheir &quot;fair share.&quot;   Or we can structure our legal system -- our electoral andemployment processes, among others -- to deliver a messagethat minority groups amount to separate nations and separatenations require distinct treatment. That message runs throughmuch civil rights discussion these days. But it should notinform our law.   ---   Mrs. Thernstrom is the author of &quot;Whose Votes Count?Affirmative action and Minority Voting Rights,&quot; (HarvardUniversity Press, 1987).</TEXT></DOC>