<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910204-0033</DOCNO><DOCID>910204-0033.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Drexel Seeks Legal Shield for Employees   ----   By Wade Lambert and Michael Allen   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   CSV M Z.CSH</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SECURITIES (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)BANKS (BNK)CENTRAL U.S. BANKS (BAC)INSURANCE (INS)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENTS (RGU)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. asked the U.S.bankruptcy court in Manhattan to block federal thriftregulators from pursuing their billion-dollar damage claimsagainst Michael Milken and other current and former Drexelemployees.   Drexel, which filed for bankruptcy-law protection almost ayear ago, said its own assets are the real target of theregulators' suits, even though the company isn't named as adefendant. The company also asked the judge overseeing thecase to declare that regulators had violated bankruptcy lawby indirectly going after Drexel's assets in litigationoutside the bankruptcy court.</LP><TEXT>   In its suit, Drexel argued that the Federal DepositInsurance Corp.'s litigation against former and currentDrexel employees &quot;would have a devastating effect upon {thecompany's} prospects for a successful reorganization&quot; underChapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Several of thedefendants &quot;are key to the reorganization efforts,&quot; the suitsaid.   In October, U.S. Bankruptcy Court Judge Francis Conradbarred thrift investors from prosecuting their cases againstMr. Milken and the Drexel-related defendants, ruling thatDrexel would be dragged into the proceedings even though itwas dropped as a defendant. In its suit, Drexel is arguingthat same ban should apply to the FDIC.   The FDIC filed a suit two weeks ago seeking damages of $6billion from Mr. Milken and other Drexel-related defendantsfor thrift losses allegedly caused by junk bonds underwrittenby Drexel. The FDIC also controls Columbia Savings andamp; LoanAssociation, which brought its own suit seeking another $6billion in damages.   On top of that, the FDIC and Columbia filedbankruptcy-court claims directly against Drexel totaling anadditional $10.5 billion. The amount sought far exceedsDrexel's total assets of $3 billion.   Thrift regulators allege that Drexel, Mr. Milken and theother defendants manipulated the junk-bond market throughrigged transactions involving savings and loans. The FDICsays junk-bond losses caused the failure of at least 44savings and loans. Mr. Milken, who last year pleaded guiltyto six felonies related to securities transactions, was headof Drexel's junk-bond department.   Drexel also argues that it and its creditors' committeeare investigating some of the defendants sued by the FDIC --but that if any damages are to be collected, the money shouldgo to pay Drexel's undisputed creditor claims of $2 billion.Unlike the creditors' committee members, the FDIC's claimsmust be proved in court.   The creditors have said they will try to recover hundredsof millions of dollars in bonuses paid to Drexel employeesjust before the company filed for bankruptcy protection andfrom employee partnerships alleged to have been used tomanipulate the junk-bond market.   Attorneys for the FDIC could not be reached for comment.   ---   BANK REGULATORS &quot;flouted&quot; U.S. banking law, judge rules.   The harsh rebuke to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.and the comptroller of the currency came in litigationbrought by MCorp against the federal agencies. Federal JudgeRobert W. Porter found that the agencies &quot;planned and carriedout a scheme to technically render insolvent as many {ofMCorp's banks} as possible&quot; after the ailing Dallas holdingcompany approached regulators for help in 1988.   To accomplish this, the agencies first cut off federalfunding to the company's troubled Dallas bank, causing aso-called &quot;liquidity insolvency&quot; in March 1989, the judgefound. Then the regulators refused to repay the full amountof federal funds owed by the Dallas bank to 12 otherwisesolvent MCorp banks, causing them to fail as well. A total of20 of MCorp's 25 banks were seized and later sold to Banc OneCorp. of Columbus, Ohio.   Since other, non-affiliated creditors of the Dallas bankwere reimbursed in full, the action violated a 127-year-oldlaw prohibiting discriminatory distribution of funds tocreditors, the judge ruled, in granting MCorp's motion for asummary judgment against the regulators. MCorp, which isoperating under bankruptcy court protection, claims damagesof &quot;at least&quot; $70 million.   Mark Rosen, a deputy general counsel of the FDIC, said theagency is &quot;disappointed&quot; by the ruling and may appeal. JudgePorter's decision mirrors a similar ruling in a caseinvolving the seizure of Texas American Bancshares Inc.'sbanking units in 1989. That decision has been appealed.   ---   COMPANIES DEMAND that insurers pay their legal fees inpatent disputes.   In a growing number of cases, insurers are beingsuccessfully sued by policyholders embroiled in patentlitigation.   Patent lawyers say the trend could have enormousimplications for already financially troubled insurers.Attorneys' fees in patent infringement suits typically exceed$1 million and have reached $10 million in some cases,lawyers say.   &quot;Insurers need to re-evaluate how much money they have atrisk and reserve additional funds to cover these losses,&quot;says Michael A. Epstein, an intellectual property specialistwith the New York law firm Weil, Gotshal andamp; Manges.   Policyholders have argued that a clause in standardcommercial general liability policies covering &quot;advertisinginjury&quot; applies to legal fees in patent suits.   Only a handful of courts have considered whether carriersare liable for policyholders' legal expenses in patent suits.Courts in Hawaii, Minnesota, and California have ruled infavor of policyholders. But patent lawyers said that courtsin New York and Florida haven't been willing to interpret theclause as broadly. An appeals court hasn't ruled on thedispute.   Patent lawyers say that a ruling last December by afederal court in Los Angeles may encourage similar suits inother states. In that case, the judge ordered three insurancecompanies to pay $500,000 in attorneys' fees to IntexPlastics Sales Co. of Long Beach, Calif., which is defendingitself against a patent infringement suit.   William Cerillo, of the San Francisco law firm Kornblum,Ferry andamp; Frye, who represented First State Insurance Co. andNew England Reinsurance Co., says he believes the insurerswill appeal.   Daniel J. Callahan, the lawyer for Intex, says the case isan important development for small companies, which oftencouldn't afford to defend themselves when they were sued forpatent infringement. &quot;The backing of a large commercialinsurer gives them the ability to remain in the marketplaceand fight,&quot; says Mr. Callahan, a lawyer with the Irvine,Calif., law firm Callahan andamp; Gauntlett.   Mr. Callahan says that in the wake of Intex and otherdecisions, he has been able to persuade insurers for hisother clients to provide coverage without litigation.   ---   U.S. BAN on foreign-exchange employee programs challengedby Credit Suisse.   Starting Wednesday, the U.S. Information Agency will allowforeign-exchange programs for employees to be sponsored onlyby companies that are majority owned by U.S. citizens. Amajority of the companies' executives and directors also mustbe U.S. citizens.   But in a suit filed in federal court in Manhattan, CreditSuisse claimed the restrictions are unconstitutional andcontrary to the purpose of the law that established suchexchange programs in 1961.   Credit Suisse said the new rule will require the companyto scrap a five-year program in which it has invested $10million. The company has operated its program through itsU.S. brokerage subsidiary, Swiss American Securities Inc. Thecompany's Swiss employees receive training in the U.S. incommercial lending and financial management, while Americanemployees receive training in international banking inSwitzerland.   When the rule was first proposed in 1987, the USIA saidthat U.S. organizations would protect U.S. interests betterthan foreign organizations and corporations, according to thesuit.   Credit Suisse attorney Richard Herzfeld said officials&quot;have shown absolutely no abuses of the exchange system.&quot;   A spokesman for the USIA said the new rule brings theprogram more in line with Congress's intent. &quot;It will onlyaffect a handful of companies,&quot; he said.   ---   EMPLOYEE BENEFITS dispute can't be tried under state law,Texas court rules.   In its first comprehensive ruling on the issue, the TexasSupreme Court said federal law takes precedence over statelaw in disputes involving insurance coverage under employeehealth plans.   The Texas Supreme Court joined other state courts infollowing a 1987 U.S. Supreme Court decision that haseffectively stripped most states of authority to regulateemployee health plans, according to lawyers who specialize inthe area.   In this case, an employee of Dow Chemical Co. filed suitin state court after the carrier of Dow's group insuranceplan, Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., refused to pay forhome nursing care for the employee's wife, who had multiplesclerosis.   The Texas Supreme Court, agreeing with two lower courts,ruled last week that the federal Employees' Retirement IncomeSecurity Act, known as Erisa, preempts any litigation understate law for claims against employee health insurers.   Under the current interpretation of the 1987 U.S. SupremeCourt ruling, employees' insurance disputes must first bepursued through administrative proceedings with the U.S.Department of Labor. Remaining claims can then be pursued infederal court.   The federal rules covering Erisa claims prevent employeesfrom recovering any damages beyond the amount of insurancecoverage and, in some instances, attorneys' fees. The TexasSupreme Court, in a separate case decided last week, struck ajury award of about $1 million in additional damages to aHouston woman who had been denied benefits under herhusband's employee insurance plan.   The two decisions were disturbing enough to three TexasSupreme Court justices that they wrote a separate concurringopinion, quoting other courts that have found the pre-emptionof state laws distasteful. They also called for a new U.S.Supreme Court interpretation or congressional action.   In the separate opinion, Texas Justice Lloyd Doggettwrote: &quot;For the over 56 million Americans who are enrolled ingroup health insurance plans like the one in which {the Dowemployee} was a member, Erisa has become more than merequicksand; it has become a black hole.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>