<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910620-0144</DOCNO><DOCID>910620-0144.</DOCID><HL>   The Core of the Big Apple's Budget Woes   ----   By Richard Vigilante</HL><DATE>06/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LABOR TAXES</CO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)</IN><NS>LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   NEW YORK -- The street lamps are going out all over NewYork, or at least they would be under one of the more drasticproposals for digging the city out of its second major fiscalcrisis in 15 years. Even if the lights stay on, the cuts willbe deep, painful and in just those services most citizensactually care about: the schools, the parks, bridge and roadmaintenance, sanitation, etc.   In Washington this would be called &quot;the WashingtonMonument ploy&quot;: Threaten to cut muscle and bone before fat inorder to scare more money out of the taxpayers. In New York,however, the threat is mostly for real. New York's politicalleaders have so lost control of the city's spending that inany crisis the essentials are the first thing to go.</LP><TEXT>   Even under the strictures of the recession, New York stillraises and spends an enormous amount of money, far more percapita than any other major American city, especially afteradding in state spending within city borders (the only reallyfair way to compare cities, since who pays for what varies somuch from state to state). At $170 per $1,000 of gross cityproduct, the combined take from state and local taxes here isnearly twice the national average.   The recession has not made much of a difference. Asveterans of budget wars know, revenue &quot;shortfalls&quot; and budget&quot;cuts&quot; don't mean that the numbers go down, just that theyfall a little short of the (projected) dreams of avarice. In1982, New York City's general fund budget was $15 billion. In1987, it was $21.4 billion. It had climbed to $24.5 billionby 1989, and may exceed $29 billion in fiscal 1992. Cityspending has grown at least as rapidly since the crash asduring the 1980s boom.   The city is in fact drowning in revenue. Precisely becausethere is so much money here in good times, the city has takenon or been saddled with a set of overlapping obligations thatstifle management creativity and guarantee a crisis wheneverthe increase in revenue slows.   The first of these obligations is state-mandated spending.Albany has discovered a wonderful way to increase serviceswithout directly raising taxes: Enact a program and thenforce localities to pay for it. New York state, for instance,runs one of the most generous Medicaid programs in thenation. Albany sets the standards but pays only one quarterof the bill: The feds pay half the total and localgovernments pick up the rest.   Nearly all state governments employ this dodge to someextent. But New York state is the country's mandate capital,and New York City pays the price. Determining exactly whatshould count as mandated spending is a tricky business, butmore than half the city's budget is probably earmarked forexplicitly mandated spending, other legally obligatedexpenditures, expenditures covered by &quot;categorical&quot; state andfederal aid (aid targeted to specific programs, designatedand often designed by the state or federal government), andspending that arises from state and federal regulations. Mostof the basic municipal services have to be paid for out ofthe discretionary half, which is one reason they get cutfirst in a crisis.   The second of the city's crushing obligations is to anunusual menu of services not provided by most municipalities.This obligation overlaps the first: In most other states, forinstance, Medicaid and welfare are essentially state-federalpartnerships; New York City's obligation to pick up 25% ofthe cost is unique among major cities outside New York stateand a major cause of its recurring fiscal difficulties.   But the city's unusual menu of services is not restrictedto mandated programs. New York is the only major Americancity that builds, rehabilitates and subsidizes a significantportion of its own housing stock, a commitment that costsmore than $1 billion a year. Few major cities have even onemunicipally owned hospital; New York has 16, absorbing anannual subsidy of at least $500 million.   The city hospitals are also an excellent example of thecity's third and most destructive commitment: to supportingthe institutions of government rather than pursuing theinterests of citizens; or perhaps more charitably, to theidea that services to citizens can best be measured by thefunding of institutions. Because of this commitment, the cityfinds it almost impossible to deliver essential services at areasonable cost.   The $500 million New York spends on municipal hospitals,for instance, represents the city's aid to the indigent anduninsured sick, whom city hospitals are obliged to treat. Butsince the overwhelming need of the poor is for good,continuous primary care, why won't New York spend that moneyon increasing Medicaid reimbursements for doctors' visits(now less than $20), or on vouchers for clinics or hospitalcare when needed, rather than on sustaining bricks and mortarand administrators? There is no reason to believe thathospitals are good providers of routine medical care, norshould the city be expected to be particularly good atrunning modern hospitals. In New York, however, theinstitutions, the bureaucracy, and the jobs they provide comebefore the interests of the people they are supposed toserve.   Another example is the schools, which spend more than$7,000 per student -- or 1 1/2 times the national average --with unimpressive results. The school system is ajobs-and-patronage machine overwhelmed with non-teachingpersonnel; a boondoggle bonanza, where library books arepurchased at retail-plus. The system by some estimates spendsas little as half its funds on actual education.   How to reform the system is no mystery. Public schoolchoice, as successfully practiced in East Harlem's DistrictFour, not only dramatically improves educational performance,but makes the expensive and destructive bureaucracyunnecessary: Schools are directly accountable to parents andstudents. Yet the city's commitment to the school system asan institution continues to override its commitment toeducate New York schoolchildren, preventing wide adoption ofchoice and other anti-bureaucratic reforms.   This allegiance to institutions is most evident in whatNew York's Citizen's Budget Commission, a private watchdoggroup, calls the &quot;roller coaster&quot; pattern of city employment:In New York the number of city employees varies not primarilywith changes in government strategies or citizens' needs butwith how much money is available. Throughout the early andmid-1980s, when the city was still recovering from the fiscalcrisis of the mid-1970s, city employment remained moderate.By 1985 the city still had only 212,000 employees, the sameas in 1976. And yet the city had visibly recovered: Thestreets were cleaner, the police force had largely beenrestored, the subways were better -- most of the visiblesigns of austerity had departed.   Then, as the memory of the crisis faded and revenuesrolled in, the city began to pile on the jobs, adding 31,000employees by 1990. Yet it would be difficult to argue thatthe quality of life or of government services continued tosignificantly improve: Certainly neither veterans of the Kochadministration nor the present occupants of City Hall havebeen able to give a convincing account of how those newemployees contributed to city life.   One is left with the very powerful impression that whenextra money becomes available the city simply pumps it intothe institutions, with no clear idea of what the money willdo when it gets there. It is as if the only management toolsat the city's disposal are an accelerator pedal and a fiscalemergency brake, both connected to a machine the operators donot quite understand.   Under the constraints of the city's three big obligations-- to mandates, to untraditional services, and to cityinstitutions -- government here has become a very bluntinstrument. On the evidence of the mid-1980s, there clearlyare now at least 30,000 workers and several billion dollarssloshing around the city budget that are making littlecontribution to city life. Yet no one in city governmentseems to know how to cut out those workers and those dollarsrather than gouge essential services.   The fiscal crisis is not a byproduct of the recession buta crisis of governance, of a system mindlessly committed tothe institutions of government rather than its objectives.The bowels of the bureaucracy are dark and deep, and theinstitutions are unfathomable even to those elected to runthem. But the Central Park Zoo, or the swimming pools, orteachers in the classroom, or cops on the beat are right outin the open where the budget cutters can find them. Those arethe things the city now stands to lose, and it will miss themmore than anyone would ever miss the Washington Monument.   ---   Mr. Vigilante is the editor of NY: The City Journal,published by the Manhattan Institute.</TEXT></DOC>