<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910827-0073</DOCNO><DOCID>910827-0073.</DOCID><HL>   Gorbachev Vows to Accelerate Reform,   Concedes Past Compromises Led to Coup   ---   Republics' Bids to Become   Independent May Make   Plans for Overhaul Moot   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- Struggling to regain his authority, SovietPresident Mikhail Gorbachev promised to accelerate thenation's transformation by overhauling the KGB, removing allobstacles to creation of a market economy and callingnational elections in the near future.   &quot;From now on, there will be no compromise,&quot; he told theSoviet parliament, acknowledging that he himself had helpedbring about last week's failed coup by elevating its leadersinto his government and heeding their advice.</LP><TEXT>   But Mr. Gorbachev's hopes for an orderly transition to anew U.S.S.R. quickly ran into trouble with leaders of severalSoviet republics, who believe that the future of the union --and Mr. Gorbachev himself -- is now an open question.   To create stability, the Soviet president is advocatingthe rapid signing of a new federal treaty that would regulaterelations between individual republics and centralgovernment. The Baltic and other republics that don't want totake part in a renewed federation will be able to negotiatetheir independence, he stressed.   Nursultan Nazarbayev, the president of Kazakhstan and oneof the strongest supporters of a new union treaty before thecoup, told parliament however, that &quot;the situation hascompletely changed.&quot; A federation is now out of the question,he said, and only a loose confederation is acceptable.   Each republic would have its own army, pursue its ownforeign policy and coordinate only the bare essentials ofeconomic and political activities with other republics, Mr.Nazarbayev suggested. Central government, including anational president and parliament, would be left with littlerole to play, he said.   Talk of such drastic decentralization is the direct resultof the attempted coup orchestrated by hard-liners determinedto maintain the dominant role of central government. Itsfailure has swung the pendulum the other way, to the likelydetriment of Mr. Gorbachev.   &quot;As a consequence of the coup, the center is dead. It hascommitted suicide,&quot; said Levon Ter-Petrossian, the Armenianpresident. He said it's probably too late to talk of a Sovietconfederation, suggesting that the U.S.S.R. may have toremodel itself on the European Community or another looselybound grouping of individual states.   The rapid disintegration of the union structure wasunderscored by an announcement from the Central Asianrepublic of Uzbekistan that it, too, plans to declare&quot;independence&quot; in the near future. The move follows similardeclarations in the past few days by the Ukraine, Byelorussiaand the two Baltic states of Latvia and Estonia, whichfollowed a move by Lithuania. All three Baltic states, whichwere forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union by Stalin in1940, are now winning growing Western recognition of theirindependent status.   Amid this scramble for national self-assertion, onlyRussia seems to be stable. By far the biggest republic, witha population of 150 million, it agrees with Mr. Gorbachevthat the signing of a union treaty in the near future wouldensure some stability in these turbulent days. But evenRussian Federation President Boris Yeltsin, the acknowledgedhero of last week's events, says he wants to re-examine thedraft treaty proposed by the Soviet president, Mr. Gorbachev.And yesterday, opening a can of worms, Mr. Yeltsin'sspokesman said Russia would reserve the right to question itsborders with any other Soviet republic that withdrew from theunion. That could provoke an extremely messy fight; by Sovietestimates, more than 70 regions around the nation aredisputed by two or more republics.   Until the key question of a future political structure isanswered, most other issues are on hold. In his 35-minutespeech to parliament, Mr. Gorbachev promised to end his yearsof dithering over how to overhaul the Soviet economy.Enterprise would be given full freedom, monopolies andmethods of coercion by central government would be destroyedand work on the &quot;basic institutions&quot; of a market economywould be accelerated, he said.   But the man most likely to play the leading role in anySoviet economic overhaul, economist Grigory Yavlinsky, sayssuch intentions will have to wait a while. Mr. Yavlinsky hastwice worked out comprehensive economic reform plans, mostrecently with experts from Harvard University. He says hisideas would work in any structure that preserves economicunity. But the precise policy &quot;depends on whether there willbe a federation, a confederation or just Russia,&quot; he says,unable to answer which is the most likely.   One of Mr. Gorbachev's most radical moves is his attemptto excoriate the KGB secret police, who have used harassment,torture and murder to ensure obedience to the Communistregime since the days of Lenin. It turns out that one unit ofthe KGB, the elite Alpha anti-terrorist group, played animportant role in ending the coup. They ignored orders on thesecond day to storm the Russian parliament, Mr. Yeltsin hassaid.   Nonetheless, top KGB officials were among the coup's mainorganizers, and Mr. Gorbachev is determined that suchsubversion won't happen again. He has put a close aide, VadimBakatin, in charge of the agency and given him a mandate forsweeping change. As a start, the KGB's armed forces will beturned over to the Ministry of Defense, Mr. Gorbachev toldparliament. A recently adopted law on the KGB will besuspended pending a complete review of the organization'sactivities, he added.   In fact, given the current situation, the entire existenceof a centrally run KGB, the army and other law-enforcementagencies is now in doubt. Mr. Yeltsin's Russia has alreadyestablished its own KGB, and others may follow suit. Thefour-million-strong Red Army, too, seems certain to become acasualty of the growing trend toward decentralization. Manyexpect a decision soon to end conscription and turn the armyinto a volunteer, professional force.   One of the most immediate questions yet to be answeredconcerns the future of Mr. Gorbachev and the nationalgovernment, particularly the parliament. During the coup,described by one deputy as a &quot;political Chernobyl,&quot; allcentral bodies of power kept silent, or lent active supportto the takeover -- in marked contrast to the fierceresistance put up by the Russian republic.   Seeking to atone for its behavior, the Soviet parliamentleadership yesterday talked about its &quot;feelings of shame,&quot;and moved to regain some of its lost credibility when itschairman, Anatoly Lukyanov, resigned his post. The Russiangovernment has accused Mr. Lukyanov of being the &quot;chiefideologist&quot; behind the coup, an allegation he denies.   Given its passivity, and even complicity, in the coup,many are calling for the parliament to be dissolved. Afull-blown session of the national Congress of People'sDeputies, the highest legislative body in the land, has beencalled for next week. It is likely to elect an interimparliament pending agreement on a new political structure.Mr. Gorbachev, assuming that central government will continueto exist, promised to call fresh elections to all posts,including his own, as soon as some sort of union treaty isconcluded.   Many believe it could be his last act.   Barring a major reversal in public opinion, Mr. Gorbachevis expected to have a tough fight to be elected nationalpresident. Apart from anything else, his already low ratingshave been depressed further by the coup. As he himselfadmitted yesterday, he acted rashly in heeding the advice ofhard-line colleagues who eventually betrayed him. &quot;It will bevery difficult for Gorbachev to be elected now. Nobody canpredict he will win,&quot; says Fyodor Burlatsky, a politicalscientist and editor of the Literary Gazette weekly.   Others are counting him out already. &quot;He doesn't have anyreal power any more,&quot; says Mr. Ter-Petrossian, the Armenianleader. &quot;It's Yeltsin who is the stabilizing influence in thecountry now.&quot;   But Mr. Gorbachev insists he is back, and with avengeance. &quot;They say I've come to a different country . . .and I look at the future with different eyes,&quot; he toldparliament. &quot;In any case, no oscillations and no delays willbe accepted in carrying out reforms as long as I ampresident.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>