<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910308-0058</DOCNO><DOCID>910308-0058.</DOCID><HL>   Nowhere to File:   Blue Cross Collapse   In West Virginia Puts   Many in Dire Straits   ---   Some Other State Plans Face   Financial Stress as Well,   Though Most Are Healthy   ---   Allegations of Self-Dealing   ----   By Susan Pulliam   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INSURANCE (INS)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)</IN><LP>   CHARLESTON, W.Va. -- Like millions of Americans, GlennisHammack thought his medical bills were covered by his healthinsurer, Blue Cross andamp; Blue Shield. That is, until $36,000 inmedical bills for his family turned up in his mailbox.   Mr. Hammack, a 32-year-old gas-line repairman in ruralWest Virginia, was caught off guard when his local Blue Crossplan went into receivership last fall. Now, his doctors areturning to him for payment. Says Mr. Hammack, whose annualincome from two jobs totals $23,000: &quot;I couldn't pay $36,000off in a lifetime.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Thousands of West Virginians fell into similar straitswhen Blue Cross andamp; Blue Shield of West Virginia collapsed andleft $50 million of medical bills unpaid. Although somehospitals and doctors are absorbing the bad debts, many aredunning patients such as Mr. Hammack.   &quot;There's no magic pot of money to take care of this,&quot; saysStephen Brenton, head of the West Virginia HospitalAssociation.   The collapse of Blue Cross of West Virginia is the firstamong the 73 Blue Cross plans nationwide, a looseorganization of nonprofit companies that together collected$64 billion in premiums last year and are the nation'slargest health insurer.   It may not be the last. More than 15 plans are on thewatch list of Blue Cross andamp; Blue Shield Association, theChicago-based organization that licenses and oversees theplans. Many of them have been cited for failing to meet thegroup's financial standards, and some, including those in NewJersey and Massachusetts, are among the largest in the BlueCross system.   The New Jersey plan has been running a capital deficit forfive years, but its total deficit narrowed in 1989 and 1990and now totals $120 million. Under a 1988 state law, it musteliminate the deficit and report a $70 million capitalsurplus by the end of next year or face the possibility ofliquidation by state insurance regulators. Donald Daniels,the plan's chairman, says it is financially troubled becauseof losses in its individual lines. He notes that on itsindividual policies, the plan is seeking a 47% rate increase,which would allow it to meet the deadline. He also says heassumes that the state would act to protect people fromlosing their coverage.   The problems of Blue Cross andamp; Blue Shield of Massachusetts,which also has been narrowing its capital deficit but stillhas only about two-thirds the capital required by stateinsurance regulators, were partly due to a management failureto respond to changes in the health-insurance market,according to a 1990 study commissioned by regulators. Sincethe report, all the top managers except the president haveleft, says Nancy Turnbull, a former Blue Cross official andnow deputy insurance commissioner in Massachusetts.   Nonetheless, most Blue Cross plans are financiallyhealthy. And, says Douglas Peters, senior vice president ofthe national association, many once-troubled plans, such asthose in California and Pennsylvania, have bounced back.Regulators usually don't consider a plan seriously impaireduntil its capital drops so low that the plan can't meet sixweeks of claims without a continuing inflow of money.   &quot;Much more important,&quot; however, is a plan's &quot;trackrecord,&quot; says Peter Hiam, a former insurance commissioner ofMassachusetts. &quot;Are they competitive? Do they have a stablemarket?&quot;   But as the crisis in West Virginia shows, a Blue Crossfailure can create havoc. Many Blue Cross customers can't getinsurance elsewhere.   Moreover, most aren't protected by a safety net. In moststates, Blue Cross plans aren't viewed as insurance companiesat all and so are generally exempt from state guaranteefunds. When a commercial insurer fails, in contrast, itspolicyholders usually can turn to the fund, which is a poolof money contributed by other insurers to cover such losses.Blue Cross plans also can't get help from their nationalassociation, which, unlike a large, well-capitalized company,is mainly a public-relations and lobbying body withoutfinancial resources of its own.   Mr. Hiam says a failure of a large Blue Cross plan mightrequire a state-assisted bailout or a state fund to provideinsurance for the customers. As for the possibility of amerger with a stronger plan, Mr. Peters of the nationalassociation concedes that a merger partner may not beavailable.   So, Blue Cross customers can be left holding the bag.   But that's not how most people perceive Blue Cross andBlue Shield. &quot;There are some institutions people see asperpetual, and Blue Cross was one of them,&quot; says Herschel H.&quot;Ned&quot; Rose III, a Charleston attorney representing localhospitals in the liquidation proceedings. &quot;I don't think theidea that Blue Cross could be liquidated had occurred toanyone.&quot;   In part, the relatively small West Virginia plan was acasualty of soaring health-care costs. Though faced by allhealth insurers, this problem hits Blue Cross plansespecially hard because the premiums they charge customersare more tightly controlled than commercial insurers' rates.But critics say the West Virginia plan's failure illustratesother problems at many Blue Cross plans, includingmismanagement by administrators and complacency by stateinsurance regulators and the national association.   State insurance regulators &quot;sat around and fiddled whileRome burned,&quot; says William Forbes, a local prosecutor whoinitially investigated the West Virginia organization'scollapse. Hanley Clark, the West Virginia insurancecommissioner, says his department monitored the plan closelybut believed that he shouldn't shut it down.   The national association is also under fire for notrevoking the company's license despite its poor financialcondition. Ten hospitals are suing the plan for $10 millionin federal court in the southern district of West Virginia;the civil suit charges the association with fraud andnegligence. The association's officials say they used all theresources they had to help the plan.   Blue Cross and Blue Shield were formed during theDepression by hospital administrators as &quot;a kind of privatesocialism, committed to providing affordable health coverageto families and individuals,&quot; says Sylvia Law, a New YorkUniversity professor who wrote a book on Blue Cross. Manyplans still act as &quot;insurer of last resort.&quot;   Unlike commercial insurers, Blue Cross plans must getinsurance regulators' approval in advance of their tightlycontrolled rate increases. In addition, Blue Cross plans payhospitals and doctors directly, while commercial insurersreimburse policyholders. Many plans get special state taxtreatment because they insure the uninsurable. Their boardsare generally composed of representatives of the variousgroups served by the plans, such as policyholders, doctorsand hospitals. &quot;Generally, the boards have beenself-perpetuating,&quot; Mr. Hiam says.   Over the years, Blue Cross plans have broadened theirmission. They have moved into a wide range of new lines,including group insurance, health maintenance and managedcare, where they compete with commercial insurers. Tosupplement their increasingly unprofitable traditionalbusiness, many plans have also started for-profitsubsidiaries.   But, in the battle against commercial insurers, Blue Crosshas steadily lost market share, dropping from 50% in 1970 to36% in 1988. Most of the plans haven't responded as thehealth-care market changed, Ms. Turnbull of Massachusettssays. &quot;Management generally is slow, bureaucratic,risk-averse and inward-directed,&quot; she says.   As their market share dwindled, Blue Cross plans have seentheir losses in the highly cyclical business double duringthe past 20 years, according to a study by Milliman andamp;Robertson, an actuarial consulting firm. (The cycles are dueto the difficulty of matching rate increases with the futureinflation in health-care costs.) During the last round ofcyclical losses in the health insurance business, from 1986to 1988, the total capital resources of all Blue Cross plansfell $3 billion. The next slump could be &quot;catastrophic&quot;because of the current low levels of capital, the study says.   Blue Cross of West Virginia had been posting operatinglosses for four years when James Heaton, who had previouslyrun a smaller plan in West Virginia and one in New Hampshire,joined as president in 1983. By 1983, its operating lossesadded up to $32 million. In those four years, it had lostone-third of its customers and its capital base had droppedto $3.4 million, a level described by insurance examiners asdangerously low.   But the first clear signal of serious trouble came in1985, when the examiners, during a routine audit, turned upwhat they considered mismanagement and questionable businesspractices. In a report filed with the insurance department,they sharply criticized a Heaton proposal to set up a stringof for-profit companies.   Though many other plans were forming such units, Mr.Heaton's idea was different. He wanted to start companiesthat would be owned and run by certain Blue Cross managersand directors rather than by Blue Cross itself. According tothe report, he wanted to start ventures, ranging from travelagencies to claims-administration companies, that wouldpermit the subsidiaries to &quot;be protected from anyacquisition.&quot;   &quot;It is the examiners' opinion that Mr. Heaton, through hisreorganizational plans, intends to reduce Blue Cross/BlueShield to a corporate shell. Further, it is {our} opinionthat Blue Cross employees and officers should not be allowedto take {subscribers'} money to fund their entrepreneurialambitions,&quot; the report said.   However, Mr. Heaton defends his diversification plan.   The examiners also criticized a contract for renovation ofthe plan's headquarters. It was awarded, despite a lower bid,to a company owned by the chairman of the Blue Cross board,Donald Wagenheim. Mr. Wagenheim says that there were &quot;noimproprieties&quot; in the decision and that he didn't participatein the board discussions or vote on the contract.   In addition, the report questioned 38 expense reports fortrips to New England filed over nine months in 1984 by RandaTorrisi, the wife of a senior manager recruited from the NewHampshire Blue Cross plan. &quot;After reviewing the expensereports, it would appear that, although Ms. Torrisi was afull-time employee of the plan, she spent the majority of hertime in New Hampshire.&quot; Ms. Torrisi says she took only 25trips to New Hampshire over a one-year period. She and theplan's officials contend that all the trips were for researchfor the plan.   The examiners also alleged several instances of&quot;misappropriation of corporate funds&quot; by Mr. Heaton,including expenses charged to Blue Cross for a trip to SanFrancisco for a job interview.   The examiners recommended the dismissal of Mr. Heaton, Mr.Wagenheim and 11 other officers.   In a letter filed nine months later with the insurancedepartment, Mr. Heaton said he was &quot;incensed&quot; at the stateexaminers' report, which he said was filled withinaccuracies. &quot;To paraphrase a representative from your owndepartment, the examiners only came to Blue Cross and BlueShield on a witch hunt and were told to dig something up,&quot;his letter said. He added that he had never misappropriatedcorporate funds for personal use. (Both Mr. Heaton and Mr.Wagenheim have since severed their ties to the plan.)   But in West Virginia, top regulators ignored the red flagsent up by their staff. Fred Wright, then the insurancecommissioner but now retired, says he had only four examinersoverseeing 21 companies. &quot;I made a conscious decision to takecare of matters I thought were more pressing,&quot; he says. &quot;Wewere a small department, and our resources were limited.&quot;   The audit that had originally generated the report washalted, and the report wasn't entered into the department'srecords because the department considered it inaccurate. Thereport surfaced only after the plan failed and the localprosecutor began his investigation.   Although the plan's capital increased in 1985 and 1986,Blue Cross reported a $16 million operating loss for 1987;that wiped out its $13 million capital base. By the end of1988, the plan had a $30 million capital deficit.   Blue Cross plans nationwide were losing money at thattime. But the West Virginia plan's officials say its losseswere especially heavy partly because of high health-carecosts in the state. They rose 40% over four years in WestVirginia, against 33% nationwide. West Virginia's fund forinsuring state employees ran out of money and hospitals wereleft with more than $8 million in unpaid bills; in addition,the state's Medicaid plan was underfunded. Those costs werepassed on to Blue Cross and other insurers through rateincreases.   West Virginia Blue Cross officials say that stateregulators were slow in granting the plan any rate increases,and by the time a large increase -- of 95% -- was approved,it was too late. Moreover, the high rates drove awayadditional customers.   So, while other Blue Cross plans returned to profitabilityin 1989, the West Virginia plan remained in the red and, byyear end, had a $32 million capital deficit. Yet Blue Crossofficials and regulators waited until May 1990 to beginlooking seriously for a merger partner, according to thelawsuit.   Hanley Clark, who replaced Mr. Wright as insurancecommissioner in 1989, says the department waited to takeaction because of an audit of the West Virginia plan showingthe company was on the verge of moving into the black again,with an $8.9 million profit projected for 1990. &quot;Your handsare tied when you have a report that says the company isgoing to turn around,&quot; Mr. Clark says.   The auditors based their projection on the assumption thatthe plan wouldn't lose any more customers, even though itscustomer base had been shrinking rapidly for several years.By early 1990, the plan started hemorrhaging $1 million amonth.   Blue Cross officials and regulators quickly arranged amerger between the West Virginia plan and Blue Cross andamp; BlueShield of Ohio. On Oct. 12, West Virginia Gov. GastonCaperton announced that the Blue Cross plan was insolvent.   That the West Virginia plan was allowed to slowlydisintegrate didn't surprise people knowledgeable about BlueCross. Ms. Turnbull, the health official in Massachusetts,says the various Blue Cross committees that decide thenational association's policy are composed of representativesof Blue Cross plans nationwide and &quot;they are sometimesreluctant to do unto others what may happen to them.&quot;   Mr. Clark says his department's main priority was toprotect Blue Cross customers. &quot;Putting {the plans} intoliquidation would have left a number of people uninsured,many of whom would not have found insurance elsewhere.&quot;   Many former Blue Cross customers may find themselveswithout insurance anyway, under terms of the agreement withBlue Cross andamp; Blue Shield of Ohio. The newly organized plan,called Mountain States Blue Cross andamp; Blue Shield, expects toraise its rates more than 50% for high-risk individuals; thatwould include about 14,000 of its 250,000 customers. AnOhio-plan spokesman says, &quot;Many won't be able to afford thosepremiums -- we know that.&quot; Admits Gov. Caperton, &quot;It's not aperfect plan. But if we'd let them go bankrupt, everyonewould have lost.&quot;   Under the agreement's terms, the Ohio plan put up $7million to buy the West Virginia company's headquarters butdidn't assume more than $50 million in unpaid medical bills.At the West Virginia governor's urging, hospitals and doctorsdidn't bill customers for several weeks for the unpaidcharges. Eventually, however, many began billing thecustomers.   And that's the problem now confronting Mr. Hammack, thegas-line repairman. &quot;I always thought insurance companieswere insured themselves in case they couldn't pay,&quot; helaments.</TEXT></DOC>