<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910419-0131</DOCNO><DOCID>910419-0131.</DOCID><HL>   REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):   The Realpolitik of Morality</HL><DATE>04/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)</RE><LP>   Americans, like any people, have an idea of themselves andtheir country that sits as a constant counterweight to thepolicies their leaders choose to pursue. Part of the processof our politics is that America's bench-mark values eitherwill support such policies, or won't, in which case thepolicies are often thrown into disequilibrium. Thecivil-rights movement of the 1960s in time discovered anAmerican balance (which is now shaking). The war in Vietnamnever did.   The proposition now before the American people is that theevents from August 2, when the fighting in Iraq began, untilits cessation at midnight February 27 squared exactly withAmerica's core beliefs. Saddam's piracy, they were told,posed a threat to international order and to the oil thatflows to the industrialized world. More recently, Americanshave been told something else: The events taking place inIraq from that midnight cease-fire order until this verymoment have nothing at all to do with America's idea ofitself. At midnight, as in Cinderella, Saddam and the peoplefalling beneath his tanks within shouting distance of U.S.troops in southern Iraq were suddenly part of Iraq's&quot;internal affairs.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   According to the script written somewhere within theadministration, events in Iraq were to fade from public viewso that men of affairs could take over the diplomatic task ofstabilizing the region; the troops would come home forparades up Main Street. This is the air of unreality, thejarring disconnection, that lies at the heart of PresidentBush's postwar policy and his current troubles, as AmericanGIs struggle to erect camps in northern Iraq for more thanone million refugees.   The world is not so simple a place now for statesmen.Realpolitik is not so readily separated from national values,from a country's common idea of itself. Traditionalrealpolitik can still make legitimate claims fordiscriminating between actions that are in the nationalinterest and those that are mainly sentimental adventures.There is in fact a danger that the sentimental moralism thatoften failed to distinguish good from poor policy during theCarter years will emerge again in the current reassessment ofrealist thinking.   It was decidely unrealistic, however, to think that itwould be possible for the United States to protect SaudiArabia from an expansionist Iraq, and then just stop. Even inrealpolitik terms, this policy is failing; Saddam's survivingarmy continues to destabilize the region, not least with thethreat the Kurdish exodus now poses to Turgut Ozal'sWestern-leaning government in Turkey. What is happening nowis not avoiding morass but building one, with camps for theKurds just like those in which the Palestinians have festeredsince 1948. The way to avoid a morass was -- still is -- todepose Saddam, organize an election, then go home with a newgovernment to blame for failure or to praise for success.   Perhaps the greater unrealism, though, was in not fullyappreciating the nature of the environment in which modernAmerican leaders must now function. The troops started cominghome, but the TV cameras and the reporters stayed. The U.S.war effort benefited enormously from an age in which 24-hourelectronic news coverage made the war in Iraq a communityevent for Americans. The nature of Saddam and his threat wasmanifest, as was the rightness of President Bush's effort toassemble a coalition of allies to suppress it. As the warprogressed, the U.S. effort was presented to public view byNorman Schwarzkopf, a man whose TV presence managed to atonce validate and ennoble what America had undertaken. Butthen something unsettling occurred: The 25-inch TV screensthat had held General Schwarzkopf's strong and proud imagefilled with the faces of frightened Kurds -- stumbling,freezing, dying and pleading.   The proponents of traditional American realpolitik aregoing to have to find a way to come to terms with this newelectronic reality. They need to discover the means torespond appropriately to what the American people todaywitness with their own eyes and sometimes support -- thedemocrats in Tiananmen Square, the Lithuanians defendingtheir Parliament in Vilnius, the Kurds fleeing the same manAmerica fought with 500,000 troops.   To say simply that it's not our affair -- or to saynothing -- is no longer enough. If a compelling rationaleexists for subordinating the shared moral instincts of theAmerican people to some larger national interest, thennational leaders bear some obligation to explain it. If theself-evident aspirations of people elsewhere in aninterconnected world correspond with the values that haveserved this country, the U.S. government should at least beable to say that. There will be times when something morethan words is required.   We recognize that there are significant dangers in tryingto create a foreign policy that must incorporate theimperatives of national interest, a common national moralityand the information stream of global communicators. If thisnew mix is an uncomfortable challenge, then presumably thatis the sort of challenge that men enter public life to meet.We do not see that there is any way to go back to the clearerrealities of an earlier age. Americans know what they thinkof themselves and their country, and they know that what theyare seeing in the mountain passes of northern Iraq does notcompute. Would-be practitioners of realpolitik should by nowrecognize that the ultimate diplomatic and military powerlies in the support of their own people.</TEXT></DOC>