<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900726-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>900726-0116.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   An Irishman in Jail Equals a Cuban Out on Bail   ----   By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DATE>07/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A17</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Orlando Bosch is a Cuban, convicted felon, a man oncecharged with masterminding the bombing of a civilian airlinerin which 73 people died. On July 17 he was paroled in Miamiand is now, somewhat relatively speaking, a free man. He hasto wear an electronic ankle trace bracelet, can go outsideonly three hours a day, must not speak to anti-Castromilitants, and has his phone tapped.   Joe Doherty is an Irishman, neither charged with norconvicted of any offense against U.S. criminal law. On June18 he began his eighth year in a tiny cell in theMetropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan; he is now thelongest-held prisoner in the history of that institution. Noless than eight times -- most recently only a few weeks agoin the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit -- he hasprevailed in court and Immigration and Naturalization Servicehearings against attempts by the U.S. government to deporthim.</LP><TEXT>   Yet today, Bosch is free on parole and Doherty, deniedbail, is confined to a matchbox cell in a prison neverdesigned for long-term occupancy, hence offering none of thefacilities other prisons are compelled to offer. See thedouble standard maintained by the Bush administration eagerto pander to political friends in Miami's Cuban-Americancommunity, and in London.   Start with Bosch. In 1968, his anti-Castro group AccionCubana blew up a Japanese freighter in Tampa, damaged aBritish vessel off Key West and bombed eight diplomatic ortourist offices in New York and Los Angeles. The aim was topunish nations doing business with Cuba. Bosch was convictedthat same year of firing a bazooka at a Polish freighter inMiami harbor and sentenced to 10 years in federal prison. Hewas paroled four years later and in 1974 fled the countryrather than honor a subpoena in a murder case. Though boththe Venezuelan and Costa Rican governments offered to sendhim back as a parole violator, the Justice Departmentexhibited no interest in his return.   In June 1976, Bosch's Accion Cubana met in the DominicanRepublic with other emigre organizations such as Alpha 66.They issued a &quot;war communique&quot; saying Cuban civilianairliners would be attacked. Later that year a Cubanaairliner, en route from Venezuela to Havana, blew up inmid-air shortly after a takeoff in Barbados; 73 civiliansdied, including all of Cuba's Olympic fencing team.   Venezuela arrested Bosch and three others and charged themwith the bombing. Bosch and two others were convicted thensubsequently acquitted on appeal, but nonetheless held inprison. The other accused, Luis Posada Carriles, had escaped.In view of the Bush administration's later clemency towardBosch, we should note that during the Iran-Contra scandal,Posada surfaced in the Ilopango base in El Salvador, workingalongside President Bush's old CIA buddy Felix Rodriguez infunneling illegal arms shipments to the Nicaraguan Contras.Mr. Bush was CIA director at the time Bosch and his confrereswere hatching terror schemes in the Dominican Republic.   On his release from a Venezuelan prison in 1987, Boschannounced he was ready to &quot;rejoin the struggle&quot; and,regarding the Cubana bombing, that &quot;all of Castro's airplanesare warplanes.&quot; In 1988 he was released and returned to theU.S., where he was arrested as a parole violator. Cubaapplied to have him deported to face proceedings, but theapplication was denied on the grounds that Bosch would notget a fair trial. In rejecting Bosch's request for politicalasylum in January 1989, the acting associate attorney generalwrote that &quot;For 30 years Bosch has been resolute andunwavering in his advocacy of terrorist violence. . . . Hehas repeatedly expressed and demonstrated a willingness tocause indiscriminate injury and death.&quot;   In July, after a campaign by Cuban emigres in Miami inwhich President Bush's son Jeb expressed his support, Boschwas granted parole.   Joe Doherty was imprisoned on June 18, 1983, for havingentered the U.S. illegally. The British government sought hisextradition on charges arising from the shooting death of amember of the S.A.S., the British commando unit. In 1984,federal district Judge John Sprizzo held that Doherty couldnot be extradited under the then-existing treaty and,addressing himself explicitly to the death of the S.A.S. man,said that &quot;The death of Captain Westmacott, while a mosttragic event, occurred in the context of an attempted ambushof a British army patrol. It was the British response to thataction that gave rise to Captain Westmacott's death. Had thisconduct occurred during the course of more traditionalmilitary hostilities there could be little doubt that itwould fall within the political offense exception.&quot;   Though the history of Joe Doherty's legal battles is long,it is also simple. He has prevailed repeatedly in courtbattles and in Board of Immigration Appeal hearings. UnderU.S. law he merits asylum, and should not be deported to theU.K., where he would not have the certainty of a fair trial.The force of this latter point was of course much enhancedlast year by the revelations of perversions of justice in thecase of the &quot;Guilford Four,&quot; released after many years inprison when a panel of British judges ruled their convictionswere not &quot;safe.&quot; Nonetheless, Attorney Generals Edwin Meeseand now Richard Thornburgh have repeatedly controverted bothfederal courts and Board of Immigration Appeals decisions,and ordered Doherty's deportation, thus seeking to circumventthe law on asylum. As Rep. Henry J. Hyde wrote to Mr.Thornburgh in May: &quot;I believe the handling of this caseinvolves an indefensible violation of the spirit, if not theletter, of the basic guarantees of equal justice and dueprocesses of law. . . . The United States has never, ever,handled an extradition or deportation case the way it hashandled this one.&quot;   On June 29, a federal appeals court panel granted Dohertythe right to apply for asylum here, thus handing the JusticeDepartment yet another setback. The judges concluded that Mr.Thornburgh's reversal of his own INS Appeals Board decisionhad been improperly influenced by geopolitical andforeign-policy considerations. Though ample sureties havebeen offered, Doherty's lawyer, Mary Pike, received her copyof the Justice Department's letter to a New York judge urgingdenial of bail to Doherty on the same day Orlando Bosch wasreleased.   So Doherty can't get bail, even though he manifestlydoesn't want to flee, given that he is litigating his abilityto stay in the U.S. Bosch got 10 years for bombing a Polishvessel and for conveying by telegraph threats to thepresident of Mexico and Prime Minister Harold Wilson. Heviolated parole and became a fugitive under U.S. law. Despitethis, Bosch is released and Doherty held in his cell. TheIrishman should hispanicize his name, make more influentialfriends in Miami and start threatening Fidel Castro. This isthe essential extrajudicial factor he has overlooked.   ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation and theAnderson Valley (Calif.) Advertiser.</TEXT></DOC>