<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910628-0138</DOCNO><DOCID>910628-0138.</DOCID><HL>   Insider Trading, Better Markets   ----   By Richard A. Booth</HL><DATE>06/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)</NS><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Trouble is brewing on the coffee exchange. A surge in theprice of coffee futures in late March, just before thegovernment announced that it would halt coffee exports, hasprompted allegations of insider trading in the futuresmarket.   Rumors of insider trading are also circulating in the bondmarket. In March, this paper reported that Goldman Sachsbought heavily discounted Tonka bonds knowing that Mattel wasconsidering a bid for the company.</LP><TEXT>   To many people's surprise, however, insider trading doesnot appear to be illegal in the futures markets. Neither theCommodity Futures Trading Commission -- the body thatregulates those markets -- nor the Coffee Exchange has a ruleagainst it. And although insider trading may sometimes beillegal in the bond market, no one seems to think GoldmanSachs is guilty of it. But perhaps the real curiosity is notthat insider trading is legal on the commodities and bondmarkets -- perhaps it is that it is illegal on the stockmarket.   Some defenders of the present rules argue that insidertrading is not a problem on futures exchanges, because theprimary function of a futures contract is hedging while theprimary function of a share of stock is, or ought to be,investing for the returns that go with owning a piece of abusiness. An uninformed shareholder is, in this view,deprived of something more serious than an uninformedcommodities seller is. This is a classic distinction withouta difference. The shareholder who sells his shares whenothers with inside information are buying is in the sameeconomic position as the farmer who sells pork bellies whenthe buyer knows that the price of bacon is about to go up.Like the shareholder, if the farmer had held out until thenews became public, he would have received more for thecontracts he sold.   A second argument as to why the futures markets aredifferent is that the future markets are the primary pricediscovery mechanism for commodities. What does that make thestock market? In 1988, in Basic Inc. v. Levinson, the SupremeCourt recognized that many investors ignore financialstatements and corporate news and rely on the stock market toestablish accurate prices. Still, maybe the distinction isthat the value of a share of stock is determined by themarket's assessment of information that ultimately comes fromwithin the company and is, in some sense, the property of thecompany. Thus, it somehow seems unfair that any particularshareholder should be privileged to use such informationbefore any other shareholder.   One problem with this argument is that few stock marketinsider trading cases involve that kind of insider trading.Rather, the typical case of insider trading arises wheninformation leaks out about a planned takeover bid for acompany. In such cases, the information comes from outsidethe company and affects the price of a stock because itaffects the demand for the stock. In other words, the typicalinsider trading case is based on precisely the same kind ofinformation that moves the prices of commodities.   So why is insider trading legal on the futures markets ifit is so similar to insider trading on the stock market? Thereal question is, why is it illegal on the stock exchanges?The seemingly obvious answer is that investors who are notprivy to inside information lose money to those who are. Theproblem is that enforcing the law against insider tradingdoes not change that. Once information becomes public theprice adjusts very quickly. Indeed, much of the adjustmentoccurs even before the information becomes public since savvytraders who keep an eye on other traders can often divinethat something is up. In any case, the small investor whoseconfidence in the market is supposedly shaken with everyrevelation of insider trading, is never going to be the oneto benefit from disclosure.   The only people who gain as a result of stricter lawsagainst insider trading are those who are in the thick of theaction and able to trade quickly and cheaply. In other words,it is market professionals, and particularly stock exchangespecialists, who seem to benefit the most from vigorousenforcement of laws against insider trading. In all fairness,it is the specialist who is also most at risk from insidertrading. The job of the specialist is to buy and sellreasonable quantities of his assigned stocks, on the basis ofhis quoted prices, when no one else will. In other words, thespecialist is a market maker very much like the market makerson the over-the-counter market.   Insider trading takes advantage of the specialist's dutyto buy or sell and it is thus understandable that they wouldbe upset by it. But should anybody else care? The need forthe specialist system has been an open question for years. Isit really necessary, after all, in a market where 200 millionshares a day often change hands to install a trader of lastresort? And if the market is poised for a big fall, is itrealistic to think that specialists will step in and absorbhundreds of billions of dollars worth of stock?   One of the reasons that there are no rules against insidertrading on the commodity exchanges is that there are nospecialists to lobby for them. On the commodity exchanges,traders buy and sell exclusively from and to each other andnot from dealers on the basis of bid and ask quotations.Thus, despite the claims of the stock exchanges, it is thefutures exchanges that are the true auction markets. This isnot to say that there is anything inherently wrong withdealer markets. The over-the-counter market, after all, isjust that. But there is something wrong with criminalizinginsider trading if the reason for it is ultimately to protectthe interests of a particular class of market professionalswhose usefulness has been seriously questioned.   The same logic largely applies to the bond market. Whilethe bond markets are dealer markets in the sense that mosttrades are for the account of the trader and not for acustomer, a bond trader is not required by law to buy or sellon the basis of published quotes. In other words, no one hasthe duty to maintain an orderly market (whatever that means).   In the end, making insider trading illegal means thatsomeone other than insiders will get the first crack attrading on it. It does not mean that the average smallinvestor will get in on the action. In all likelihood,whatever benefit is shifted away from insiders will accrue tomarket professionals. There is nothing wrong with thatnecessarily. But is it worth the cost?   Banning insider trading actually hurts the market morethan it helps (if indeed it helps at all). First, insidertrading gets information to the market more quickly. Oftenthere are good reasons why insiders cannot discloseinformation that they know will move the market. One classicreason is the need of a company to buy up mineral rightsafter an ore strike. Indeed, the same need for secrecy willtypically arise with any innovation or discovery. And thereis nothing in the securities laws that requires a company toblow a profitable opportunity in the name of full disclosure.   On the other hand, if it is possible to let the marketknow that something is up -- without having to say exactlywhat it is -- investors will be better off. In other words,insider trading is a good surrogate for disclosure. Considerthe alternative. With a rule against insider trading, thelonger the delay in disclosure, the more trades will occur atinaccurate prices. If the goal is to minimize the number ofsuch trades, a rule against insider trading makes littlesense. And if the goal is otherwise, someone ought to explainwhat it is.   Second, insider trading also helps the market react moreaccurately. Inside information tends to leak out no matterhow illegal it may be to trade on it. Thus banning those whoactually know what the information is from trading on itmakes the market &quot;noisier&quot; than it otherwise would be. Ineffect, banning insider trading makes the market move more onthe basis of rumors than facts. In short, if the point ofsecurities law is to get better information to the marketfaster, then insider trading simply should not be illegal.   Finally, the most significant cost may be discouragingthose whose job it is to dig for information. Consider thenow classic case of Ray Dirks, the analyst who learned of themassive fraud at Equity Funding and tipped off his customerswho promptly sold their stock. For an analyst, that discoverywas roughly equivalent to finding the holy grail. But the SECsought to censure Mr. Dirks because his customers savedthemselves a bundle. In other words, the SEC saw Mr. Dirks assomething less than a hero because he had a profit motive.Mercifully, the Supreme Court saw the folly in this logic,and reversed the SEC censure of Mr. Dirks in 1983.   The fact remains, of course, that an employee's use ofmarket information may be damaging to his or her employerwhether the employer is an investment bank or a newspaper. Sowhat do we do about the fact that employees are sometimestempted to trade on inside information that their employerwants to keep secret for business reasons? The answer isquite simple really. Leave it to those who benefit fromkeeping secrets to take appropriate steps to keep them secretand to fire or sue the offenders when they spill the beans.   ---   Mr. Booth teaches law at the University of Maryland.</TEXT></DOC>