<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910612-0048</DOCNO><DOCID>910612-0048.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Teamsters Remains a Mighty Force in Business   And Politics Despite Many Apparent Setbacks   ----   By Ann Hagedorn and Albert R. Karr   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>COMMERCIAL TRUCKING AND RELATED WAREHOUSING (TRK)</IN><NS>LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Battered but surprisingly unbowed, the InternationalBrotherhood of Teamsters approaches its first nationalconvention under government supervision with much of itsfabled clout intact.   On the surface, the Teamsters union looks like a has-been.Trucking deregulation and an increase in non-union truckershave diluted the union's once-startling power to haltinterstate commerce in a single strike. The deaths andindictments of top officials over the past decade havedestabilized its leadership.</LP><TEXT>   The union's membership has fallen to 1.6 million membersfrom 2.2 million in 1978. And now the Justice Department hasput a clamp on union independence under terms of a civilracketeering settlement designed to eliminate mob influenceon union officials.   Nonetheless, say labor experts, the union remains a mightyforce in U.S. business and politics. And, they say, theunion's government-mandated direct election of top officials-- in a process that takes shape at the union conventionlater this month -- could strengthen the Teamsters bybringing consensus to the leadership for the first time inmore than 10 years.   &quot;The combination of deregulation and inner turmoil makesthe Teamsters' effectiveness much less apparent,&quot; saysWilliam Curtin, a Washington, D.C., lawyer at the firm ofMorgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius. &quot;But it means only that they arejust a little less powerful than the very powerful union theyonce were.&quot;   While the number of Teamsters strikes has dropped in thepast decade, Mr. Curtin and others stress that the standardsfor measuring a union's strength have changed. Politicalclout, they say, is more effective than fist-slamming threatsof strikes or reminders of past walkouts. &quot;In 1991, more thanever before, strength is measured less by how much hurt aunion can inflict on the marketplace and more by itsabilities to deal with employers and labor matters throughthe legislative process,&quot; says Mr. Curtin.   The union's political influence received a big boost in1983 when then-Teamster president Jackie Presser urgedmembers to begin $1-a-week contributions to the union'spolitical action committee, known as DRIVE, or DemocraticRepublican Independent Voter Education Committee. By 1985,the flow of money that followed turned DRIVE into the richestPAC in the nation, a distinction it still holds.   In the 1989-1990 election cycle, the union raised $10.5million, almost double the collections of the AmericanMedical Association's PAC, the nation's second largest. Andin the same period, DRIVE spent more than any other PAC --$10.6 million, nearly double the amount of the No. 2 spender,the National Association of Realtors' PAC.   The political contributions appear to have paid dividends.Earlier this year, for example, the union successfullylobbied the Senate and House Democratic campaign committeesto stop using non-union Federal Express for overnightdeliveries, in favor of United Parcel Service, the Teamsterslargest employer. &quot;When they choose to make themselves felt,they certainly can,&quot; says Rep. Marcy Kaptur (D., Ohio).   And while the union failed to block the government frombringing its massive anti-racketeering lawsuit in 1987, PACcontributions to legislators and presidential candidateshelped generate some strong opposition. The union persuadedmore than half the House of Representatives to sign a letterurging the Justice Department not to file its suit; of the253 House members who had received money from the Teamsterssince 1983, 185 signed the letter. The union also drummed upsupport from four presidential aspirants -- Republicans JackKemp, Alexander Haig and Democrats Jesse Jackson and PaulSimon -- to speak out against the government's attack on theunion.   While the Teamsters union flexes its political musclesnationally, its locals have been gaining autonomy andstrength. Says H. Thomas Felix II, a lawyer in Philadelphiawho represents 30 companies in negotiations with the union:&quot;The Teamsters remains an extremely powerful union but thebase of power has shifted from the national level, where itwas more visible, to the locals. You want to take on aTeamster local, you are taking on World War III.&quot;   In state legislatures and on city councils nationwide,says Mr. Felix, Teamsters locals have become sophisticatedlobbying forces. The 140,000-member Pennsylvania Conferenceof Teamsters, for example, typically raises its own PAC fundsof more than $800,000 annually. Among other causes in recentyears, it has lobbied against a big push in Pennsylvania forthe appointment of judges. So far, Pennsylvania judges arestill elected -- and thus remain dependent on campaigncontributions.   Economically, trucking deregulation loosened the union'sgrip on the marketplace but only slightly diminished itspower, say labor experts and management lawyers. Prior toderegulation in 1980, almost 300,000 trucking industryworkers -- including drivers, mechanics and dock employees --were Teamsters represented by one collective-bargainingagreement, known as the National Master Freight Agreement, orby contracts linked to Master Freight.   Today, after deregulation forced many of the big unionizedtrucking companies to fold and shifted much of the businessto non-union truckers, only about 160,000 of the nation'struckers, or between 5% and 10%, are Teamsters, most of whomare represented by Master Freight or linking contracts.Yellow Freight, a large trucking concern, now has a separateTeamsters contract.   Nonetheless, deregulation didn't devastate the union'spower, in part because the union still controls 65% to 70% ofthe &quot;less than truckload&quot; shipments.   Also, labor experts add, deregulation, which spawnedhundreds of new companies, boosted the union's negotiatingpower because truck companies now fear loss of business toother truckers.   One corner of the marketplace where Teamsters haveconsiderable clout is the package-delivery industry. At UPS,which delivers almost 12 million parcels a day, there are160,000 Teamsters, all represented by a national contract.The company handles nearly 20 times the package volume of theU.S. Postal Service and has clients in every industry. Andthe union's power is increasing as businesses, in an effortto contain costs, turn to &quot;just-in-time&quot; inventory -- thatis, ordering on demand.   A Teamsters walkout would effectively halt the nation'spackage-delivery system. &quot;UPS has a stranglehold on themarketplace. A strike would be devastating to the company andto the national economy,&quot; says Walt Mitchell, president ofZone Skip Inc., a private carrier in Paramus, N.J. &quot;There'sno group of carriers that could fill the void.&quot;   In bargaining, the Teamsters, like other unions, have beenunable to gain the hefty wage increases they achieved in the1960s and 1970s. Concessionary bargaining became a way oflife in the 1980s and givebacks weakened the Teamsters'image.   But labor experts say that today the union's bargainingpower is rebounding. One factor is a 1988 change in theunion's constitution allowing a majority of the membership,rather than two-thirds, to reject a contract. Effectively,this means companies have to give more because employees canmore easily turn down their offers.   William Legg, a trucking analyst at the Baltimoresecurities firm of Alex Brown andamp; Sons Inc., cites theTeamsters' three-year contract with the trucking industry,ratified last month, as a sign of growing Teamsters strength.It was &quot;a relatively even contract,&quot; he says. And for thefirst time since 1979, there weren't any concessions.   Each year since 1986, Teamsters membership has inchedupward, and has spread into unlikely arenas, largely due tovigorous activity by locals. Librarians at the University ofChicago, school principals in Philadelphia, and even MickeyMouse, as well as other Disney characters at Disney World,are Teamsters union members now.   On June 24, the union's top leaders, the government'scourt-appointed overseers and thousands of Teamsters willgather in Orlando, Fla., for the first democratic conventionin the union's history. There, delegates, elected by therank-and-file this year, will nominate candidates for theunion's first direct, secret-ballot election in December. Ifthe democratic process can bring unity to the union'sleadership, say labor experts, the Teamsters will be strongerthan it has been in at least 15 years.   Board member R.V. Durham, of Greensboro,-N.C., running forunion president, says that the government's intervention&quot;certainly has had its disruptive effects. In the long term,however, it's going to make us a much stronger union.&quot;   Mr. Durham is backed by Teamsters president William J.McCarthy. The four other declared candidates for the union'stop post are: Walter Shea, another board member, fromWashington, D.C.; Ron Carey, a Teamsters reformer from NewYork who runs the union's largest UPS local; William Genoese,head of a New York local; and Lou Riga, head of a San Jose,Calif., local.   James P. Hoffa, the son of former Teamsters chief James R.Hoffa, wants to run, but earlier this year the governmentsaid he was ineligible because he hadn't been a unionofficial long enough. The senior Hoffa vanished in 1975.There is much speculation that his son, an attorney, will tryto override the government's objections to his candidacy bydrumming up sufficient support for his nomination fromdelegates at the convention.</TEXT></DOC>