<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910806-0137</DOCNO><DOCID>910806-0137.</DOCID><HL>   Favored Few:   Pentagon Unit Steers   Supercomputer Deals   To Certain Companies   ---   Rival Firms Complain Darpa   Is Unfair in the Way It   Stresses Parallel Processing   ---   Agency That Hates Red Tape   ----   By Bob Davis   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CNX CYR INTC</CO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)MINNESOTA (MN)MISSISSIPPI (MS)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   Soon after opening an engineering research center lastyear, Mississippi State University started shopping for asupercomputer. The way the university made its choicedemonstrates how, in the race to keep America No. 1 insupercomputers, a few U.S. computer makers may be getting adistinct advantage.   Mississippi State's choice came down to competing machinesmade by Intel Corp. and N-Cube Corp. The school chose Intel.A big reason: federal dollars.</LP><TEXT>   Intel, the semiconductor maker, is a major player in aPentagon computer program run by the Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency, or Darpa; N-Cube, a closely heldcompany in Belmont, Calif., isn't. Joe Thompson, theengineering center's director, hopes to join the program andget a $500,000 supercomputer from Darpa free, plus researchwork.   That isn't an unrealistic hope. As part of researchgrants, Darpa has already given more than a dozensupercomputers made by a few select companies, includingIntel, to universities and laboratories.   &quot;What Darpa is doing unwittingly . . . is denying themarket to others,&quot; charges Lawrence Ellison, N-Cube's largestshareholder and the chief executive of Oracle Corp., thesoftware producer. &quot;They're picking winners and saying thesemachines will compete with Japan.&quot;   The fight may soon grow nastier because the supercomputerbusiness, currently about $1.5 billion a year world-wide, isabout to get a lot bigger. The Bush administration is givingDarpa a crucial role in a multibillion-dollar program, set tobegin this fall, to build a nationwide supercomputer network.   More broadly, the dispute over Darpa's role affects thefuture of supercomputers, one of America's few indisputableleads in high technology. Scientists use the machines, whichmake billions of calculations a second, to attack the mostdaunting problems: designing spacecraft and nuclear weapons,forecasting weather and climatic changes, analyzing satellitephotos and searching through vast computerized libraries.   Darpa is prodding the supercomputer industry to adapt anew technique, called parallel processing, in which hundreds-- sometimes tens of thousands -- of small computer chips runin concert. Although parallel computers are a nightmare tobuild and program, they promise a huge increase in speed overtraditional computers. &quot;If we can make software work {onparallel machines}, we'll have a big lead over the Japanese,&quot;says Ken Kennedy, director of Rice University'sparallel-computer center. By 1996, Darpa wants to develop acomputer that can make a trillion calculations a second.   But the supercomputer industry is riven over Darpa'sapproach. Companies without the agency's support say itfavors Intel, of Santa Clara, Calif., and Thinking MachinesCorp., a closely held supercomputer company in Cambridge,Mass., and fear being blocked by Darpa from the lucrativenational network project. In addition, they accuse Darpa ofdiscouraging competition that might lead to breakthroughs.Jeffrey Kalb, president of Maspar Computer Corp., a closelyheld Sunnyvale, Calif., company, calls Darpa a &quot;marketingarm&quot; of the favored companies.   Supporters of Darpa praise it for helping companies, oftenobscure start-ups, develop innovations. To Geoffrey Fox,director of a Syracuse University lab that got a $2 millionThinking Machines computer free, the controversy comes downto this: &quot;You have to make trade-offs between democracy andmaking {technological} breakthroughs.&quot;   The flap focuses renewed attention on Darpa, which haspioneered advances in computers and aerospace but shuns thelimelight. Early in the Bush administration, White Houseofficials assailed the agency for promoting high-definitiontelevision and other commercial technologies, activities thatcontributed to the dismissal of Darpa's director, CraigFields.   Darpa, founded in 1958 to maintain U.S. technologicalsuperiority after the Soviets launched Sputnik, haspreviously been dogged by charges of favoritism andindifference to procurement regulations aimed at assuringfair competition. A recent report by the Pentagon's inspectorgeneral, obtained under the Freedom of Information Act,criticizes the agency for not fully justifying sole-sourcecontracts and for ignoring &quot;legal reviews and audit advice&quot;during a project to build a computerized battle-simulationsystem. Darpa's disdain for bureaucracy reflects its leanstructure -- it has only 75 managers to run $1.4 billion inprojects -- its close ties with contractors and itsnationalistic bent.   A look at a dozen computer purchases involving Darpa showsclearly that the market does tilt toward Darpa-blessedmachines, even without the agency pushing them. For example,the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's AmesResearch Center, whose computer department is renowned forsimulating the stresses faced by experimental aircraft, hasbought two parallel computers in the past three years. Thegoal was to determine whether they could run design programsas quickly as traditional supercomputers made by CrayResearch Inc.   Each time, Ames, which is situated in California's SiliconValley, evaluated parallel machines supported by Darpa andthose made by such outsiders as N-Cube and Bolt Beranek andamp;Newman Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., company that once had Darpasupercomputer funding but lost it. Each time, Ames chose aDarpa-backed computer, which came with advantages the othercompanies couldn't match.   Darpa agreed to pay half the cost of the first machine, a$3 million computer made by Thinking Machines. It alsoprovided about $500,000 in research funds for an advancedcomputing institute at Ames.   With the second machine, made by Intel, Darpa wangled adiscount, perhaps of as much 40%, from Intel for Ames. Darpaalso provided a contracting mechanism that enabled Ames toget the machine quickly. NASA managers say that if Ames hadto buy it through the government's regularcompetitive-procurement process -- a process that one calls&quot;long, tedious and always open to protest&quot; -- it would havetaken 18 months longer. But the Intel purchase wascontroversial at Ames because computer experts there wereequally impressed by N-Cube, an Ames official says.   Thomas Lasinski, an Ames official who oversaw bothpurchases, says the research center chose the Darpa-backedcomputers because it judged them superior. But heacknowledges that Darpa's ability to get machines quickly&quot;certainly is a factor, especially in these days when we'retrying to make assessments of technology, {and} technology ischanging rapidly.&quot;   To Chuck Masters, N-Cube's former vice president ofmarketing, such competition was fundamentally unfair. AtAmes, he says, &quot;Darpa dollars getting funneled into Intel putus out of the running.&quot;   Darpa and Intel officials say Ames's Intel purchase simplyshows that the NASA center wanted to join a Darpa programrevolving around the company. And Stephen Squires, Darpa'sdirector of computing-systems technology, contends that theagency must place several generations of a computer inlaboratories to determine whether the machine will be usefulto the military. &quot;If we started a project and didn't followthrough, we'd be criticized for dropping the ball,&quot; he says.   Darpa support can be invaluable. Starting in 1984, Darpaprovided research funds that helped Thinking Machines attractventure capital. It later bought the first of each newgeneration of the company's computers. It provided variousresearchers with about 16 machines free or at steepdiscounts, and organized projects to write software for thecomputers.   In all, Darpa values its purchases and other contributionsto Thinking Machines at $55 million -- equal to about 20% ofthe company's revenue since 1984. Thinking Machinescalculates that Darpa-derived orders accounted for a smallerpercentage of its revenue and says that share is declining.&quot;We went out on a limb and pioneered a whole new class ofhardware and software virtually with all our own money,&quot; addsRichard Clayton, vice president of operations.   Thinking Machines uses one of several approaches on whichDarpa has focused in parallel processing, after havingexperimented with a dozen ideas. It strings together as manyas 64,000 tiny processors that execute the same commandsimultaneously.   In addition, a Darpa-backed technique at Intel usesseveral hundred more-powerful processors that executedifferent instructions as part of a complex choreography.Scientific American magazine has compared Thinking Machines'computing style to a Rockettes chorus line and Intel's to aballet. A third Darpa-backed approach, by Tera Computer Co.,focuses on ease of programming. The closely held Seattlecompany isn't expected to sell its first computer until 1993.   None of Darpa's direct aid has been available to ThinkingMachines competitors that don't work with the agency. At SRIInternational Inc., the big research institute in Menlo Park,Calif., Darpa placed a Thinking Machines computer, valued atseveral million dollars, free as part of an early project.Then, it replaced the computer with an upgraded model, theCM2, also made by Thinking Machines. But when SRI asked Darpato buy a competitive machine made by Maspar, it refused.&quot;Darpa wasn't going to pull the plug on the CM2 to get us aMaspar,&quot; says Ray Perrault, director of SRI's artificialintelligence center.   Maspar's Mr. Kalb thinks Darpa should buy and give awayjust a few machines, not the dozen or so that it has played abig hand in buying from Thinking Machines and Intel. &quot;They'regoing beyond sheer testing; they're trying to discriminateand support companies,&quot; he says.   The agency's influence soon will be expanded by WhiteHouse plans to launch the interagency project to developfaster parallel computers, build a high-speed network and usethe network to study topics ranging from cancer genes tohurricane prediction. The project could cost $2 billion overfive years, with much of the money being used to buy parallelcomputers.   &quot;Darpa is supposed to develop hardware, and we're supposedto use their hardware,&quot; says James Fischer, a computerresearcher at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. He saysthat as part of the project, he has already ordered a $5million Thinking Machines computer through Darpa. He addsthat NASA isn't limited to using Darpa machines and is tryingto devise a contract that would let it buy from other vendorsquickly.   Mr. Squires, the Darpa computer official, saysacquisitions under the program will be open to fullcompetition. And Darpa does seem to be trying to mend itsrelations with companies it doesn't back. Charles Seitz, aCalifornia Institute of Technology computer designer longassociated with Darpa, says the agency encouraged him to helpCray Research -- a longtime critic of Darpa -- with a projectto develop a parallel computer. Convex Computer Corp., inRichardson, Texas, says Darpa recently funded a researcher ina Pentagon lab who wanted to use part of the grant to buy aConvex computer.   Nevertheless, N-Cube, Cray Research and Convex arelobbying in Congress to add several provisions to theprogram. One would require Darpa to buy more computersthrough competitive bidding; another would speed up theacquisition of parallel computers made by all vendors.Otherwise, &quot;sales don't come down to technology or software,{but} to someone playing God and saying we'll make it easierto work with one vendor,&quot; says Deborah Goldfarb, an analystat the market-research firm of International Data Corp.</TEXT></DOC>