<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920324-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>920324-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Iraq's Kurdish Victims, Turkey's Kurdish Terrorists   ----   By Frank J. Gaffney Jr.</HL><DATE>03/24/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><RE>EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)TURKEY (TU)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The tragic plight of the Kurds -- relatively absent fromon front pages and the public consciousness for nearly a year-- is about to burst forth from the Middle East once again.   In northern Iraq, three heavily armed Iraqi divisions arereported to have resumed Saddam Hussein's genocidal assaultagainst his Kurdish population. In neighboring Turkey, a newspate of violence began over the weekend, instigated by theKurdish Workers Party and precipitating swift retributionfrom the Turkish security forces. Some 45 people lost theirlives in the clashes in Turkey.</LP><TEXT>   For Western policy makers and interests, what is mostimportant about these developments is not their superficialsimilarities -- the appearance in both cases of conflictsbetween states and Kurdish minorities -- but theirdifferences. In Iraq, the Kurds are one of several groupstargeted for destruction by Saddam's despotic regime. Whilethey have borne the brunt of the Butcher of Baghdad'sdomestic violence, including his chemical weapon attacks, thefate of Iraq's Kurdish population has been shared by thecountry's Shiite majority, by officers of questionableloyalty and by others opposed to the Takriti ruling clique.   The Kurdish Workers Party, known as the PKK, has attemptedto exploit the sympathy legitimately extended by theinternational community to the Kurds of Iraq. But it iswholly undeserving of such support. The PKK is an avowedlyMarxist organization, bent on imposing through terrorism itsdemands for an independent Kurdistan on the democraticgovernment of Turkey. Premier Suleyman Demirel called theweekend's clashes &quot;a declaration of war by the PKK.&quot;   The principal sponsor of the PKK is Syria's Hafez Assad,who permits the party's leadership to be openly headquarteredin Damascus and its terrorists to train in the Bekaa Valley.Like its Syrian patrons, the PKK relies heavily on illicitinternational drug traffic to finance its operations.   The main victims of the PKK's attacks are fellow Kurds insoutheastern Turkey, who have been assimilated into theTurkish population, have the democratic rights of all Turkishcitizens and are represented in Turkey's parliament andgovernment (the current foreign minister, Hikmet Cetin, is anethnic Kurd). As with terrorist organizations elsewhere --which attempt to justify violence against civilians bydressing it up as national liberation heroism -- the PKK isprimarily engaged in terrorizing its ethnic fellows toexacerbate relations between the minority and majoritypopulations.   In these activities, the PKK is now receiving importantlogistical and material support from Iraq. Such assistancereportedly includes rockets, artillery and other weapons moresuited to full-scale combat than terrorist operations. ThePKK offers Saddam a means of accomplishing two strategicobjectives. First, the Kurdish Workers Party harries theTurks, distracting them and perhaps precluding them fromparticipating in U.S.-led initiatives aimed at pressuring ordeposing Saddam. Second, the PKK's attacks on Turkishcivilians permit Baghdad to exact some revenge for Turkey'spivotal role in the campaign to liberate Kuwait without beingheld directly responsible.   Saddam Hussein has also begun to use the PKK to attackKurds living in northern Iraq -- people for the moment livingbeyond his ruthless grasp. A car bomb detonated outside theKurds' headquarters in the region a few weeks ago is a casein point. It was intended to kill much of the Iraqi Kurdishopposition leadership. Fortunately for the Kurds, theleadership escaped unscathed, although some guards werekilled.   The challenge to the U.S. and other Western democraciessympathetic to the plight of the Kurds will be todifferentiate their responses to the incipient Kurdrelatedcrises in Iraq and Turkey. On one hand, the West shouldoppose with force any renewed assault by Saddam against theKurdish population in northern Iraq. Only by threatening sucha response and, if necessary, carrying through on thatthreat, can civilian lives be protected from Saddam's renewedpredations.   As for the PKK's activities in Turkey, Washington andother Western capitals must recognize that they represent aserious terrorist threat to the security of an ally andfellow democracy. The fact that this organization is made upof people with ethnic ties to the long-suffering Kurds ofIraq should no more legitimize the PKK's destructiveactivities than the shared nationality of the Khmer Rougewith the people of Cambodia makes their abhorrent behavioracceptable. Far from criticizing Turkey for dealingforcefully with a renewed campaign of terror on the part ofthe PKK, the West -- especially the U.S. -- should encourageAnkara to deal firmly though discriminately with thisterrorist Marxist gang.   The fate of the Kurds will rest to some extent with thoseof us far removed from the region in which they live. Thedegree to which still more Kurdish civilians will become thevictims of terrorism -- whether the state-sponsored varietydispensed by Saddam Hussein in Iraq or that inflicted by theSyrian-based PKK acting in Turkey -- will depend upon thewillingness of Western nations to oppose such violence and tosupport those resisting it.   ---   Mr. Gaffney is the director of the Center for SecurityPolicy in Washington.</TEXT></DOC>