<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910313-0126</DOCNO><DOCID>910313-0126.</DOCID><HL>   Enterprise:   Minority-Owned Business's Surge of '80s Is Threatened   ---   Recession and Disputes Over   Special Programs May Check Growth   ----   By Dorothy Gaiter   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Guy Louise-Julie used to sell facsimile machines forsomebody else. In 1986 he tried to sell one to his neighbor,Clarence Williams, a founder of the Connecticut MinorityPurchasing Council. Mr. Williams suggested that he thinkabout setting up his own business.   With the council's guidance and $10,000 in savings, Mr.Louise-Julie and his wife, Ann, started FairfaxCommunications Co., which sells and services fax machines.The Milford, Conn., company now has six employees, 600clients, and annual revenue of about $600,000.</LP><TEXT>   The Connecticut business owners were part of the blackentrepreneurial explosion of the 1980s. The U.S. CensusBureau's most recent figures show that the number ofblack-owned businesses soared to 424,000 in 1987, up 38% from1982. That was almost three times the 14% overall growth inthe number of U.S. companies.   That trend is being threatened by the economic downturnand legal and budgetary assaults on programs that help createand nurture minority businesses. A Supreme Court ruling hascast a cloud over 236 state and municipal programs that aidwomen and minorities. And the recession is certain to claimmarginal companies, many of them black-owned.   Nevertheless, patterns in the rise of minorityentrepreneurship are leading many specialists to concludethat, on balance, special-assistance programs for minoritiesare making a significant contribution.   &quot;Businesses do better in states that have activeminority-business programs or a governor or mayor with astrong commitment to minority procurement,&quot; says John F.Robinson, president of the National Minority BusinessCouncil, a New York not-for-profit group that helpsminorities get contracts and training.   Not surprisingly, black capitalism took deepest root instates with booming economies and large black populations.But authorities said that private and government-sponsoredprograms were a factor, too.   Of the five states where black-owned business growth wasfastest -- New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Massachusetts,Connecticut and Florida -- all had special state programs toaid minority businesses except New Hampshire. Of the fourstates with the slowest growth of black-owned business --Wyoming, North Dakota, Idaho and Iowa -- only Iowa hadspecial state programs for minority firms. (Washington, D.C.,rounded out the slow-growth group, although it too had aspecial program.)   Atlanta stands out for some as an example of what suchprograms can accomplish. In 1974, when the city started a&quot;set-aside&quot; program to funnel a certain percentage of itscontract dollars to businesses owned by minorities or women,such businesses received less than 0.1% of the city'scontract dollars, says Thomas Boston, an economics professorat the Georgia Institute of Technology. By 1989,minority-owned and women-owned firms in Atlanta werereceiving 35% of the city's contract dollars.   Furthermore, Mr. Boston notes, the number of blackbusinesses in Atlanta grew 66% from 1974 to 1987, thesharpest increase among U.S. cities, and their averagerevenue, $63,000, was the highest.   But in 1989, the Georgia Supreme Court suspended Atlanta'sprogram after the U.S. Supreme Court's Croson decisionstriking down a similar program in Richmond, Va. Within sixmonths, contracting with minority and women-owned firms fellto 15%, Mr. Boston says.   Timothy Bates, director of the graduate program in UrbanPolicy Analysis at Manhattan's New School for SocialResearch, has conducted several studies that show thatblack-owned businesses in categories that are likely to beset-aside recipients are booming. The number of black-ownedcompanies benefiting from set-aside programs in theconstruction, manufacturing and business-services industries,which traditionally all but excluded blacks, is &quot;growing byleaps and bounds,&quot; he says.   In Connecticut, where a decade-old support system wasbringing together black entrepreneurs, sympathetic stateofficials and corporations willing to invest in minorityenterprises, the number of black-owned businesses surgedthrough the mid-1980s. A strong state economy helped, too.   &quot;As the economy was booming, opportunities opened forfirms in general, but for black-owned firms in particular,&quot;says Joseph McGee, Connecticut's economic developmentcommissioner. Blacks lobbied officials for help in promotingblack startups.   As a result, he says, the state has effective programs inplace to encourage minority-purchasing. He cites theConnecticut Minority Purchasing Council, a not-for-profitadvocacy group that is one of 48 such groups nationwide.Allying itself with minority-business advocates, Connecticutin 1976 established one of the nation's first set-asideprograms.   Some analysts question the effectiveness of set-asides,and the potential for abuse is great: Blacks have been usedas fronts to qualify companies for minority-only contracts.But supporters say the benefits of the programs outweigh thedrawbacks.   For the Louise-Julies and their Fairfax Communications,there was one particular hurdle that minority start-ups oftenface: a lack of connections. That's where the ConnecticutMinority Purchasing Council helped.   The council, based in Bridgeport, besides offering adviceon everything from writing a business plan to answering thetelephone professionally, gives fledgling businesses a headstart by putting them in contact with big companies committedto increasing purchases from minority-owned firms. More thanone-third of Fairfax's revenue comes from contracts with bigfirms that are council members.   Cities as well as states are lending a hand to minoritiesand women. New York City, for example, has a program toprovide counseling to start-up firms. One beneficiary isPearl Hedgspeth, who set out on her own after 20 years ofteaching shorthand, typing and word-processing. MissHedgspeth had always tried to find jobs for her students, anddecided to parlay that experience into a business. So shetook business courses, attended seminars, rented space -- andseveral years ago founded Temporary Solutions Inc., aprovider of temporary office help.   The city's business mentoring program paired her withRosann Levy, marketing director and partner with her husbandin an accounting firm. Mrs. Levy helped work out a businessplan and sharpen the firm's image. The city also paid most ofa financial consultant's fee. On an initial investment of$7,000, Miss Hedgspeth's revenue grew to $350,000 last year.The city program doesn't guarantee success -- her company nowis slumping with the struggling economy. &quot;But it helps,&quot; shesays.</TEXT></DOC>