<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900711-0100</DOCNO><DOCID>900711-0100.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Teamsters Objections to Election Rejected   ----   By Ann Hagedorn and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDICAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY (MTC)INSURANCE (INS)TRUCKING (TRK)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal judge in New York rejected objections by theInternational Brotherhood of Teamsters to proposed rules forthe union's court-ordered elections next year.   Judge David N. Edelstein, in a strongly worded opinion,referred to the union's protests as &quot;frivolous,&quot;&quot;inappropriate,&quot; and &quot;unpersuasive.&quot; Moreover, he said, &quot;TheIBT's behavior over the past year indicates officialrejection of reform -- and with it, free elections.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Judge Edelstein stressed the importance of the electionrules as &quot;the linchpin&quot; in the government's effort to purgethe nation's largest union of the alleged influence oforganized crime. &quot;An election under these rules beacons thecoming of the light of freedom to this dark union,&quot; the judgewrote.   Teamsters officials and attorneys couldn't be reached forcomment on whether the union plans an appeal.   The union is under court order to hold direct,secret-ballot elections next year for top officers as part ofits settlement last spring of civil racketeering chargesbrought by the U.S. attorney in Manhattan. In the past, unionleaders were elected at a national convention by delegateshand-picked at the local union level.   In its 1988 suit, the government accused the Teamstersleadership of depriving its 1.7 million members of theirrights through a pattern of racketeering. The governmentclaimed that organized crime figures had routinely influencedunion elections.   As part of the 1989 accord, Judge Edelstein appointedthree officers to oversee the union as it moves toward thegoal of free elections. Election Officer Michael H. Holland,a Chicago lawyer, drafted election rules that he submitted toTeamsters locals early this year. Mr. Holland then visitedlocals nationwide and in Canada to discuss the rules and hearthe concerns.   Meanwhile, in Manhattan federal court, the Teamsters'current leadership was voicing its own concerns. The union,for example, challenged the requirement that each localsubmit a plan to the elections officer outlining such detailsas its method for counting ballots and the name of theoutside agency hired to conduct the election. The judge said,&quot;The election officer cannot supervise this election withoutthe specific information contained in a local union plan.&quot;   The union also disputed a rule allowing candidates topublish campaign literature in &quot;International Teamster,&quot; theinternal union organ controlled by the current leadership anddistributed to all 1.7 million members each month.   The union argued that the rule violated its right to freespeech by compelling it to publish specific material. Thejudge said, among other things, &quot;No opposition candidate maymount a viable challenge to the entrenched IBT plutocracywithout standing on an equal footing with regard todistribution of their views.&quot;   The judge also ruled that the union's membership list maybe distributed to the accredited candidates -- a move thatboth the union and the election officer had protested. Therewas a danger, they argued, that the list could be copied andused for improper purposes by employers, rival unions andsubversive groups. But the judge said that &quot;extraordinarymeasures are necessary to ensure that this electionsucceeds.&quot; However, the judge prohibited the distribution ofthe list to third parties.   ---   SODOMY LAWS in Michigan and Kentucky found to violatestate constitutions.   In both states, lower court judges ruled that the lawsviolate the right to privacy under the states' constitutions.The decisions reflect the success of a strategy adopted bygay activists four years ago to turn to state courts ratherthan to federal courts in challenging such laws.   The decisions, if upheld by the states' appeals courts,also appear to open a door to the use of privacy arguments instate constitutional challenges to restrictions on abortions.   In 1986, the U.S. Supreme Court said the federalConstitution doesn't prohibit states from banning sodomy, andit rejected the right-to-privacy arguments. The constitutionsof 10 states, however, explicitly grant a right to privacy.In other states, such as Michigan and Kentucky, such a righthas emerged through years of state court decisions unrelatedto the sodomy laws.   Florida, Arizona, Montana, Louisiana and South Carolinaare among the states that have laws banning sodomy and alsohave specific right-to-privacy protection in theirconstitutions. Evan Wolfson, an attorney with Lambda LegalDefense and Education Fund, a national gay-rightsorganization based in New York, said Lambda is weighingwhether to pursue cases in such states.   In the Michigan and Kentucky decisions, both judges saidthat the right to privacy prohibited the state from banningconsensual sexual acts among adults in the privacy of theirhomes.   In the Michigan case, in which the plaintiffs includedheterosexuals and homosexuals because the law applies to allpeople, Circuit Court Judge John A. Murphy of Wayne Countysaid, &quot;The Michigan Constitution embodies a promise that acertain private sphere of individual liberty will be keptlargely beyond the reach of the government.&quot;   A spokesman for Michigan Attorney General Frank Kelleysaid he will decide in a couple of weeks whether to appeal. Aspokesman for Kentucky Attorney General Fred Cowan said it'snot clear whether the decision last month will be appealed.In both cases, the attorneys general argued that the lawswere constitutional.   ---   PATIENTS DENIED share in profits from research using theirblood or tissue.   The California Supreme Court's ruling on Monday was a boonto the biotechnology industry, which feared that litigationby patients might have a chilling effect on the research anddevelopment of valuable new products.   The suit was filed by John Moore, who sought treatment fora rare type of leukemia at the University of California atLos Angeles Medical Center in 1976. David Goldie, a doctorthere, removed Mr. Moore's spleen as part of the treatment.   While experimenting with cells from the diseased spleen,Dr. Goldie and a colleague developed a cell line thatproduces proteins found in the human immune system and isconsidered valuable in research on cancer and acquired immunedeficiency syndrome. The university patented the cell line in1984.   That same year, Mr. Moore sued the university, theresearchers and two biotech firms using the cell line,claiming they had misappropriated his bodily material andcommercially exploited it without his knowledge or consent.He alleged that as the owner of the bodily materials, he wasentitled to a share in the future profits derived from them.   The high court found that Mr. Moore was not entitled to ashare of the profits from the patented cell line, whosepotential value had been estimated at $3 billion. The courtsaid that the patent was not for Mr. Moore's cells but for aproduct of human invention.   The court did allow Mr. Moore to go to trial on his claimthat Dr. Goldie failed to disclose his personal financial orresearch interests before obtaining Mr. Moore's consent tothe medical treatment.   &quot;Physicians are expected to tell patients aboutinformation relevant to their physical condition, such as theside effects of a drug. But it wasn't customary to talk abouta doctor's financial or research interests. This addssomething new,&quot; said Daniel Callahan, director of theHastings Center, a Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., researchorganization on ethics and medicine.   Sanford M. Gage, Mr. Moore's lawyer, said his client stillmay be able to recover significant damages if he proves thatDr. Goldie violated a fiduciary duty by failing to inform Mr.Moore of his personal interest in use of the spleen. Mr. Gagesaid, &quot;We can get a share of the profits, and possiblypunitive damages.&quot;   Richard D. Godown, president of Industrial BiotechnologyAssociation, the main biotech trade group, characterized theruling as &quot;a very big victory&quot; for biotechnology that hadbiotech companies &quot;breathing a sigh of relief.&quot;   He added that &quot;we will simply have to reorganize theconsent forms and the procedures used with these forms tomake sure that not only medical issues are covered. Itbehooves everybody involved to be more careful.&quot;   ---   INSURANCE REGULATION rejecting HIV test requirement gets ahearing.   The New York Court of Appeals, the state's highest court,agreed to review a lower court ruling that rejected theregulation, which prohibited insurers from using the humanimmunodeficiency virus blood test in underwriting individualand small-group hospital and medical insurance.   Court approval of the New York insurance department'sregulation would run counter to the trend of decisions in ahandful of other states. Recently, state regulators'attention has focused on getting consent for such testing andmaintaining the confidentiality of test results, said anofficial with the National Association of InsuranceCommissioners.   In August l987, the New York insurance department adoptedan amendment to an existing regulation that prohibitedinsurers from using the blood test for detection of the AIDSvirus in underwriting, rating or administering claims forhospital and medical insurance. The ruling also prohibitedinquiries regarding the test on health insurance applicationsor in interviews.   New York regulators believe that the HIV test isn't adiagnostic test for AIDS, and that the &quot;denial of healthinsurance is a most serious consequence of a testingprocedure that indicates only an exposure to a virus,&quot; saidSalvatore R. Curiale, New York's superintendent of insurance.   The New York regulation has never been implemented becauseit was challenged by a group of insurers and tradeassociations. The state supreme court annulled the amendmentin April 1988. The appellate division of the supreme courtupheld that ruling in February.   ---   MCKENNA, CONNER andamp; CUNEO will split into two financiallyseparate branches.   The 250-lawyer firm was formed in 1980 from a mergerbetween Washington-based Sellers, Conner andamp; Cuneo and LosAngeles-based McKenna andamp; Fitting. Two years after the merger,each branch reverted to independent management, though theirfinances remained linked.   The current financial divorce proceedings will furtherseparate the branches, which will coordinate some work witheach other but have little else but their name in common.Partners at McKenna Conner say the two branches mayultimately sever their ties completely.   The law firm's trouble operating as one unit appears toreflect differences between the two branches in the types ofclients they cater to and in their strategies for futuregrowth.   Charles Yonkers, managing partner of the firm's Washingtonoffice, said the East Coast branch, which has traditionallyfocused on government contracts work, is now trying todiversify its practice. By contrast, Mr. Yonkers said, theWest Coast branch has continued to focus on its traditionalclientele, financial institutions.   Lawyers and consultants say the recent push towardlaw-firm consolidation has prompted some firms to rushblindly into unsuitable mergers. &quot;Firms today are in such ahurry to merge . . . that they miss critical steps,&quot; saidHoward Mudrick, who specializes in law-firm mergers atHildebrandt Inc., a Somerville, N.J., consulting firm.   ---   Amy Dockser Marcus and Beatrice E. Garcia contributed tothis article.</TEXT></DOC>