<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911203-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>911203-0008.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Appeals Court Overturns Ruling   On Replacing Striking Workers   ----   By Wade Lambert and Stephen J. Adler   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   DIS GE LABOR</CO><MS>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)INSIDER TRADING (ISD)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)CONNECTICUT (CT)FLORIDA (FL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   A federal appeals court ruled that arbitrators exceededtheir power in ruling that a company must warn strikingworkers they could be fired before hiring new employees toreplace them.   In a case involving small printing companies in Buffalo,N.Y., the arbitration panel had found that &quot;the fundamentalright of due process&quot; barred employers from hiring permanentreplacements without warning the strikers that they wererisking their jobs.</LP><TEXT>   But the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattanruled that the panel of the American Arbitration Associationhad exceeded its authority. The court said the arbitratorswent beyond the printing companies' collective bargainingagreement, which didn't specifically provide for such awarning.   The appeals court said the arbitration panel's decisionwasn't &quot;based on express or properly implied terms, butrather was improperly based upon the panel members'particular notion of industrial justice.&quot;   The hiring of permanent replacements has become acontentious issue between labor and employers. Unions saythat companies are increasingly hiring permanent replacementworkers when unions go on strike, rather than hiringtemporary help until a strike ends.   Nicholas J. Fiorenza, a Syracuse, N.Y., attorney for theseven printing companies, said the decision could rein inarbitration decisions that try to go beyond a contract'sspecific provisions. He said the arbitrators were &quot;holdingour clients to a standard that they had no way of knowingthey were obligated to follow.&quot;   The arbitrators had found that the printing companiesimproperly replaced 34 workers who went on strike in 1983.The local unit of the Graphic Communications InternationalUnion argued that the arbitrators' ruling was within thebounds of the collective bargaining agreement.   The appeals-court panel rejected the union's argument.While noting that courts often defer to arbitrationdecisions, the appeals panel said &quot;this deferential standardof review doesn't . . . amount to a grant of unlimited powerto the arbitrator.&quot;   The court said other aspects of the collective bargainingagreement included notice requirements. But the judges saidthe section that applied to the printing workers, who werestriking in support of another union, didn't include such arequirement.   &quot;It is undeniable that the notice requirement in this casehad its origins in the {arbitration} panel members'subjective notions of a fair labor contract,&quot; the court said.   An attorney for the union couldn't be reached for comment.James Speyer, the president of the union local, said hehadn't yet reviewed the decision. (Harry Hoffman PrintingInc., et al, vs. Graphic Communications International Union,Local 261, Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 91-7389)   ---   PSYCHIATRIST LOSES bid to have securities fraud chargesdropped.   A federal judge in Manhattan ruled that a recent appealscourt decision on securities fraud and insider-tradingdoesn't bar prosecutors from charging the doctor, Robert H.Willis, with fraud. Dr. Willis is charged with illegallytrading securities on the basis of information he obtainedfrom a patient, Joan Weill, about the plans of her husband,financier Sanford I. Weill.   Dr. Willis, of Tenafly, N.J., pleaded guilty to thecharges in June 1990, but he withdrew his plea last month inthe wake of the appeals court decision in the case of brokerRobert Chestman. The appeals court reversed the securitiesfraud conviction of the broker but upheld his conviction forinsider trading. In that case, the appeals court found thatsomeone who trades on an inside stock tip can't be liable forsecurities fraud if the person who gave him the tip didn'tviolate a fiduciary duty in divulging the information.   Dr. Willis argued that he couldn't be charged with fraudbecause a marital relationship isn't necessarily a fiduciaryrelationship.   But Judge Miriam Cedarbaum ruled that the Chestmandecision &quot;doesn't preclude the government from proving . . .that Mrs. Weill received the information from her husband ina relationship of trust and confidence.&quot;   (U.S. vs. Robert Howard Willis, U.S. Southern District ofNew York, 89 Cr. 561)   ---   JEWISH JURORS' EXCLUSION attacked by defense in Smith rapetrial.   In a surprise move before opening arguments in the WilliamKennedy Smith trial began yesterday, defense lawyers for Mr.Smith charged that prosecutors had excluded three prospectivejurors because they are Jewish. But the judge rejected thedefense's contention.   The defense claimed that the prosecution's action violateda U.S. Supreme Court decision in 1986 that bannedprosecutors' use of so-called peremptory challenges in aracially discriminatory manner. Before that decision, lawyershad been given nearly unlimited discretion to exercise alimited number of challenges to qualified jurors withoutstating reasons.   Since the 1986 decision, lower federal courts and statecourts have differed widely on whether the use of challengesbased on gender, age, national origin, sexual orientation andreligion should also be banned.   In cases where the judge decides that an exclusion appearsto have been discriminatory, the prosecution must givenondiscriminatory and reasonably specific reasons for theexclusion in order to sustain it. In the Smith case,prosecutor Moira Lasch, fearing an appeal, chose to give herreasons for the challenges even though the judge had alreadyrejected the defense claims on procedural grounds.   Ms. Lasch recited from her notes on the three excludedjurors, observing, for example, that one juror had cried atthe mention of the assassination of President John F. Kennedyand another had said the defendant was being exploitedbecause of his name. Afterward, the judge said the challengeshad been &quot;reasonably exercised.&quot;   &quot;If there are any neutral reasons articulated, thatgenerally suffices under the cases decided so far,&quot; saysOakland attorney Thomas M. Meyer, a specialist in the area.&quot;You don't have to show it's logical.&quot;   Mr. Smith, the defendant, isn't Jewish and therefore thedefense's claim was seen as unusual.   ---   FISHERMEN SUING GE can increase punitive damage demand,judge rules.   The state court judge allowed commercial striped bassfisherman in New York to increase the demand to $100 millionin a class-action suit over contamination of the HudsonRiver. They had originally asked for $10 million in punitivedamages, meant to punish and prevent future wrongdoing. Thefishermen are also seeking compensatory damages.   The fishermen allege that General Electric Co. helpeddestroy New York's striped bass fishing industry because itreleased into the Hudson polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs,used at plants in Hudson Falls and Fort Edward, N.Y.   The suit was filed in 1985 on behalf of about 350fisherman after New York state banned commercial striped bassfishing in the lower Hudson River and along western LongIsland because of PCBs. The state extended the ban in 1986 toall New York waters.   The ruling by state Supreme Court Justice Mary M. Werner,a trial judge, also allowed the plaintiffs to expand theclass to include fishermen affected by the later ban. JosephF. Carlino, a Mineola, N.Y. lawyer for the plaintiffs, saidabout 400 fishermen will be added.   The Environmental Protection Agency is also consideringwhat responsibility GE, based in Fairfield, Conn., shouldhave in cleaning up the river's bottom.   &quot;This is a procedural decision and in no way decideswhether GE is liable to anyone,&quot; said Jack Batty, a GEspokesman. He said the company expects to prevail at trialand that the long-term danger of PCB contamination isminimal.   (Leo vs. General Electric Co., New York State SupremeCourt, Suffolk County, N.Y., 85-21018)   ---   SEC LIFTS ORDER barring Mulheren from securities industry.   The Securities and Exchange Commission cited an appealscourt's decision to reverse fraud and conspiracy convictionsagainst John A. Mulheren Jr. It had barred Mr. Mulheren fromthe industry earlier this year after a federal jury convictedhim of manipulating the stock of the former Gulf andamp; WesternCorp. at the behest of convicted former arbitrager IvanBoesky.   In July, however, a federal appeals court in New Yorkreversed Mr. Mulheren's conviction, stating that thegovernment failed to prove that the manipulation occurred.Prosecutors subsequently dropped 26 remaining conspiracy andsecurities fraud charges against Mr. Mulheren on which a jurycouldn't reach a verdict.   The SEC action came after Mr. Mulheren applied to have thebar against him removed.   &quot;It makes you feel better,&quot; Mr. Mulheren said. &quot;You have achoice to do what you want. But I haven't really thoughtabout whether I'd go back to being a broker-dealer.&quot; Mr.Mulheren said he's currently in an investment partnershipcalled Buffalo Partners.   ---   BROADCAST MUSIC INC. signs deal with cable channels itopposed in court.   The nonprofit licensing society, which obtains fees formember composers when their music is played, said it signedlicensing deals with Disney Channel, a unit of Walt DisneyCo., and Black Entertainment Television.   The two cable channels, joined by two cable industrygroups, had argued in federal court in Washington, D.C., thatBMI's standard licenses were anti-competitive, but a judgeruled in favor of the society in August.   Lawyers for the cable industry subsequently filed anappeal, but BMI said the cable channels and industry groupshave agreed to withdraw it.</TEXT></DOC>