<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900524-0125</DOCNO><DOCID>900524-0125.</DOCID><HL>   War on Gerrymandering, California-Style   ----   By Dan Walters</HL><DATE>05/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><LP>   SACRAMENTO -- The late Rep. Phil Burton was once asked todescribe the 45 California congressional districts he createdin secrecy in the early 1980s.   &quot;It's my contribution to modern art,&quot; Mr. Burton, a SanFrancisco Democrat who was the unofficial boss of theCalifornia delegation, replied.</LP><TEXT>   And art it was. Mr. Burton's districts swooped and dippedthrough the social and physical landscape. Several districtshad pieces that touched only underwater.   Prior to the Burton-drawn redistricting, California's43-member House delegation had been divided nearly evenly, 22Democrats and 21 Republicans. After the Burton plan went intoeffect for the 1982 elections (a liberal-dominated stateSupreme Court ordered its use even though voters had rejectedit 2-1 via referendum), the delegation, two seats larger dueto population growth, had a 28-17 Democratic tilt.   Mr. Burton's plan, universally regarded as a classicgerrymander even by Democratic partisans, was so adroitlydrawn that despite Republican voter registration gains and anoverall GOP cast in congressional voting patterns, theDemocrats lost but one of their seats in the 1980s, leavingthe delegation with a 27-18 split today.   As census-takers complete their count of California andother states, partisan warriors are arming themselves for newbattles over reapportionment of congressional and legislativedistricts. And it's clear that populous, fast-growingCalifornia will be the major battleground.   The political stakes are enormous.   Because it has added six million people to its populationin the past decade, California will be awarded six or sevennew congressional seats, nearly half of those that will beshifted from Frost Belt to Sun Belt states. The state'scongressional delegation, 51 or 52, will be the largest ofany state in the nation's history and California alone willhave a fifth of the electoral votes needed to elect apresident.   Republicans want back the five seats Rep. Burton pilfereda decade ago, and they want all the new seats. They also wanta better shake on state legislative seats, which weresimilarly tilted to lock in Democratic control of thestatehouse.   Democrats have seen their voter registration drop steadilyin California, falling below 50% for the first time in morethan a half-century. They lost seven of the ninetop-of-the-ticket elections in the 1980s and, until thepost-1980 census reapportionment, were seeing their marginsin congressional and legislative seats also shrink. ToDemocrats, therefore, reapportionment is a matter ofpolitical life and death. A fair reapportionment could meanGOP control of the state Legislature and the congressionaldelegation by the end of the decade.   It's no wonder that leaders of both parties are pullingout all the stops.   Their immediate focus is on two ballot measures set forJune 5. Both have Republican sponsors, but there's a split inGOP ranks between those who think reapportionment should beremoved entirely from the Legislature and those who want toleave it but impose restrictions.   The former measure, sponsored by San Mateo CountySupervisor Tom Huening, would create an independentcommission appointed by retired judges to draw new lines. Thelatter, sponsored by Marin County businessman Gary Flynn,would leave the task with the Legislature but require atwo-thirds vote, which would give Republicans a veto power.   Democrats despise both measures but seem to dislike anindependent commission more -- it would negate thepossibility of a bipartisan, incumbent-protecting deal.   The Democrats' chief warrior is Assembly Speaker WillieBrown, a colorful veteran of California political wars. Mr.Brown has been hitting Democratic money sources, such as theCalifornia Trial Lawyers Association and the CaliforniaTeachers Association, hard for endorsing the Huening measureand has publicly denounced the League of Women Voters forendorsing it. He suggested in one speech that theorganization's members should &quot;go back to the kitchen.&quot;   The GOP, meanwhile, has gotten initial support fromCalifornia corporate interests, such as Chevron andHewlett-Packard, but that, in turn, has created a backlash.Corporate officials say privately that Democrats have warnedthem that unless they match pro-GOP checks withpro-Democratic money or refuse to contribute to thereapportionment campaigns, they'll suffer the consequences onlegislation in both Sacramento and Washington.   Both sides agree that as much as $12 million will be spentby election day to sway voters, who seem to be leaning towardpassage of at least one of the proposals. Republicans arehoping to capitalize on a wave of anti-politician sentimentthat stems from scandals in Washington and Sacramento, whileDemocrats will portray the initiatives as partisan and powergrabs by special interests.   If both of the measures are rejected, a second stage ofthe California reapportionment battle will occur in November,when voters choose a new governor to succeed retiringRepublican George Deukmejian. Under the current system, thegovernor would have to sign any reapportionment bill from theLegislature. GOP leaders had hoped that Mr. Deukmejian wouldseek a third term to protect their interests onreapportionment.   When Mr. Deukmejian decided to retire, the Republicanchieftains turned almost desperately to the party figure theybelieved had the best chance to keep the governor's office inGOP hands -- Sen. Pete Wilson, who had just been elected to asecond term.   Reapportionment loomed so large in the minds ofRepublicans that even New Right conservatives agreed to Mr.Wilson, a moderate former mayor of San Diego who had longbeen anathema to the right because of his pro-choice,pro-environment, pro-gay-rights positions. The Bush WhiteHouse pushed for making Mr. Wilson the consensus choice. Mr.Wilson is favored to win the governorship against either ofthe Democratic candidates, John Van de Kamp and DianneFeinstein.   Either by voter decree or gubernatorial power, then, it'sprobable that the Democratic hold on California politics, anartificial grip that amounts to disenfranchisement formillions of Californians and a denial of political reality,will end.   ---   Mr. Walters is a political columnist for the SacramentoBee.</TEXT></DOC>