<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900516-0156</DOCNO><DOCID>900516-0156.</DOCID><HL>   Vision Test:   Despite His Successes,   Baker's Critics Say He   Lacks a Broad Strategy   ---   Secretary's Mastery of Tactics,   They Add, Isn't Enough   In Handling Big Problems   ---   Betting Heavily on Gorbachev   ----   By Robert S. Greenberger and Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FORGN EUROP FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   It looks like a political campaign in the Americanheartland -- except it is in Sofia, Bulgaria.   As Secretary of State James Baker's black Cadillaclimousine pulls up to the Sheraton Sofia Hotel on LeninSquare, more than a thousand enthusiastic Bulgarians wavehand-lettered signs saying &quot;USA -- your democracy is ourdream&quot; and chant, &quot;So-fi-a, Wash-ing-ton.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   But Mr. Baker is uncomfortable. He hustles up the steps,offering the crowd only an awkward smile and stiff wave. Hispress spokeswoman, Margaret Tutwiler, steps in and urges himto say something. He turns and offers a few limp phrasesabout America's admiration for what Bulgaria's people aredoing. Then, he flees inside, where he conducts aclosed-door, two-hour seminar for Bulgarian oppositionleaders on how to beat the ruling Communists in the country'sfirst free election.   Mr. Baker, whose natural habitat is the smoke-filled room,has displayed his skill in political tactics during his firstyear in office. With communism collapsing from Moscow toManagua, he forged a bipartisan foreign policy at home, keptAmerica's allies united and built a solid relationship withhis Soviet counterpart. All the while, he courted Congressand the press.   But now the tactician must show a feel for strategy. Therecent upheavals have made him the first post-Cold Warsecretary of state. Before him is a world-wide realignment ofpower that requires not just wheeling and dealing but also aclear sense of direction from the U.S. So far, though, he andPresident Bush have had trouble presenting a comprehensivestrategy.   &quot;Baker is very skillful at negotiating every sharp turn inthe road,&quot; says Burton Yale Pines, an official at theconservative Heritage Foundation. &quot;But what I see missingfrom U.S. foreign policy is a grand sense of where we aregoing.&quot;   Mr. Baker declines to comment on the view that he lacks along-term strategy or vision. But a close adviser bristles atthe criticism: &quot;We say just judge him by the results. Was itvision to come up with the compromise on Central America? Wasit vision to come up with the NATO arms-control proposals?You can't do those things without a strategy.&quot;   Clearly, however, clever tactics, not grand strategy, gotMr. Baker where he is today. Texas-bred andPrinceton-educated, he honed keen political skills as acampaign chairman for Presidents Ford, Reagan and Bush. Fewpeople in U.S. history have played such important roles in somany successful presidential campaigns. And few have builtsuch spectacular resumes: Mr. Baker has moved in successionthrough three of Washington's top posts, from White Housechief of staff to Treasury secretary to State, mastering thearcane details of policy all the way.   But by experience and instinct, he manages foreign policyas if he were still on the campaign trail. During the Bushcampaign, an old colleague recalls, Mr. Baker would canvasstop aides every morning on what the candidate needed to dothat day. Then, the colleague says, &quot;He'd call Bush and say,`Here's what's important today.' He really did controlthings.&quot;   The disadvantage in that closely held operating style,says another former campaign worker, was that &quot;if you weren'tin the inner circle -- and I wasn't -- you never saw theguy.&quot; That could prove more dangerous in internationaldiplomacy, where Mr. Baker is still a newcomer, than it didin presidential campaigning, where he is regarded as ablack-belt master.   At State, as in the past, Mr. Baker relies almostexclusively on a few intensely loyal, youthful aides who wereby his side at Treasury or in campaigns. To the chagrin ofcareer diplomats, the small in-group handles important issuessuch as German unification, Soviet relations and Mideastpeace talks.   For instance, it was Robert Zoellick, a former Treasuryofficial, Bush campaign adviser and now State Departmentcounselor, who was dispatched to Bonn earlier this month toprepare for the Allies' talks on German reunification. Onlythe day before, Mr. Zoellick had returned from Mexico, wherehe led a trade delegation.   Unlike many of his predecessors, who often hit stone wallsin dealing with the White House, Mr. Baker speaks bytelephone with his &quot;candidate,&quot; George Bush, at least ahalf-dozen times a day. In a small but symbolic show ofpower, he sometimes phones the Oval Office in the middle ofthe president's daily 8 a.m. meeting with National SecurityAdviser Brent Scowcroft, a potential rival.   The frequent telephone talks permit Messrs. Bush and Bakerto discuss problems or make quick decisions unencumbered bythe bureaucracy. They enjoy a mutual confidence dating backto the 1960s, when they were doubles partners on the tenniscourts of Houston's country clubs. Recently, for instance,President Bush needed quick advice before heading into aWhite House meeting with four congressmen who wanted theadministration's view on legislation that would guarantee$400 million in housing loans to help resettle Soviet Jews inIsrael. Most presidents would have turned for in-house helpfrom the national security adviser. Instead, Mr. Bush phonedMr. Baker.   &quot;The president and Jim Baker have a social relationshipthat's very different,&quot; says White House Chief of Staff JohnSununu. &quot;There's no introductory language necessary; theycommunicate in shorthand with each other.&quot;   The unusually tight White House tie also makes Mr. Baker aformidable secretary of state to his peers abroad. &quot;He is soclose to the president you can rely on everything he tellsyou,&quot; says West German Foreign Minister Hans-DietrichGenscher.   So far, Mr. Baker's instincts have served theadministration well. Early in the Bush presidency, Mr. Bakersurmised that what was being viewed as Mr. Bush's excessivecaution would curtail the honeymoon usually accorded newadministrations. Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev wasdazzling the world while the U.S. was bogged down with anill-advised foreign-policy review that yielded only an emptyslogan, &quot;beyond containment.&quot;   The administration's foreign-policy strategists gatheredat the White House. Aides such as Mr. Scowcroft urged ago-slow approach. But the new secretary of state, thoughstill learning his job, took charge. &quot;Baker insisted that, bythe May {1989} NATO summit, the president would have to beready to assume the leadership of the West with a boldapproach. It was like getting ready for a debate or aprimary,&quot; recalls a senior aide.   The result was a Bush proposal last May in Brussels tonegotiate cuts in American troops and Western aircraft inEurope. Mr. Bush's proposal was, in part, just a cleverpublic-relations move because the cuts were almostinevitable. But afterward, Mr. Bush was viewed, for the firsttime, as having seized the diplomatic initiative from Mr.Gorbachev.   For all that, Messrs. Bush and Baker haven't yetdemonstrated skill in navigating beyond the medium range.After much hesitation, they tied themselves to Mr.Gorbachev's future, even declining to support Lithuania'sindependence drive in hopes of nailing down U.S.-Sovietarms-reduction agreements. Mr. Baker will try to close thesedeals today in crucial pre-summit talks in Moscow. But ifthat reliance on Mr. Gorbachev fails, the Baker-Bush strategywill hit a dead end: The administration has no post-Gorbachevplan.   &quot;There's a lack of historical background for what'shappening,&quot; complains one senior administration official(who, like most others, would criticize the powerful Mr.Baker only if he wasn't identified). That lack sometimeshampers Mr. Baker's response to Soviet reforms or Mideastpeace moves, the official argues: &quot;There's not, sometimes,the sense that these things have happened before.&quot; Indeed,Mr. Scowcroft's deputy, Robert Gates, has publicly impliedthat the Baker approach is naive because it doesn't recognizethat earlier Soviet reform efforts have failed.   Mr. Baker also has missed a chance to channel foreign aidto emerging democracies. Instead, tactician-like, he isasking Congress for flexibility to shift existing funds as hegoes along.   Some critics complain that his voice has beenconspicuously absent from the troubled U.S. policy towardChina. His aides are quick to shield him, saying PresidentBush, who was once U.S. envoy there, &quot;is his own secretary ofstate for China.&quot;   Yet such distance from messy problems is a hallmark of Mr.Baker's career. &quot;His secret of success is he's so adroit atbeing able to separate himself from issues that becomeunpopular,&quot; says GOP Sen. Nancy Kassebaum. As TreasurySecretary Mr. Baker was one of the Reagan administration'stop financial officials -- yet he isn't commonly linked tothe savings-and-loan disaster that occurred partly on hiswatch. And although he ran Mr. Bush's last campaign, hewasn't criticized for its mean-spirited tone, which wascharacterized by pro-Bush advertisements featuring a blackrapist, Willie Horton.   Mr. Baker makes no bones about picking his issues. &quot;It hasalways been my view that it is important to prioritize,particularly in the expenditure of presidential capital,&quot; hesays in a comment that, in a bit of a departure, is on therecord.   Added up, his traits help him excel in the diplomatic artof damage control. Last May, he delivered a speech calling onIsrael to give up its dream of maintaining control over theWest Bank. The address was received coolly by many AmericanJews. A week later, he invited several pro-Israel members ofthe House Foreign Affairs Committee to his office for drinks.He explained he was trying to prod Israel toward peace talkswith the Palestinians and thus was doing Israel a favor.   &quot;Baker likes dealing with politicians,&quot; says onerepresentative who attended the session, Howard Berman ofCalifornia. &quot;George Shultz had a lot of respect on the Hill.But you never got the impression he enjoyed being up here.With Baker, you do get that feeling.&quot;   Few of his predecessors courted Congress as ardently as hedoes. As an ironclad rule, he returns every member'stelephone call, if possible on the same day. He is a regularvisitor on Capitol Hill, where he spent 40 hours negotiatinghis first foreign-policy triumph, a bipartisan agreement onNicaragua. The deal he cut was based on his shrewdrecognition that lawmakers no longer had the stomach to fightover military aid to the Contras.   When preparing for his confirmation hearing before theSenate Foreign Relations panel, he visited each memberindividually, working them as if they were key delegates at apolitical convention. Sen. Kassebaum recalls that he arrivedalone in her office for a long chat and jotted notes on a padas they spoke. &quot;You thought, `My gosh, he's interested in myissues,'&quot; the Kansas Republican says.   Mr. Baker also works hard to forge personal bonds withforeign officials, especially Soviet Foreign Minister EduardShevardnadze and West Germany's Mr. Genscher. Initiallyhostile to Mr. Genscher's dovish views on U.S. missiles inGermany, Mr. Baker gradually built a friendship with him. Alittle flattery helped. To contrast his own inexperience atdiplomacy with Mr. Genscher's 17-year tenure, Mr. Baker callshim &quot;the Dean.&quot;   Mr. Baker cultivates the press, too. A month after movinginto Foggy Bottom, he threw a cocktail party for reportersand their spouses, prompting many foreign-service officers togripe that they still hadn't met their new boss. He hasgranted more than 150 news interviews during the past year --usually in the guise of a &quot;senior official&quot; -- far more thanhis predecessor.   But despite his hospitality, Mr. Baker got off to a rockystart with the State Department press corps. On his firstdiplomatic trip abroad, matters of state were overshadowed bya news story about his ownership of Chemical Bank stock whilehe was Treasury secretary. Mr. Baker appeared shocked whenreporters on his plane pressed him about this apparentconflict of interest rather than foreign affairs.Characteristically, he quickly cut his losses, announcing enroute to Rome that he would sell all his publicly tradedsecurities.   On overseas trips these days, Mr. Baker customarilywanders back to the airplane's press section, wearing anelectric-blue nylon warm-up suit, to banter with reportersand kibbitz during their games of &quot;liar's poker,&quot; whichinvolves betting on the serial numbers on dollar bills.Recently, appearing while a game was in progress, he unfurleda huge sheet of uncut single bills bearing his signature fromhis days as Treasury secretary and joked: &quot;I'm ready to playnow.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>