<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900817-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>900817-0059.</DOCID><HL>   Foreign Investment in China Dwindles   ---   Tiananmen Killings, Economy's   Ills Restrain Flow of Funds   ----   By Julia Leung   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5F</SO><CO>   FREST PHG RD SC ALD</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   HONG KONG -- While pro-democracy demonstrators occupiedTiananmen Square in May last year, Dening Wang was facing apile of work at his office in the nearby Beijing Hotel. Thedirector of John Colling Associates (China) Ltd. was rushingto translate a feasibility study on a port project.   Even after Chinese tanks and troops shot their way intothe square on June 4 of last year, Mr. Wang biked to hisoffice that morning, undeterred by sporadic shooting outsidethe hotel.</LP><TEXT>   He and the project survived. And after several monthsdelay, its two foreign participants, Royal Dutch/Shell Groupand Nedlloyd Group, returned to China earlier this year toresume negotiations. &quot;We took stock of the situation, anddecided that the economic fundamentals are still strong,&quot;says Tim Brennand, managing director of Shell China Ltd.   But for each investment plan in China that has goneforward, several have been axed. The Tiananmen killingsprecipitated a dive in direct foreign investment, and theflow of funds that resumed after the initial period of shockwas far thinner and aimed at fewer projects. China's direeconomic state has contributed to the steady slide, as hasthe emergence of the newly democratized Eastern Europeancountries, which threaten to supplant China as the world'sbiggest frontier market.   &quot;The number of opportunities and the amount of investmentwill shrink. There was an energy boom, a hotel boom. Butthere won't be another boom,&quot; says John Hoffmann, anotherdirector at John Colling, a Hong Kong-based consultant firm.&quot;But there'll always be opportunities for those with aserious interest in China.&quot;   The size of the market will continue to draw multinationalcompanies like Shell, which take a long-term view towardChina. Even so, many companies are adjusting their plans.Some are reducing the size of their investment, while othersare demanding additional benefits. Still others are shiftingfocus to match Beijing's emphasis on such sectors as basicindustries and transportation. In addition, foreign investorsgenerally are resigning themselves to longer repaymentperiods.   New foreign direct investment, which began to slow in thethird quarter, dropped to a trickle in the first quarter ofthis year. According to official Chinese figures, the valueof newly approved contracts fell 42% to $870 million in thefirst quarter from the year-earlier period. This follows a43% drop in the October-December period to $1.13 billion.   (Actual foreign direct investment has been largely flatsince June 4, 1989, indicating that foreign businessmen havecontinued to honor earlier commitments.)   The drop in new foreign direct investment could have beenmore acute had it not been for money from Taiwan. Followingin the footsteps of their Hong Kong counterparts, many Taiwanexporters are moving their manufacturing bases to China.Chinese officials estimate that cumulative investment fromTaiwan, valued at about $1 billion at the end of 1989, isexpected to double by the end of this year, surpassing thatfrom Japan and the U.S. Those two countries are tied for theNo. 2 position as China's biggest foreign investors, afterHong Kong, which accounts for 60% of the total $15.4 billionin actual investment as of the end of 1989.   For Taiwan investors, long blocked from China by the twonations' political differences, the slight easing ofrelations recently has opened up a new investment frontier.But with Washington and Beijing still trading words overChina's human-rights record since the Tiananmen killings andmultilateral lenders still reluctant to provide China withnew loans, the initial shock of June 4's brutality has beenslow to wear off for many foreign investors.   In the wake of the killings, Allied-Signal the Morristown,N.J., aerospace, automotive and engineering-materialsconcern, suspended negotiations -- which were at an advancedstage -- for an automotive-component joint venture. Morerecently, William Lee, regional vice president ofAllied-Signal International, returned to China to meet withofficials to test the water, but he hasn't decided yetwhether to pursue the project.   With the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, Westernbusinessmen are showing the kind of euphoria over the EasternEuropean market's potential that they once felt for China's.Eastern Europe has already diverted attention from China,businessmen say, although it isn't clear whether that shifthas also cost China funds it might otherwise have received.   China's current economic recession is another deterrent toforeign investment. Starting from Beijing's austerity programin late 1988, consumer demand has been steadily weakening.   Many foreign investors who have remained in China havetoned down their expectations. N.V. Philips, one of thebiggest foreign investors in China's electronics industry,has nine joint ventures. Cees J. Seelen, president of PhilipsElectronics South East Asia Holding B.V., a unit of the Dutchelectronics giant, says the company will be &quot;more selective&quot;in future commitments.   Mr. Seelen concedes that weak consumer demand is squeezingprofit growth at the two Philips ventures that are up andrunning, but he brushes aside concern over cloudy prospectsfor the seven still at preparatory stages.   One of the seven is a plant to make television picturetubes, which was initiated when demand for TV sets was high.With deepening economic retrenchment, domestic sales haveplunged 35% from 1988 levels of eight million to ninemillion.   Even the Shell-Nedlloyd port project, which belongs to thetype of investment preferred by Beijing, isn't entirelyausterity-proof. The plan calls for a $20 million investmentin facilities for the storage and handling of bulk chemicalsand oil near the Tianjin port. The project's Chinese partner,the Port of Tianjin Authority, is strapped for cash tocomplete the transportation facilities leading to theproposed tanks, according to Shell's Mr. Brennand. As aresult, Shell is reconsidering the scale of investment in theproject.   Besides rethinking the size of their China investments,foreign companies also seem to be changing their basicattitude about doing business in China. Initially drawn bythe lure of a market with 1.1 billion consumers, manybusinessmen abandoned their usually hard-nosed attitude whendoing business in China. Now, they have become more pragmaticand put more emphasis on the bottom line.   Such is the attitude Allied-Signal's Mr. Lee adopted whenhe returned to China recently to study whether the companywould continue to pursue the automotive-component venture.&quot;We are demanding more benefits to be provided in the area offoreign-exchange balance, and asking the Chinese to providemore specifics,&quot; he says.   For its part, Beijing has also undergone a soul-searchingperiod. As the country's economic problems worsen,tight-fisted central-government officials are allocatingscarce domestic and foreign funds in accordance with nationalpriorities. Beijing has always kept a priorities list, butprovincial officials routinely ignored it and favoredinvestments in fast-earning ventures such as hotels andconsumers goods. Then came Tiananmen, and everybody listened.   Some foreign businessmen are seeing new advantages in thecentral government's reassertion of authority. With Beijingputting the brakes on consumption and spending, inflation andconstruction costs also are being restrained. In addition,more projects require Beijing's approval, which means thatproposals are more carefully screened.   &quot;My phone isn't ringing as much as before, but when itdoes, the project has a higher chance of success,&quot; says ClarkRandt, a U.S. lawyer who specializes in China.   But despite these advantages, the foreign-investment boomis definitely over. Even in areas Beijing is targeting, it islikely to attract only modest capital. That's because suchprojects typically require long repayment periods that only afew multinational companies can afford.   Besides, many of these projects are only viable if theoutput is mass-produced. And China, despite its hugepopulation, has only a small market for advancedtechnological products. Ernesto Harry Grobe, general managerof Siemens AG's Beijing office, says the sales of some of theWest German electronic group's products in China representonly one day's production in one of the company's plants inthe West.</TEXT></DOC>