<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900612-0138</DOCNO><DOCID>900612-0138.</DOCID><HL>   Closing Door:   South Korea Regresses   On Opening Markets,   Trade Partners Say   ---   It Clamps Down on `Luxuries,'   Which It Defines Broadly;   U.S. Avoids Pushing Hard   ---   To Buy a Car, You Buy Bonds   ----   By Damon Darlin   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   F FREST EUROP CCI</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)BANKS (BNK)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)</GV><LP>   SEOUL, South Korea -- Ford Motor Co. was selling about 250American-made Mercury Sables a month in Korea through its10%-owned Korean affiliate, Kia Motor Co. It wasn't manycars, but Ford was pleased to be outselling all the WestGerman makers combined while laying a foundation for futuresales.   Kia, a compact-car company, also seemed pleased to havethe popular large car in its lineup. But recently, Kia cutits advertising for the Sables and then its orders from Ford.</LP><TEXT>   Why? Because, Kia says, the Korean government told it to.Government leaders thought Korea was importing too manyforeign cars -- even though Korea, which exported about350,000 cars last year, agreed three years ago to open itsdomestic automobile market to imports. &quot;We tell the companiesthat they have to understand the sensitivities of the peopleand for the good of the country restrain their sales ofluxury goods,&quot; says an official at the Ministry of Trade andIndustry.   Late last month, the government announced that anyonebuying a new car must purchase an increased amount of subwaybonds. But the increase for buyers of imports is much larger.For instance, a Mercedes buyer now must purchase bonds worthabout 14 million won ($20,000), up from three million, whilethe requirement for a domestic luxury car rose only about 50%to 5.9 million won.   With regard to many other products as well, Korea haspromised repeatedly to open its markets to imports and toprotect the intellectual-property rights of foreigncompanies. And the U.S. has taken the Korean government'sword. But lately, foreign executives and trade officials seemounting evidence that the government, despite its denials,is backtracking on moves to open markets -- to the dismay ofWest Europeans as well as Americans.   &quot;There is liberalization,&quot; says Gilles Anouil, theambassador to Korea for the Commission of the EuropeanCommunities. &quot;But when they open a door, sometimes they closeanother.&quot; European ambassadors and U.S. officials have beencomplaining to Seoul. &quot;We are concerned because of thepattern of activity,&quot; says Peter G. Frederick, counselor forcommercial affairs at the U.S. Embassy.   The Ford case is but one example of bureaucraticobstruction and the new campaign against foreign goods:   -- The Korea Trade Commission, loosely modeled on the U.S.International Trade Commission, announced it will investigatewhether 200 imported products, such as pens, cookies, steelplates and various consumer products, are damaging thedomestic market -- even though the domestic industries aren'tcomplaining. The U.S. protested to the Korean government, butKim Won Soon, the commission chairman, says he is &quot;proud ofwhat we are doing.&quot;   -- Kukje Corp., a major Korean sporting-goods producer,started making tennis shoes carrying the Batman logo createdby D.C. Comics, a division of Time Warner Inc. When U.S.lawyers asked the Korean patent office to help protect thetrademark, the officials sided with the Korean company eventhough a 1986 U.S.-Korea trade agreement specifically saysworld-famous trademarks are to be protected. &quot;I never heardof Batman,&quot; the Korean official allegedly said. Tough legalaction eventually forced Kukje to back off.   -- Cargill Corp., the giant American commodities trader,wants to build a $30 million soybean-crushing mill in Koreato service the local feed and soybean-oil markets. Despitethe government's statements that it now encourages foreigninvestment, Cargill can't get approval for the plant -- not a&quot;yes,&quot; not a &quot;no,&quot; just silence.   The list goes on and on: Cracker Jack-type candy isbanned; high taxes and tariffs make Scotch in Korea the mostexpensive in the industrialized world ($47 for a fifth ofJohnny Walker Red Label); U.S. cigarette marketers areharassed and unable to sell their products; Citibank can'topen branches in Korea as promised.   &quot;It's guerrilla warfare,&quot; says Mr. Frederick at the U.S.Embassy. &quot;It's a constant house-to-house battle.&quot; Concludesan American Chamber of Commerce report: &quot;It has becomeincreasingly clear that, at times, liberalization in Koreacan mean absolutely nothing.&quot;   So, why did the U.S. recently bypass Korea when itprepared its list of unfair traders? According to State andCommerce department officials involved in the issues, U.S.officials knew about some of the problems. But the consensusin the U.S. government was that it might be counterproductiveto push Korea too hard. &quot;We are still trying to get them toimplement prior agreements, and taking on any more changesmight overload the {Korean} system,&quot; says a State Departmentofficial in Washington.   Similarly, many foreign executives believe that publiclycomplaining about Korean tactics damages any chance ofgetting cooperation. So, Ford won't talk about its problem.Neither will Citibank nor the American tobacco companies.   &quot;It is not in our interest to foment problems between theU.S. and Korean governments,&quot; says Robert J. Gregory of theAmerican Chamber, one of the few U.S. executives willing totalk on the record, and then only as the organization'spresident rather than as a CalTex executive.   In addition, some observers play down the problem. &quot;Therehave been a few bumps in the road,&quot; says U.S. AmbassadorDonald Gregg, but he says otherwise he is &quot;very pleased&quot; withthe trade picture. &quot;The message I give Koreans is we aredoing fine, but we need to do more.&quot;   Korean officials note the nation's trade surplus with theU.S. is shrinking rapidly, from $8 billion in 1988 to $4.5billion in 1989. They add that this year Korea could have asmall trade deficit with the U.S. and a $2 billion to $3billion deficit overall. But its surplus in U.S. trade isdropping not because its markets are open but because itsexports have slumped. Less than 2.4% of Korea's imports fromthe U.S. are consumer goods, according to a U.S. governmentreport.   Park Pil Soo, Korea's trade and industry minister,pooh-poohs the notion that the government is reverting toprotectionism. &quot;Once you open your market, you cannot closeit,&quot; he says. For Korea to export, it must import, he says.&quot;Except luxury goods,&quot; he adds.   The catch, for the U.S. and Europe, is that Koreaconsiders almost every imported finished product a luxurygood. Many products that the Western economies make are aimedat the upscale market -- golf clubs, whiskey, big cars --because that is where Western countries have the comparativeadvantage. And that is what they export.   The Korean government is discouraging the consumption ofluxury goods because it considers that unhealthy for theKorean economy. So, it is ordering tax investigations ofpeople who buy imported cars or sell imported clothes. Thegovernment is encouraging department stores to closeboutiques offering foreign clothes and accessories. It istightening the exhaust tests for the 325 or so foreign carsthat trickle in each month. It even bans foreigners fromacting in commercials for fear that they will whip up thedesire for foreign goods.   Tupperware plastic kitchenware is listed among the luxurygoods, Ambassador Anouil notes. &quot;If you call it luxurious,you can call anything luxurious, even a General Motors car,&quot;he says. &quot;This campaign is taking proportions that isworrisome.&quot; The American Chamber of Commerce agrees:&quot;Criticisms of excessive consumption of imported productsserves no purpose other than to increase the anti-foreignbias of the Korean market.&quot;   The recent anti-foreign-goods crusade is especiallydisturbing because it contradicts the open-markets policymessage supposedly coming from the top of the Koreangovernment. Faced with delays and obstructions, foreignexecutives, lawyers and trade officials had always assumedthat the Western-educated technocrats high up in powerfulbureaucracies sincerely believe in open markets and blamedany problems on low-level people prone to do things the oldway. &quot;It is very hard to undo 30 years of training,&quot; says Mr.Gregory of the American Chamber.   Now, the low-level officials look up and see that thetraditional obstructionist methods are in favor -- and inabundance.   Many of the government's trade agreements haven't beenimplemented. Foreign banks, for instance, would like to openbranches in Korea and, like Korean banks, tie intoautomatic-teller-machine networks. But foreigners'applications are languishing. Although a new Korean bank,Donghwa Bank, applied last summer for permission to join theATM network and received approval within two weeks,Citibank's application was, by then, already moldering for ayear, and the American bank is still waiting.   &quot;Do we see a more positive attitude toward U.S. banks?Absolutely not,&quot; says Richard Mounce, a Chase Manhattanexecutive who heads the Foreign Bankers Association. &quot;We'veseen numerous instances that policy directions are agreed ona senior level and there is a great deal of difficultygetting it through.&quot;   Another irritant is the Korean government's reluctance toenforce the protection of trademarks, copyrights and patents-- intellectual property rights. Korea signed an agreementwith the U.S. in 1986, but process patents, particularly withpharmaceuticals, are violated regularly, U.S. drug companiessay. Trade secrets aren't protected, under Korean law, if thegovernment thinks they are unfair. There is no semiconductorchip design-protection law. The market for computer softwareand videos is awash in pirated copies because of the lack ofenforcement, according to officials of Microsoft Corp. andseveral American movie companies.   Although the Korean government cracked down a bit lastyear in its successful effort to get the U.S. to take it offthe list of unfair traders, counterfeit goods still pour outof Korean factories. Some examples, such as the Batman case,are blatant. The government says it supported the U.S.company's plea, but it still allows Korean makers to usefamous characters, such as Snoopy, Mickey Mouse, RoboCop andWoody Woodpecker without authorization of the trademarkowner.   The government makes occasional raids on the stalls in theItaewon tourist shopping district, where fake Rolex watches,Gucci bags and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle T-shirts are soldopenly. But counterfeits flow unabated out of the country.   In August and September of 1989, investigators in the U.S.and Mexico seized several shipments of counterfeit Reebok,Vans and Converse sports shoes -- several hundred thousandpairs. Federal authorities filed criminal charges at El Paso,Texas, and Tucson, Ariz., against several importers. Reebokalso filed civil suits against the importers in federal courtin San Diego. With that end of the pipeline closing, Reebok'sattorneys set out to dam up the source: Korea.   They sent almost a thousand pages of evidence to Koreanauthorities, much of it translated into Korean. The evidenceincluded shipping documents, invoices, copies of checks andmoney orders, specification sheets, even letters andfacsimiles sent between the exporter in Korea and theimporters in the U.S.   One document, an attachment to an affidavit filed byHarley I. Lewin, a New York attorney representing Reebok,showed that a U.S. importer paid more than $1 million to theKorean supplier. Another document, a photocopy of a letterallegedly from a Korean company to U.S. importers, says theimporters should send payments in amounts of $50,000 to evadeKorea's export-licensing rules -- &quot;otherwise we have bigproblem for export of your order.&quot; The attorneys also sentalong names, addresses, bank-account numbers, even phonenumbers. Many of the offices are still taking phone calls atthe listed numbers.   &quot;If there ever was a case that we made it easy for theKoreans, this is it,&quot; Mr. Lewin says. &quot;We gave it to themgiftwrapped.&quot;   But nothing happened. The U.S. government complained inprivate talks with the Korean trade minister, his staff andother officials. Still nothing is happening. Kim Chul Su, whoheads the Korean Industrial Property Office that enforcesintellectual property rights, says, &quot;The information providedby the Reebok case was so scanty that prosecutors were unableto apprehend the persons in question.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>