<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910215-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>910215-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Chief Ousted by Commodore Wins Suit   ----   By Paul B. Carroll and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   CBU LABOR WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)</GV><LP>   The former chief executive officer of CommodoreInternational Ltd. won a rancorous, four-year legal battlestemming from his ouster and forcible removal from theheadquarters of the personal-computer maker.   After a two-week trial, a federal jury in Manhattan foundin favor of Thomas J. Rattigan after deliberating for lessthan an hour. Mr. Rattigan had sought $9 million in damages,but the judge has asked the two sides to try to reach asettlement. Commodore, West Chester, Pa., said it hasn'tdecided whether to appeal.</LP><TEXT>   As chief executive of Commodore, Mr. Rattigan was widelycredited with instituting a cost-cutting campaign in 1986 and1987 that helped bring back the company from the brink ofbankruptcy. But the blunt Mr. Rattigan, now 53 years old,began to have personality conflicts with Irving Gould, now71, the strong-willed chairman, who owns almost 20% ofCommodore's stock.   Mr. Gould's colleagues said he resented the high mediaprofile of Mr. Rattigan, who recently was named chairman andchief executive officer of G. Heileman Brewing Co. Mr. Gouldalso was frustrated by Commodore's inability to generatesales in the U.S., despite a solid position overseas,especially in Germany.   Matters came to a head at a board meeting in April 1987,and Mr. Rattigan lost the power struggle. Mr. Rattigan wassuspended two days later. When he tried to return to hisoffice, he was removed by security personnel and ordered offthe premises. He then resigned, saying he had effectivelybeen fired, and sued the company.   Mr. Gould assumed the chief executive's job and, while thecompany continued to struggle following Mr. Rattigan'sdeparture, it has recently begun to grow again. In the fiscalfirst half ended Dec. 31, earnings soared ninefold to $43.5million, or $1.34 a share, as revenue increased 23% to $584million. The stock price has quadrupled since August, closingyesterday at $17, off 12.5 cents, on volume of 629,100shares, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.   Federal Judge Michael Mukasey instructed the jury todecide two questions: whether the company had breached itscontract with Mr. Rattigan, or whether Mr. Rattigan haddisregarded his duties, as the company had contended. Thejury found in favor of Mr. Rattigan on both questions.   Damages will be decided by Judge Mukasey, and a hearinghas been set for Feb. 27. Although Mr. Rattigan sued fordamages totaling $9 million, his attorney, Jonathan Rosner ofNew York, said he doesn't expect to receive that much.Damages will be based on the salary, stock, bonuses andcertain benefits that Mr. Rattigan would have received if hehad been allowed to complete his five-year contract, whichhad about four years to run.   Michael Cardozo of New York, attorney for Commodore, saidthe company wants to try to reach a settlement.   ---   MUSEUM CAN SUE to recover stolen painting, appeals courtrules.   New York's highest court ruled that the Solomon R.Guggenheim Museum can proceed with a suit seeking to recovera stolen Chagall painting, valued at $200,000, from an artcollector.   About half a dozen suits are pending around the countryseeking to recover stolen art work. The decision is expectedto have widespread significance because New York is thenation's leading art market.   The painting, a type of watercolor known as a gouache, waspainted by Marc Chagall in 1912 and donated to the museum in1937 by Solomon Guggenheim as part of the foundingcollection. The museum believes the painting was stolen by amailroom employee in the late 1960s.   Rachel Lubell, a New York art collector, purchased thepainting for $17,000 from a well-known gallery in 1967. Themuseum did not rediscover the work until August 1985, whenMs. Lubell sent a color transparency to Sotheby's for anestimate of the painting's value. A Sotheby's employeerecognized the gouache as a piece that was missing from themuseum and notified the Guggenheim. Before the museumdemanded the painting's return in 1986, Ms. Lubell had noidea that the work had been stolen, she has said.   Ms. Lubell had argued that the suit should be barredbecause she had bought the painting in good faith and thatthe museum did not take any action to report or recover thestolen work. A lower court agreed and dismissed the case, butan intermediate appeals court reversed that decision.   In its decision yesterday, the appeals panel ruled thatthe museum's inaction did not prohibit it from filing a suit.But the panel said the trial court may consider whether themuseum undertook a reasonable search when determining whoshould retain the painting.   The panel wrote that the three-year time limit for filinga suit does not start running until an owner locates themissing work and demands its return. The panel rejected thereasoning followed by other state courts that it begins whenthe owner discovers that the work was stolen, stating thatsuch a rule does not offer an owner sufficient protection.   &quot;Buyers should know that someone can come knocking ontheir door 20 years later and that they should be carefulwhen they buy art,&quot; says Constance Lowenthal, executivedirector of the International Foundation for Art Research,which keeps track of art thefts. She said that 90% of stolenart is never recovered.   Jeffrey Barist, a lawyer with the New York law firm Whiteandamp; Case which represented the museum, said the court's broadprotection of a true owner's rights would help discourage theillicit trafficking of stolen art work.   Ms. Lubell and her lawyer could not be reached forcomment.   ---   FEDERAL WORKPLACE safety laws don't override Texascriminal laws.   The ruling by the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals followssimilar decisions by the highest courts of New York, Illinoisand Michigan. The decisions hold that the federalOccupational Safety and Health Act doesn't preclude theenforcement of federal criminal laws against employers.   In the Texas case, an employer was charged with criminallynegligent homicide for the deaths of two workers killed whenthe walls of an excavation trench collapsed.   The employer, Sabine Consolidated Inc., which is defunct,and its president, Joseph V. Tantillo of Houston, pleaded nocontest to charges of criminally negligent homicide. A lowerappeals court reversed the convictions, reasoning that OSHAprecludes state criminal prosecutions of workplace safetyviolations.   The criminal appeals court overturned the lower appealscourt's ruling and directed the lower court to consider otherpoints of appeal. Mr. Tantillo said yesterday that he hadn'tbeen informed of the decision and couldn't comment.   The criminal appeals court noted that &quot;the application ofcriminal laws. . . . to conduct in the workplace does notpresent an obstacle to OSHA's stated goals of assuringemployees safe and healthful working conditions. If anything,it supports the OSHA duty and standards.&quot;   ---   MANDATORY RETIREMENT for Pennsylvania judges is struckdown.   A federal judge in Philadelphia ruled that the stateconstitution's requirement that judges aged 70 or over mustaccept reduced pay and benefits or retire violates equalprotection guarantees of the U.S. Constitution.   The amendment to Pennsylvania's constitution went intoeffect in 1969, but so far few state judges have left thebench on reaching age 70, said Philadelphia attorney StephenM. Feldman. He represented five of the eight state judges whofiled the suit.   Instead, the Pennsylvania judges accept &quot;senior status,&quot;and remain on the bench at reduced pay and benefits.Nevertheless, they usually carry the same workload, said Mr.Feldman.   &quot;Age is an arbitrary distinction on which to base such adrastic difference in compensation for services,&quot; ruledFederal Judge Clarence C. Newcomer. No other public officialsin non-physically demanding jobs in Pennsylvania facemandatory retirement, he added.   A spokesman for the state Attorney General's office saidhe could not comment because the opinion is under review.   A handful of other states have had theirmandatory-retirement provisions for judges struck down onsimilar grounds. In a suit involving Missouri judges, theprovisions were upheld. That case is scheduled to be heard bythe U.S. Supreme Court this spring.   ---   LAYOFFS AT DALLAS FIRM are attributed to economicconditions in Texas.   The law firm, Gardere andamp; Wynne, announced this week that itis paring its staff of 195 lawyers by 10%. In a statement,the law firm said it had increased its staff during theeconomic boom of the early 1980s but is now attempting tobring its size &quot;back in line with current and projectedmarket demands.&quot;   The staff cuts, to be completed by March 31, will be madeamong partners and associates in all departments at the lawfirm but will be felt most keenly by some of the practiceareas that the law firm added during the past two years.Those specialties include environmental law, white-collarcriminal defense and health-care law, according to lawyers atthe firm.   ---   NOTED: Alan I. Baron, a lawyer in the Baltimore law firmSnyder, Baron, Mehlman andamp; Wais, was appointed by RhodeIsland's governor to serve as special counsel to a statecommission investigating the collapse of the Rhode IslandShare andamp; Deposit Indemnity Corp. Risdic, a private depositinsurer, became insolvent last December, causing the failureof 45 banks and credit unions across the state. Mr. Baron, 48years old, is a former assistant U. S. attorney for Maryland.</TEXT></DOC>