<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900809-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>900809-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Walsh v. Crovitz: Prosecution and Defense</HL><DATE>08/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The following are letters to the editor to Friday, anOklahoma newspaper, by Lawrence E. Walsh, independent counselfor the Iran-Contra prosecutions, and Robert L. Bartley,editor of The Wall Street Journal. Friday, a weekly with some18,000 circulation, covers the affluent areas in and aroundOklahoma City, including Nichols Hills, where Mr. Walsh has ahome.   Mr. Walsh's letter was in response to an article in Fridayheadlined &quot;U.S. Top Dollar Prosecutor Is From Our Area,&quot;which cited L. Gordon Crovitz's May 30 Rule of Law column inthis newspaper, &quot;Lawrence Walsh, Drug Cases and the Costs ofSelective Prosecution.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   ---   Although I appreciate your interest in the work of myoffice, I regret your reliance on the speculations of L.Gordon Crovitz of The Wall Street Journal. He is a young manwho has had essentially no law practice experience and whohas never been responsible for litigation of any importance.Neither is he a reporter. The Washington press corps, whichis perhaps the best in the world, keeps my office undercontinued expert scrutiny. Mr. Crovitz is not a member ofthat group, and is, in fact, avoided by the reporters of hisown publication.   The fallacies of his various comparisons must have beenobvious to you. Essentially, he speculates as to the cost ofsupporting government agencies and adds these exaggeratedestimates to the actual expenditures of my office. He thencompares this total with the actual cost of the offices ofUnited States Attorneys and the New York County DistrictAttorney without adding a comparable estimate of the cost oftheir supporting services -- such as the New York City PoliceDepartment and various government law enforcement agenciessuch as the FBI, the Drug Enforcement Agency, etc.   He also attempts a cost-benefit evaluation based upon theamount diverted to the Contras. In doing this he confuses thestandards of criminal and civil litigation. In civillitigation a lawyer evaluates his probable recovery againstthe cost of litigation. In criminal cases the recovery ofstolen proceeds is usually not the controlling consideration.Incidentally, Mr. Crovitz's estimate of the amount of thediversion is grossly wrong and the amount of probablerecovery is more like $8 million than $3 million.   The expenses of the FBI and other government agencieswould have been substantially the same no matter whoprosecuted the case. For example, a large part of theseexpenses, such as the archivists briefly assigned to theWhite House, represent the cost of responding to discoverydemands of the defendant (Lt. Col. Oliver) North. These costswere in no sense subject to the control of independentcounsel.   Having said this, there is no question that theprosecution by independent counsel is more expensive than aroutine prosecution. It is necessary to create a new officewith heavy overhead and the higher salaries of temporaryappointees. This becomes particularly onerous when it isnecessary to collect and store highly classified information.The standards of security are prescribed by the intelligenceagencies, not infacility for the use of the defendants.   Opinions may differ as to whether such a costlyprosecution should be undertaken. In this case it was theopinion of the Reagan Administration -- through the AttorneyGeneral -- and of the appointing court that this should bedone. There were no illusions that it would be cheap. It ismy responsibility to see that it is thorough. Actually, theexpenses of my office are reviewed in detail by theAdministrative Office of the Courts. They are updated eachmonth for the press. They are reported formally to theappointing court twice a year.   It is regrettable that The Wall Street Journal permits anirresponsible journalist to use its editorial page. Mr.Crovitz could have checked these facts with my office as moreexperienced reporters do with regularity. This information isequally available to Friday. My office telephone number is202-383-8953. My home number is, of course, listed in theOklahoma City Directory.   Lawrence E. Walsh   ---   Congratulations on your scoop on Lawrence Walsh's view ofthe criticisms of his special prosecutor's office by our L.Gordon Crovitz. The Wall Street Journal is also willing topublish letters to the editor from offended officials, butapparently responding to your story quoting Mr. Crovitz'scolumn struck Mr. Walsh as more important. While I understandthat you circulate among his wife's social set in Oklahoma,both his forum and the personal nature of his attacks are atbest curious.   Before dealing with the latter, a few words on thesubstance. In an effort to arrive at an approximation of thetrue cost of the Walsh prosecutions, Mr. Crovitz added to the$20.8 million recorded in Mr. Walsh's office some $7.9million the Justice Department estimated for indirect costssuch as FBI time. Mr. Walsh complains that in a cost-per-casecomparison with a normal U.S. attorneys' office, indirectcosts for the latter were not included. Mr. Walsh surely alsoknows that the comparison was generous to his side in notincluding in the case count the large volumes of civillitigation covered by the budgets of U.S. attorneys. In anyevent, I marvel over a mind that wants to nit-pick thenumbers given their result -- $20,242 per defendant for theU.S. attorney in southern New York versus over $3 million perdefendant by Mr. Walsh.   I marvel, too, over a mind that commits sentences like &quot;.. . a young man who has had essentially no law practiceexperience and who has never been responsible for litigationof any importance.&quot; Or &quot;. . . is, in fact, avoided byreporters of his own publication.&quot; Or &quot;It is regrettable thatThe Wall Street Journal permits an irresponsible journalistto use its editorial page.&quot; One expects such language incrank letters, not from an attorney holding a position ofresponsibility and trust as a high public official.   For the record, I count saving Mr. Crovitz from the law asone of my life's accomplishments. He earned a degree injurisprudence as a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford, was the firsteditorial page editor for our Wall Street Journal Europe, wona law degree from Yale while continuing to work half time injournalism. He is a member of the New York Bar, and got ataste of law practice when Davis Polk andamp; Wardwell, Mr. Walsh'sformer Wall Street firm, thought enough of him to take him onas a summer associate. In his short time there, as ithappens, he helped win a multimillion-dollar case; RobertFiske, Mr. Walsh's former partner, has been quoted in theAmerican Lawyer as saying that Mr. Crovitz was &quot;the drivingforce&quot; behind the winning brief. This of course accounts forthe curious phrasing in Mr. Walsh's sentences on legalexperience.   More to the point, Mr. Crovitz's journalism has become thetalk of the legal community. The New York Bar Associationgave him its first prize in its media awards for three yearsin succession: 1987, 1988 and 1989. In the Loeb Awards forBusiness and Financial Writing, he took first place in 1990after having been a finalist or honorable mention in 1987,1988 and 1989. His writings are often controversial, as anopinion journalist's are supposed to be, but he isincreasingly recognized as the leading media commentator onthe law.   By now, of course, the Circuit Court of Appeals hasoverturned Mr. Walsh's conviction of Oliver North, and hisPoindexter conviction is jeopardized by similar error,leaving him with even less to show for our $20.8 million,$28.7 million or whatever. Mr. Walsh's real problem is notirresponsible journalism. His problem is that the courts, notoverwhelmed by resumes, are ruling that Mr. Walsh has the lawwrong, and Mr. Crovitz has it right.   Robert L. Bartley   Editor   The Wall Street Journal</TEXT></DOC>