<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910405-0114</DOCNO><DOCID>910405-0114.</DOCID><HL>   Election 1992:   A New Traditionalism for Democrats   ----   By John Silber</HL><DATE>04/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><LP>   The Democrats can win the White House in 1992. But to doso, we must assess our party's situation with painfulhonesty.   Having lost five of the past six presidential elections,the Democrats can count on only the District of Columbia,claiming at best that as the District goes, so goes eitherMassachusetts or Minnesota. The Democratic hold on Congressis little consolation, for the direction of the nation ischarted in the White House.</LP><TEXT>   Nineteen months from now a Democrat can win -- but onlyif, first, the party recalls and reaffirms its guidingprinciple that government can make a positive difference forthe working men and women of America. Republican presidentsare fond of invoking the name of John F. Kennedy, but nearly11 years of Reagan-Bush have revealed this as a ploy.Republicans do not share President Kennedy's centralconviction that government cannot sit on the sidelines butcan and must confront the domestic problems of this nation.   Second, our party must recognize the failures in itsnominating process that have distanced it from itsconstituents. Democrats must once again become the party ofinclusion -- not just in caucuses and conventions, but at thepolls as well.   Once the party of farmers, working men and women (unionand nonunion alike), teachers and other professionals, racialand ethnic minorities, Protestants, Catholics and Jews,Democrats appealed -- victoriously -- to Americans asAmericans. But in 1972 the party abandoned FDR's grandalliance and began to appeal to voters as members of specialinterest groups. As these groups became increasinglyimportant in the nominating process, the party becameincreasingly ideological and hostile to compromise.   Now traditional Democrats have come to feel abandoned orignored, and they have wondered what has happened to theirparty. In great numbers they voted for Ronald Reagan andGeorge Bush -- not because they had become Republicans butbecause they saw traditional Democratic values bestrepresented in these candidates.   Third, Democrats must re-establish bipartisanship onnational security and foreign policy. In 1947, Sen. Arthur S.Vandenberg of Michigan, who with many Republican leaders hadbeen a firm isolationist before the war, reversed hisposition to support Harry Truman on the Marshall Plan andNATO. By turning his party away from its discreditedisolationist past, he gave it new life. We should profit bythe Republican example. It is folly to disagree with theopposing party when it is right. If Republicans say two plustwo is four, Democrats are not obligated to argue that it isfive.   Democrats need to reassert their belief in a positive rolefor government. They do not believe that the best governmentis almost no government at all, nor that deregulation is theremedy for all problems. Americans have seen the havocwrought by hands-off government: ineffective regulation ofthe Sandamp;Ls, deterioration of the banking system, conversion ofthe stock market into a computer-driven casino, the loss ofcompetitiveness in American business with the consequent lossof jobs, the failure of the war on drugs, increased crime andviolence, the decline in personal security, in our basicinfrastructure, and in the quality of our schools.   Democrats need to develop the knowledge, common sense,vision and courage to address our greatest responsibility --our children. The Department of Education should serve as aNational Bureau of Educational Standards to provide tests tomeasure student competence and the competence of teachers;persuade states to deny certification to high schools inwhich less than 80% of the graduating class passes the12th-grade test, and colleges to deny academic credit tostudents until they pass that exam; encourage choice byurging school boards to contract with private companies toachieve schools of higher quality; and offer day-careprograms for all children from three to six years of ageevery working day of the year so that working and singleteen-age mothers who need to work or go to school can escapepermanent entrapment in welfare.   In this way we can ensure for the first time in ournation's history that all children have the ability to enterthe first grade prepared to succeed, to experience school asa place of fulfillment and delight, prepared to stay inschool and to avoid the use of drugs, alcohol, and thepractice of irresponsible sex. And if we succeed in this, wecan begin to reduce the destruction and loss wrought byrandom crime and violence, drug and alcohol addiction, andadolescent pregnancy.   If we do not give all children a vision of themselves ascompetent, responsible individuals able to support themselvesand their families, and a vision of the consequences of moralirresponsibility, we will never restore civil order or reducethe need for jails, welfare and increased police protection.Unless young people can earn an honest living and look aheadto a good life without crime or drugs, they will make adishonest living and take their pleasures, howevershort-lived and destructive, where they find them.   Democrats should acknowledge that the War on Poverty,despite good intentions and some successes, has increasedpoverty and dependency. Incentives are needed to help thoseon welfare regain control of their lives and liberatethemselves from entrapment in an underclass. Americans aredisgusted with filthy cities and decaying infrastructure,while able-bodied, mentally sound people are unemployed. Theyare ready for a revival of the WPA and programs that requirework for remuneration: programs that rebuild ourinfrastructure, provide thousands of jobs, and rehabilitatethose addicted to drugs or alcohol.   Americans want an end to welfare fraud by the rich who useMedicaid trusts to defraud taxpayers. They want common senseused in the allocation of health dollars where major savingscan be made through preventive medicine, includinginoculations for children. It has been estimated that 40% ofour children lack one or more essential inoculations. Thelack of these ounces of prevention will inflict great humansuffering and millions of dollars in expenses for avoidablecures. They want an end to mandated heroic treatment ofpatients for whom it is futile, cruel and expensive. Theywant an end to the ambulance-chasing that has drivenmalpractice insurance costs so high that many communities arewithout obstetricians or adequate medical care.   As crime and violence increasingly dominate our streetsDemocrats can offer more than the &quot;hands off&quot; Republicanprescription. They can stand up to the gun lobby on automaticweapons. They can state the plain truth that these guns haveone purpose, to kill people, and that they are no moresporting weapons than the Patriot missile. They can convinceAmericans that in the long run the use of abandoned militarybases as sites for prison-schools to transform ill-educatedyoung offenders into responsible citizens will be far lesscostly than endlessly building more prison warehouses, orputting hardened criminals back on the streets.   Democrats, while supporting free trade, should, unlike theRepublicans, act to protect sound companies from corporateraiders and encourage basic research and its translation intoproducts made by American workers to be sold competitively onworld markets. Under the Republicans we lost immense parts ofthe microchip industry and run the risk of losinghigh-definition television to Japan. The Democrats can ensurethat American industry will have the level playing field thatwill prevent more such disasters.   America is still a young, powerful nation rich in naturalresources, including the most important -- the intelligenceand imagination of its people. When we develop our humancapital and restore the banks and stock markets to providefinancial capital, we will again have an America where lifeis good, where families and children flourish, where all aresafe not only in their homes but on the streets, an Americain which working men and women can enjoy in peace andsecurity the fruits of their labor and anticipate a futureunclouded by random violence.   The great years of America lie not behind us but beforeus. We are too young and strong to step back or step down. Weare ready for leadership that will use government positivelyto harness the strengths, the talents and the virtues of ourpeople. If the Democrats offer new hope and hard work, theycan win.   ---   Mr. Silber, president of Boston University, ran forgovernor of Massachusetts on the Democratic ticket last year.</TEXT></DOC>