<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911223-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>911223-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Castle in the Sand:   A Florida Insurer's Fall   Underscores Weakness   Of State Regulation   ---   Alleged Fraud Was Rampant   At Guarantee Security,   And It Went Undetected   ---   A Taste for Oil Wrestling   ----   By Martha Brannigan   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MER</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ACCOUNTING (ACC)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING NEWS andamp; ISSUES (ACC)BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)FLORIDA (FL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. -- In 1990, Mark C. Sanford, theyoung chairman of Guarantee Security Life Insurance Co.,decided to build a 35,000-square-foot castle on his sandyocean-front property in this exclusive north Florida town.   The extraordinary success of Guarantee had made Mr.Sanford a wealthy man, and now he planned to spend some ofthat wealth on a dream house. The supermarket-sized structurewould be named &quot;Burnett Castle&quot; after his girlfriend, MargenaBurnett. There were plans for an indoor ice-skating rink, abowling alley, a mirrored gym, a secret passage to a hiddenroom and dramatic 42-foot turrets.</LP><TEXT>   But not long after drawing up his plans, Mr. Sanfordabruptly abandoned the project: It was too expensive, hedecided. Looking back, it was also very symbolic. For likehis dream house, Mr. Sanford's flashy business life -- inwhich growth was exponential and no deal seemed tooextravagant -- was also proving a castle in the sand.   Last August, it all caved in. Guarantee Security,collapsing under the weight of sour junk-bond holdings, wasseized by the state. It has an estimated $300 milliondeficit. The Securities and Exchange Commission, acting on atip from former junk-bond king Michael Milken, has begun aninvestigation of Guarantee and its holding company parent,Transmark USA Inc. Mr. Sanford is also president ofTransmark.   State regulators are now accusing Mr. Sanford of fraud.They say he paid himself a fat salary and otherwise lootedthe company to support his lavish lifestyle, which included aprivate island in the Bahamas called Rudder Cut Cay, wherethe &quot;currency&quot; was one-ounce silver coins minted with hislikeness on one side and Ms. Burnett, now his wife, in astring bikini on the other. W. Michael Heekin, deputyreceiver for the state, says it will take &quot;an army of lawyersand accountants&quot; to untangle Transmark's web of investments,including a $17 million loan to a nude bar chain. A statecourt has frozen the assets of Mr. Sanford and William B.Blackburn, the company's former chief executive.   The insurer's collapse has left many of the 57,000policyholders in 40 states in a lurch. Their annuities, whilemostly insured, can't be cashed in for now. The ordeal is apotential embarrassment to Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., which isunder SEC investigation for a suspected securities parkingscheme that hid the insurer's weak finances for years, andCoopers andamp; Lybrand, which acted as the firm's outsideauditors. And it highlights the inability of Florida stateregulators to spot problems at insurers involved in complexdeals.   Guarantee's story also shows how some of the same abusesthat brought down the Sandamp;L industry after deregulation --risky investments, self-dealing and accounting tricks -- arenow showing up at insurance companies. Insolvencies haveincreased dramatically. For 1991, the National Organizationof Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Associations estimatesthat assessments on its members to cover insolvencies to beroughly double to triple the record highs of 1989 and 1990.The Justice Department recently created a task force to probewhat it suspects may be widespread fraud in the industry.   Both Merrill Lynch and Coopers vigorously deny anywrongdoing and say their dealings with Guarantee at all timeswere ethical. For its part, the Florida Department ofInsurance concedes its staff is simply no match for elaboratewhite-collar schemes. &quot;The people conducting exams and thosesupervising them weren't sophisticated enough to recognizewhat the intentions of this company were,&quot; says JillChamberlain, a department spokeswoman. Regulators say theyrelied heavily on Guarantee's audited financial statementsand were duped by the company's cooperative attitude.   Mr. Sanford, who is tall, athletic and mustachioed,declines to be interviewed. Through a spokesman, he deniesany wrongdoing, noting that the bulk of the transactionsregulators now vilify were disclosed in public filings. Heblames Guarantee's demise on the recession.   Mr. Sanford's foray into insurance began in the early1980s. According to several former employees, he and Mr.Blackburn, then obscure securities brokers at a smallLouisville, Ky., firm, read &quot;The Invisible Bankers,&quot; a bookby Andrew Tobias about the insurance industry. They grewintrigued by the opportunities in insurance investmentportfolios.   Undaunted by their inexperience, they formed a holdingcompany, later called Transmark, and bought Guarantee, basedin Jacksonville, Fla., for $6.5 million in January 1984. Thenthey headed to Florida. Mr. Blackburn left behind a wife infavor of a young broker from their firm. Mr. Sanford tookalong his younger brother, Robert C. Sanford, who took a jobat his new company.   Messrs. Sanford and Blackburn were a born team. Mr.Blackburn, who is 48 and a lawyer by training, is gregariousand charming. A Louisville native, he started his career as astockbroker for Merrill Lynch in New York in 1966. AsGuarantee's chief executive, he took charge of marketing andoperations. Mr. Sanford, who acquaintances say is cold andcharmless and rarely makes eye contact during a conversation,was the numbers whiz. Associates say Mr. Sanford can memorizea deck of cards simply by flipping through it. With an M.B.A.from Indiana University, he became the back-room man whomanaged the investments.   Their strategy was simple. Guarantee paid ultra-highinterest rates to attract customers to its annuities. Itpeddled the policies through independent agents drawn to itslush 10% commissions, far more than blue chip insurancecompanies paid. Guarantee carved a niche by offering lowminimum premiums that drew folks of modest means saving forretirement.   But the sky-high interest rates paid customers sounded toogood to be true, and they were. Typically, they plungedsharply, sometimes by 5%, after a year or so. Investorsgriped, but it was legal: The policies specify rates maychange. To deter withdrawals, the policies also had hugesurrender charges, often 15% in the initial years.   To raise the money to pay the interest, Mr. Sanfordsteered the company into high-yielding junk-bond investments.In the heady days of the mid-1980s, Guarantee's assetsballooned to almost $1 billion in 1987 from $99 million in1983. Profits soared too, to $30.9 million in 1988 from$414,000 in 1983.   But regulators say that, almost from the start, the ownershid the company's true financial picture. In 1984, and againin 1985, 1986 and 1988, Guarantee dressed up its books bytemporarily swapping hundreds of millions of dollars of junkbonds for U.S. Treasurys in year-end trades with MerrillLynch, the state alleges. When an insurance company investsin treasurys, it doesn't have to set any money aside to coverpotential losses. But when it goes into junk bonds,regulators require it to have big reserves on hand in casethe bonds default. Had Guarantee reserved funds as requiredfor its junk bonds, it would have been insolvent by 1985, thedeputy receiver estimates.   According to a suit filed in Florida state court inJacksonville Friday against Mr. Sanford and others,regulators say the swaps themselves weren't bona fide tradesbut just paper transactions. &quot;Buys&quot; and &quot;sells&quot; of the bondswere made at artificial prices, the suit alleges, and thedates on numerous trade confirmation slips were altered. Thesuit accuses Merrill Lynch of common-law fraud and breach offiduciary duty. Merrill Lynch says the suit has no merit.   In 1985, Coopers said the swaps couldn't be recognizedunder accepted accounting principles. But seven months later,Coopers said Guarantee could recognize the trades -- but onlyfor regulatory purposes -- and issued a letter to thateffect. Guarantee was gleeful: In a memo attached to theopinion letter, Mr. Blackburn told a subordinate: &quot;Pleaseguard it with your life.&quot; In the suit filed Friday, the stateaccused Coopers of malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty.Aside from denying any wrongdoing, Coopers had no comment.   It's unclear how much the company tried to conceal theswaps, as regulators allege. The transactions, after all,were reported in public filings. A 1986 state exam reporttook note of the big swings in the portfolio, but drew noconclusions. Guarantee even told an examiner about them, thestate acknowledges now. But at the time, regulatorsapparently didn't understand their significance.   As Guarantee's fortunes continued to climb, Mr. Sanfordbasked in the proceeds. He collected fancy cars, includingtwo Lamborghinis, a Rolls-Royce and a couple of Jaguars. Hewould fly on one of two company planes to his weekend spot onhis 400-acre island in the Bahamas. But he would seldomhobnob with Jacksonville's other insurance executives. Feweven knew him. &quot;He never went to the Chamber of Commerce,&quot;says T. O'Neal Douglas, the silver-haired CEO of AmericanHeritage Life Investment Corp. Instead, Mr. Sanfordpatronized topless bars like Thee Dollhouse in Pompano Beachand Atlanta's Gold Club, according to state officials.   About this time, Transmark was becoming a steady client ofDrexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Mr. Sanford forged close ties toMr. Milken, according to Florida state officials, andextolled junk bonds to whomever would listen. Like otherfavored Drexel clients, he and Mr. Blackburn receivedvaluable equity warrants in companies from which Guaranteebought junk bonds, the state says. Both men say the equitiesthey received were publicly disclosed and appropriate.   By 1986 and 1987, Transmark was selling its own junkbonds. Its investor list reads like a Who's Who of Drexel'sjunk-bond catastrophes: CenTrust Savings Bank and ColumbiaSavings andamp; Loan Association, among others. Today, Transmark'ssenior notes, which rarely trade, are priced at $1.00 foreach $1,000 face amount.   Regulators continued to be conciliatory during thisperiod. In 1987, Florida passed a law limiting insurers'exposures to junk bonds to 20% of assets, but they soongranted Guarantee a waiver. The company later got regulatorsto support a bill to soften the rule. At one point, thecompany had more than 70% of its portfolio in junk bonds.Many were private placements it allegedly overvalued. Lastyear, Guarantee inflated asset values by $368 million, thestate asserts.   In 1987, Messrs. Sanford and Blackburn had a falling outand Mr. Blackburn went his own way, selling back his 50%stake in Transmark to the company for $15 million. Hedeclined to be interviewed for this article but his lawyersays he is innocent of any wrongdoing and hasn't kept up withTransmark since leaving.   Soon, Transmark embarked on a starcrossed diversification.It acquired a tiny commuter airline, a commercial printer,and two Canadian clothing store chains. The state allegesthat the other subsidiaries obtained more than $120 millionin loans from Guarantee, disguised as investments innonaffiliated companies to avoid restrictions on such deals.Some proceeds were plowed back into Guarantee as new capitalas the cratering junk-bond market pulled the company everdeeper into the red, the state says.   By 1989, Guarantee was in bad enough shape that it decidedto curtail writing new insurance policies. The state knewthis, but still it postponed an examination of the companyfor a year. It blames the delay on a staff vacancy.   That same year, a Transmark unit loaned $17 million to aFlorida nightclub chain owned by Michael J. Peter thatfeatures nude dancers and oil wrestlers. The idea was to takethe chain national, state officials say. But Mr. Sanfordwrote off the investment after a dispute with Mr. Peter.   Separately, Mr. Peter recently was charged with kidnappingand extortion. Fort Lauderdale Police say he forced acompetitor into his white Rolls-Royce and threatened to crushhis fingers if he kept trying to hire Mr. Peter's dancers. InJuly, the FBI seized Mr. Peter's business records for a stateand federal racketeering investigation. Police say they areexamining the Transmark loan in a broad look at Mr. Peter'sfinances. Fred Haddad, a lawyer for Mr. Peter, who haspleaded innocent, says the charges are unfounded.   Guarantee's condition continued to worsen, but Floridaregulators did little. It wasn't until both the SEC andCoopers andamp; Lybrand started waving red flags that the state wasprodded into action. In March 1991, Coopers qualified itsopinion on the company's financial statements and raisedquestions about the firm's viability. About the same time,the state, after inquiries from the SEC, initiated itsoverdue exam, and found the company's internal controls in ashambles. Some accounts hadn't been reconciled for years. Thestate put Guarantee under its supervision but, notably, itwasn't until after the SEC told Florida regulators that fraudmay have occurred that the state finally seized Guarantee inAugust.   &quot;There were things that should have caused us to look intothings earlier and more in-depth,&quot; says Tom Gallagher,Florida's insurance commissioner. &quot;Obviously if I could do itover, I'd do it differently.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>