<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911014-0053</DOCNO><DOCID>911014-0053.</DOCID><HL>   Lonely Crusade:   One Man's Suffering   Spurs Doctors to Probe   Pesticide-Drug Link   ---   Tom Latimer, Tagamet User,   Fell Ill After He Mowed   Lawn That Was Treated   ---   A Problem Little Understood   ----   By Frank Edward Allen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CHV SBE Z.CIG</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)ENERGY (ENE)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)CONSUMER andamp; HOUSEHOLD SERVICES (CSV)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><NS>PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)SCIENCE andamp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)</NS><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SWITZERLAND (SZ)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   DALLAS -- Thomas Latimer used to be a vigorous, athleticman, a successful petroleum engineer with a bright future.   Then he mowed the lawn.</LP><TEXT>   On a summer Saturday in 1985, Mr. Latimer spent an hour orso cutting the grass, picking up the clippings and edging thewalkways around his modest two-bedroom home. Soon, somethingwas terribly wrong. He felt dizzy and nauseated. His nose wasrunning and his chest was tight. He had a pounding headache.   Ten days later, he was still sick, so he went to see adoctor. But he kept getting worse. He suffered constant headpain. His eyes began to jerk uncontrollably. In November1985, he developed testicular cancer. Now, six years and 20doctors later -- after liver biopsies, spinal-fluid taps, CATscans, radioactive brain blood-flow studies, sleep studiesand many other tests -- Mr. Latimer, 36, accepts thediagnosis of doctors: that he was poisoned by anorganophosphate pesticide used to treat his yard.   Doctors say the poison was absorbed through his skin andby his inhaling the pesticide fumes. Millions of people areexposed to those same fumes and residues every year;normally, the body flushes out small or moderate amounts ofan organophosphate in 24 to 48 hours. But Mr. Latimer'sdoctors say his case has a complicating factor: He was takingprescribed daily doses of 900 milligrams of Tagamet, thepopular ulcer drug.   A toxicologist, three neurologists and twoneuro-ophthalmologists who examined him all concludedindependently that the Tagamet suppressed the normal role ofhis liver in metabolizing the poison and expelling it. Theybelieve the medication caused the poison to accumulatethroughout his body and thus to become more potent in itsattack on the nervous system.   Mr. Latimer can no longer ride a bike. He has difficultywalking. At night, to combat brain seizures and nightmares,he takes an epileptic medicine. Until recently, he couldsleep for only about an hour at a time. Doctors suspect thepoisoning also interfered with his immune system, leading toviral growths on his vocal cords that have required annuallaser surgery.   The makers of the pesticide, diazinon, and of Tagametfirmly deny that their products had anything to do with Mr.Latimer's condition. The pesticide maker says it doesn't evenbelieve he was exposed to its product. And in fact, Mr.Latimer lost a lawsuit he filed against the companies. Evenso, the case intrigues scientists and regulators because itillustrates the need for better understanding of the complexinteractions between such everyday chemicals as pesticidesand prescription drugs.   Neither the Food and Drug Administration nor theEnvironmental Protection Agency conducts routine tests forsuch interactions. Indeed, the EPA doesn't even evaluate thesynergy of two or more pesticides commonly used together. &quot;Wehave not developed ways to test any of that,&quot; says an EPAspokesman. &quot;We don't know how to do it.&quot; And a newcongressional report says the FDA lacks both the resourcesand the enforcement powers to protect Americans from allkinds of poisons.   Companies that make and market pesticides are required toconduct a standard battery of laboratory tests on animals toassess various risks. But the companies don't have to performany tests for interactions with prescription drugs. Withthousands of drugs and thousands of pesticides, &quot;thecombinations and permutations would be astronomical,&quot; saysDarrell Sumner, a toxicology specialist at Ciba-Geigy Corp.,which made the pesticide used on Mr. Latimer's lawn.Ciba-Geigy says that the industry already spends $35 millionto $60 million per pesticide on tests to qualify forregistration with the EPA.   Every year for the past decade, the EPA estimates, morethan 25 million pounds of herbicides and 30 million pounds ofinsecticides were applied to residential lawns and gardens.About 40% of yards are so treated, and about 21 millionpeople do the job themselves.   Complicating this is the ever-heavier use of prescriptiondrugs. Tagamet, for instance, is one of the most widely useddrugs ever, taken by more than 15 million people since 1976.And drug metabolism varies widely by age, physique, sex,ethnic group and other factors.   In reconstructing what had happened to Mr. Latimer,doctors noted that, in addition to the treatment of his lawn,he had sprayed an organophosphate on some ant hills andinsect nests in his yard that summer. He and his wife hadboth worked in the yard in bare arms and shorts, diggingaround flower beds and shrubbery that were treated. His wife,who wasn't taking Tagamet, didn't get sick.   Thomas Lee Kurt, a nationally recognized toxicologist whowas a medical director of the North Texas Poison Center atthe time, diagnosed Mr. Latimer's condition as &quot;enhancedorganophosphate toxicity due to Tagamet.&quot; The pesticide andthe medicine were, in effect, &quot;competing with each other&quot; tobe metabolized, he says. He compares it to having hundreds ofpeople trying to escape down the same narrow hallway: Thehall becomes jammed, and many can't get out.   Alfredo A. Sadun, a professor of neurosurgery andophthalmology at the University of Southern California whohas treated victims of aerial malathion spraying, says takinga medication like Tagamet &quot;can make a person 100 to 1,000times more sensitive to organophosphate poisoning.&quot; Dr.Sadun, who conducted extensive tests in evaluating Mr.Latimer's eye disorder, also named the cause asorganophosphate poisoning, exacerbated by the Tagamet. &quot;I seeno evidence that it could be anything else,&quot; he says.   Because of such cases, pressure is growing on the EPA, theFDA, the Federal Trade Commission and Congress to toughenrules on labeling, advertising, spraying methods andapplicator training.   &quot;Pesticides are biologically active chemicals withpotential risks,&quot; says Victor J. Kimm, a deputy assistantadministrator of the EPA. &quot;Many people haven't fullyappreciated the inherently toxic nature of lawn-carepesticide products.&quot; Chemical makers and applicatorsacknowledge that pesticides obviously have inherent risks --they are designed, after all, to kill living things. But theygenerally argue that rigorous testing procedures, and yearsof use, show that their products are safe when usedcorrectly.   Statistics compiled by the American Association of PoisonControl Centers indicate a steady increase in the proportionof the U.S. population being exposed annually to toxicpesticides. Last year, 56,865 accidental exposures toinsecticides and herbicides were reported through 72 regionalcenters. By far the largest number of cases -- 16,018 --involved organophosphates, compounds that kill by interferingwith nerve transmissions. About 4,900 organophosphateincidents required treatment in health-care facilities. Threeaccidental exposures resulted in deaths.   Such acute exposures are only part of the problem. Agrowing body of research indicates that many Americans may bevulnerable to chronic, low-level exposure to these pesticidesthat can produce severe abdominal pain and headaches, nauseaand other effects. Over time, as these toxins accumulate inbody tissue, research shows that the risks include cancer,birth defects and damage to the liver, kidneys and nervoussystem.   But these risks still aren't widely known. Manydo-it-yourselfers still don't read the labels. Many who doread them can't understand what they say, and others don'tunderstand the dangers of failing to follow the instructions.&quot;People assume that if they follow the label, there won't beany ill effects,&quot; says Jay Feldman, coordinator for theNational Coalition Against the Misuse of Pesticides. &quot;Thereneeds to be a warning, similar to what's on cigarettepackaging. The labels need to say you are at risk even if youfollow the directions.&quot;   Prompted by interest in the Latimer case, the NationalInstitute of Environmental Health Science decided this summerto study the interaction between Tagamet and diazinon.Diazinon is too toxic to test in humans, so the study willuse animals. The institute says any retarding of themetabolism of the pesticide would indicate &quot;a longerresidence time in the body,&quot; which would increase toxicity.   &quot;All our testing is done with a single agent, but in thereal world, people are exposed to mixtures,&quot; says John Doullof the University of Kansas, head of the National Academy ofSciences' toxicology committee. He says interaction betweenpesticides and prescription drugs is &quot;not nearly as wellstudied as it needs to be.&quot; Physicians and researchers havedocumented interactions with Tagamet that sharply increasedthe blood-plasma concentrations of Valium and at least 20other prescription drugs.   Many of these interaction mechanisms are so complex thatthey still aren't well understood. Robert Palmer, vicepresident for gastroenterology for SmithKline Beecham PLC,which makes Tagamet, concedes that Tagamet inhibits themetabolism of diazinon, but he and other researchers say theyaren't sure where the unmetabolized poison goes. They suspectmuch of it accumulates in high concentrations in fattytissues throughout the body, where it may stay indefinitely.(Other studies have shown that in lactating women who wereexposed to pesticides and who later undertook weight-lossregimens, the poison broke loose from fatty tissue and wasexpelled through breast milk.)   Even more frustrating to investigators, the results ofchemical-interaction and toxicity studies in animals can beinconsistent. Dr. Palmer cites two separate rat studies in1986, one suggesting that Tagamet reduces organophosphatetoxicity and the other concluding that Tagamet increases itexponentially. He says, &quot;That just shows you can't predictwith rats.&quot;   Mr. Latimer simply wants the public to be warned. &quot;Wedon't want to ban Tagamet or diazinon,&quot; he says. &quot;We justwant people to be aware of the possible risks.&quot; Dr. Kurt, nowthe FDA's medical officer for the Southwest, says of Mr.Latimer: &quot;He is a credible man, neither a rabble rouser nor aRalph Nader. He's just very persistent.&quot;   Illness and its consequences have taken a toll on Mr.Latimer's job, marriage and family. At the office, he speaksslowly and often loses his train of thought. His intellecthasn't been impaired, but because of his eye disorder, he canread only a few minutes at a time. &quot;My daughter has grown upknowing I can't read her a bedtime story,&quot; he says. &quot;Byevening, I can't see to read the words and don't have a voiceto speak with. I have to use sign language to tell her I loveher.&quot;   To fight bitterness and depression, he has turned hisordeal into a quest to increase awareness about the hazardsof home pesticides. He and his wife, Carol, an emergency-roomnurse, have appealed to regulators and Congress, seekingclearer warning labels on pesticides.   When they discovered Mr. Latimer's cancer, theyaccelerated their plans for starting a family, even creatingtheir own sperm bank. Now, &quot;we have two beautiful children,but our marriage has changed a lot,&quot; says Mrs. Latimer. &quot;Ourgoals are so different now. Your needs and wants change awhole lot when you go through something like this.&quot;   Ciba-Geigy and Chevron Corp., whose Ortho divisiondistributes diazinon, think it's time the Latimers threw inthe towel. Ellen Maldonado, a Chevron attorney, says hercompany believes there was no evidence that Mr. Latimer wasexposed to diazinon. Basic questions were never resolved:exactly when Mr. Latimer's lawn was treated by a lawn-servicecompany and what was used. But even if he had been exposed,the Chevron attorney says, there was no evidence the diazinonwould have caused his injuries.   The companies argue that the diazinon in the lawn wouldhave degraded or vanished. But soil studies performed byCiba-Geigy show diazinon's rate of degradation varies withsoil type, temperature and other factors. The studies showthat soil with organic material, such as lawns, can retainabout 50% of applied diazinon for up to five weeks and 10%for seven months. In Mr. Latimer's yard, soil analysts founddiazinon residues in 1989, four years after his episode.   Ciba-Geigy says it is satisfied the case was &quot;thoroughlyinvestigated&quot; before it was dismissed by a federal court inDallas. It says its own animal tests prove diazinon productsit sells in the U.S. aren't potent enough to cause humannerve damage.   SmithKline won't comment on Mr. Latimer's case but defendsthe record of Tagamet, which has spared many people fromulcer surgery and helped millions cope with a variety ofgastro-intestinal ailments and other conditions.   Dr. Palmer says SmithKline has &quot;no reason to believeTagamet enhances organophosphate toxicity&quot; in humans. Andindeed, it's just about impossible in a case like Mr.Latimer's to prove the exact cause. Lawyers for SmithKlineargued in court that Mr. Latimer's condition might be theresult of multiple sclerosis, a stroke or a venereal disease.(His doctors did tests that they say ruled out thosepossibilities and others.)   In general, drug and pesticide companies argue in courtsthat there needs to be epidemiological proof -- mass datafrom human exposure -- to establish a connection betweenexposure to a substance and a health effect. Such proof isall but impossible to obtain, says Anthony Z. Roisman, aformer Justice Department litigator and section chief forhazardous waste. And the courts have generally agreed: Mr.Roisman notes in a legal journal that several U.S. districtcourts and a majority of judges in three U.S. circuit courtshave ruled that &quot;the only way to prove medical causation isthrough epidemiology.&quot;   Indeed, it was generally on those grounds that the judgedismissed Mr. Latimer's case, although he didn't explain hisruling in detail. Mr. Latimer, who is seeking a new trial,finds such rulings unfair. He believes it is his right tohave a jury, not just a judge, decide what caused hisillness.   On some days when Mrs. Latimer is working, Mr. Latimertakes his four-year-old daughter with him to the grocerystore. His eyes can't track to look at the shelves, but shecan pick out containers of asparagus and cottage cheese byrecognizing pictures on the labels. In the evenings, Mr.Latimer does the dishes with scalding water and no gloves.&quot;It's a good way of distracting my head pain,&quot; he says. &quot;Ihave discovered that I can feel pain in only one place at atime.&quot;   Sitting in the den as she nurses their infant son, Mrs.Latimer talks about her attitude. &quot;People have asked us whywe don't just accept this as our fate and leave it alone,&quot;she says. &quot;But we are still mad enough about this, even aftersix years, that we want some resolution, something to comeout of it.   &quot;I would like to get to the point where the poisoning isnot the first thing in our life and we can just go on, but Iam not sure we will ever get to that point.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>