<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910213-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>910213-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Iraq Warms to Soviet Move   To End War by Diplomacy   ---   U.S. Officials Are Skeptical,   Likely to View Any Step   Short of Pullout as Ploy   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Iraq said it is ready to work with theSoviet Union to end the Persian Gulf war, the first timesince shooting started that the Iraqi government has signaledit may want a diplomatic way out of the crisis.   But it was far from clear from Iraq's vague statement,delivered on Baghdad Radio after Iraqi leader Saddam Husseinmet with a Soviet envoy, whether Iraq has become any morewilling to actually withdraw its troops from Kuwait. U.S.officials reacted skeptically, and are likely to viewanything short of the beginning of an Iraqi pullout as a mereploy designed to slow down allied bombing or delay a groundoffensive.</LP><TEXT>   Baghdad Radio said Saddam Hussein told Soviet envoyYevgeny Primakov, &quot;Iraq is prepared to extend cooperation tothe Soviet Union and other nations and agencies in theinterest of finding a peaceful, political, equitable andhonorable solution to the region's central issues, includingthe situation in the Gulf.&quot;   The pronouncement took the Bush administration bysurprise, and officials said they hadn't seen any otherindications Iraq might be softening its stand over Kuwait.&quot;We don't have any details of their discussions,&quot; the WhiteHouse said. &quot;But finding a solution would have to start withIraq getting out of Kuwait and complying with the {UnitedNations} resolutions&quot; demanding a pullout.   U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar welcomedthe Iraqi statement, but he emphasized that the withdrawal ofIraq from Kuwait remained &quot;a precondition for any justsolution of the problem.&quot;   Though falling far short of a declaration of willingnessto meet U.N. demands, the Iraqi statement may be significantfor two reasons. It seems to represent a more positive Iraqiattitude toward a diplomatic solution than Baghdad seemed todisplay in response to recent overtures by other would-bepeacemakers, particularly the Iranian government.   Secondly, some of America's allies in the coalitionopposing Iraq have long considered the Soviet Union the mostimportant and potentially most fruitful channel ofcommunications with Iraq. Arabs allied with the U.S., inparticular, have suspected that Soviet overtures were theonly ones that had much chance of influencing Iraq.   But there are clear problems with the initial Iraqistatement as well. U.S. officials noted that it pointedlyavoids even mentioning Kuwait. Moreover, its declaration thatIraq wants to work at solving &quot;the region's central issues&quot;seems to refer to the Israeli-Palestinian dispute as well asIraq's occupation of Kuwait, and the U.S. and its allies havefirmly rejected linking the Kuwait crisis and the Palestinianissue.   Moreover, another potential problem is the fact thatSaddam Hussein's message was delivered to the Soviet Union'sMr. Primakov, who has been Soviet President MikhailGorbachev's personal envoy to Iraq. While the Bushadministration cooperated with Mr. Primakov when he launcheddiplomatic missions to defuse the crisis before war brokeout, U.S. officials are suspicious of the Soviet envoybecause he has a long-standing relationship with SaddamHussein and Iraq.   While there were new hints of diplomatic activity, U.S.and allied troops were busy conducting increasinglysophisticated combined land, air and sea shellings of Iraqitargets -- the kinds of operations they will employ if theylaunch a ground attack on Iraqi positions in Kuwait.   Early yesterday, Saudi artillery batteries, U.S. Marinejets and artillery and the battleship Missouri all focusedtheir fire on Iraqi troops that had massed on theKuwaiti-Saudi border. The massing of the Iraqi tanks andsoldiers was an encouraging sign to U.S. military planners,because it was an indication that allied bombing raids mayhave left them in need of supplies and more protectedpositions.   The Pentagon also disclosed that damage to oil wellsinside Kuwait is more extensive than previously reported.More than 50 oil-well fires are burning inside Kuwait, somepossibly the result of allied bombing raids and some possiblyset deliberately by Iraqi troops occupying Kuwait, said RearAdm. Mike McConnell, director of intelligence for the JointChiefs of Staff. The fires have been burning for at least aweek, Adm. McConnell said, but only a handful have beenreported previously by military briefers.   The disclosure is likely to increase concern that Iraq mayuse burning oil facilities as a military tool to thwartallied forces, as it has threatened to do. Iraq is known tohave placed explosives to blow up dozens and perhaps hundredsof Kuwait's 1,080 on-shore oil wells. Lt. Gen. Tom Kelly,director of the operations for the joint staff, said thefires &quot;have had no significant impact on militaryoperations,&quot; although extensive smoke can obscure targetsfrom pilots, satellites and certain optically guided weapons.   Adm. McConnell said the fires are scattered around Kuwait.Three weeks ago, the U.S. accused Iraq of setting a handfulof fires in the al Wafra oil field in the Kuwaiti-Saudineutral zone, just north of where U.S.-led forces aredeployed in Saudi Arabia, and also reported two oil-storagetanks ablaze at the Mina Abd Allah and Shuaiba refineries onthe coast south of Kuwait City.   Fires at Kuwaiti oil facilities aren't expected to havemuch impact on world oil markets, which have done withoutKuwaiti and Iraqi oil since Iraq's Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait.   Meanwhile, the White House began displaying increasingirritation at Iraqi accusations that allied bombs aretargeted at civilian areas -- and growing anger at the U.S.press for reporting those Iraqi claims. &quot;I think there's aconscientious effort on {Saddam Hussein's} part to try toraise the propaganda value of accusing us of indiscriminatebombing of civilians,&quot; President Bush complained. &quot;And it'ssimply not true.&quot;   Privately, a senior administration aide was more acerbic,accusing news organizations of relaying pictures of battledamage that they suspect dates back to Iraq's eight-year-oldwar with Iran without casting doubt on Iraqi claims that thedamage was caused by U.S. bombing. &quot;You ask us all the timeto have faith in your integrity,&quot; asserted the official, whospoke on condition that his name not be used. &quot;And I'll bevery blunt. There is an obligation for that integrity to bedisplayed. . . . I think you folks {in the press} arebeginning to have a problem with the public.&quot;   The Iraqi charges that allied bombings are killing andwounding civilians were particularly intense yesterdaybecause it was a day of heavy bombing around Baghdad, whereIraq took both foreign journalists and the Soviet Union's Mr.Primakov to view buildings it said had been bombed. Iraqasserted that allied bombing raids hit, among other things,two government ministries in the capital city and causedcivilian damage in the process.   The Iraqi charges of attacks on civilian targets are asensitive issue for the Bush administration because Iraq isusing them in an open effort to whip up sympathy and supportamong Arab and other Islamic countries. The charges alsocould cause political problems at home for President Bush ifthe public begins believing that allied warplanes are doingtoo much damage to civilian targets. But officials also hintthat the pace of bombing runs at Baghdad may begin fallingoff as the war focus shifts away from Iraq's commandstructure and toward attacks on Iraqi troops inside Kuwaititself.   The combined arms attack on Iraqi positions in southernKuwait didn't amount to a major military operation. Butallied officers in Saudi Arabia said it was significantbecause it was the largest attempt so far to coordinate U.S.and allied fire from land, sea and air on a precise Iraqitarget. The ability to coordinate such disparate elements isone of the toughest challenges facing military commanders.   &quot;This was really a sign of success,&quot; said Col. Ahmed alRobayan, a Saudi Arabian officer. &quot;It was a test of thecommand and control system.&quot;   Yesterday's shelling, which lasted three hours andincluded three allied artillery battalions, was the mostextensive operation of its kind since the war began.Previously, U.S. artillery responded almost exclusively toshelling from behind Iraqi lines. It wasn't clear how muchdamage the Iraqi positions suffered.   But now, Pentagon officials said, commanders are lookingfor ways to step up the use of artillery to damage Iraqiforces, and to try to force Iraqi tanks and troops to startmoving out of their concrete- and sandbag-protectedpositions. Any major allied ground offensive would bepreceded by days of artillery action much more intense thanthat reported yesterday.   High-ranking U.S. military officers differed about whetherthe latest Iraqi movements signal the beginning of animportant shift in the campaign. Reflecting the views of somehigh-level commanders in Saudi Arabia, U.S. militaryspokesmen for the past two days have emphasized thatround-the-clock aerial attacks have damaged certain Iraqiunits so badly that they have been forced to move to newpositions in order to consolidate supply lines and seekshelter close to other units.   But other officers, including some Pentagon planners, tendto discount that assessment, arguing that there has been onlylimited movement so far and that it hasn't involved any ofSaddam Hussein's strongest and most disciplined divisions.The real test of whether the Iraqis have decided to becomemore mobile, these officers contend, will be if some of theirtop-notch tank and artillery brigades move out ofpainstakingly fortified positions in response to alliedshelling and movements of U.S. troops.</TEXT></DOC>