<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910919-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>910919-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Fixed-Up Fighters:   Old Warplanes Get   Brand New Electronics,   Live to Fight Again   ---   Shrinking Military Budgets   Create a Robust Market   For the Upgrade Industry   ---   Israel Soups Up the Phantom   ----   By John J. Fialka   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LTV U.SIN</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)SOFTWARE (SOF)STEEL MANUFACTURERS (STL)</IN><RE>AFRICA (AF)AUSTRALIA (ASA)BRAZIL (BR)CHINA (CH)CANADA (CN)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)ISRAEL (ISR)ITALY (ITA)NORTH KOREA (KN)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NORWAY (NOY)NEW ZEALAND (NZ)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SCANDINAVIA (SCA)SOUTH AFRICA (SF)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)SINGAPORE (SN)TEXAS (TX)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   BEN GURION AIRPORT, Israel -- In a distant hangar of thisairport, far from the busy passenger terminal, sit a dozenworn F-4 Phantom jet fighters. Born of 1950s technology,these U.S.-built aircraft bear the scars of two Arab-Israeliwars and many hasty patches by mechanics desperate to getthem going for the next mission. In the constantly changing,high-tech world of modern warplanes, this should be the endof the line for these veteran aircraft.   But now Israeli Aircraft Industries has a plan to keepthem going into the next century: The Phantoms will beupgraded.</LP><TEXT>   In a world arms market that is shrinking fast, upgradingis bucking the trend. The tired old airframes will be stuffedwith the &quot;black boxes&quot; of 1990s electronics. The result: asubstantial boost in air power at a fraction of the cost ofbuying a new plane.   The upgrading industry has come into existence for asimple reason. The air bases of many nations are clogged withmilitary antiques from the 1950s and '60s, planes that incombat would likely last only seconds against thecomputer-driven radar and smart weapons of fighters like theU.S. F/A-18 Hornet. Yet few nations can afford the $42million price tag of McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s Hornet.   So at a time when sticker shock has shrunk the overseasmarket for top-line U.S. fighters, the prospects for theupgrading industry are rosy. There are, for example, some1,000 F-5 Tigers in the world, and at least nine nationscurrently are having their F-5 fleets upgraded.   In its basic concept, upgrading isn't new. &quot;People havebeen re-adapting airplanes since they were invented,&quot; saysDavid Bainbridge, a spokesman for Smiths Industries PLC, aBritish manufacturer of flight-control systems, which hasplunged into the upgrade market. The difference now, henotes, is that instead of simply giving a plane a few newdials and instruments, today's computerized avionics cantransform a warplane's capabilities and multiply its killingpower.   Not everyone is pleased with that result. Remaking theworld's air forces worries those who want to control theproliferation of conventional weapons in world trouble spots.Making matters more complicated, trade in this corner of thearms industry is even more difficult to monitor than in therest of the industry. Upgrade deals are generally kept quiet,and the products being peddled -- microchips, software andguidance systems -- usually don't change the exterior of thetransformed aircraft.   Leaders in the business are LTV Corp. in the U.S., SmithsIndustries in England and the arms industries of Canada,Brazil and Italy. China and North Korea are on the fringes,revamping Soviet aircraft.   No other nation has plunged into upgrading as aggressivelyas Israel. In a land that still sees itself surrounded byenemies, upgrading is a matter of survival. &quot;The bottom lineis always the same,&quot; says Menahem Shmul, Israeli Aircraft'slead test pilot, who will put the finished &quot;Phantom 2000,&quot; asthe upgraded version is called, through its paces. &quot;It is:What is the kill potential of the aircraft?&quot;   The upgrade operation here in state-owned IsraeliAircraft's hangars at Ben Gurion begins with a lobotomy. TheF-4 Phantoms' instrument panels, gyroscopes and wiring areremoved. Technicians beneath the aircraft explain that manyof the wires are redundant. Rather than root out the oldlines, earlier mechanics fixing the planes had just added newones.   Other workers crawl over the airframes, looking formicroscopic bits of corrosion, metal fatigue or smallmalfunctions in fuel or hydraulic systems, anything thatcould mushroom into a problem over the next 20 years.   Then the new brain, a small but powerful computer, isimplanted. To help it operate, the computer is given a muchlighter, laser-driven gyro, which stabilizes the plane, andan instrument panel that spits the data from the computeronto the windshield, telling the pilots exactly where theyare in three dimensions at every moment. The computer issuesits digital commands over a much-simplified wiring system.   The reborn Phantoms will be not only smarter but also moreagile, because the lighter electronic innards mean theiroverhauled engines can push them faster. Although theupgraded Phantoms haven't flown yet, &quot;Y.P.,&quot; a chunky,gap-toothed test pilot, predicts that the change will be&quot;radical.&quot; (Y.P. is forbidden by Israeli military rules todisclose his full name.)   Y.P. has flown both old and upgraded versions of anotherveteran plane, the A-4 Skyhawk. In the old Skyhawk, a pilot'schances of hitting an enemy aircraft in a dogfight were goodonly if he could maneuver within 200 feet of it. As forbombing, pilots had only a 10% chance of hitting close to thetarget. &quot;In the old plane, if you really wanted to hit thetarget, you had to go low, down to 200 feet,&quot; Y.P. says.Because of anti-aircraft advances, &quot;that would be a killingdisease&quot; for the pilot today, he notes.   But in Israel's upgraded A-4 Skyhawks, the pilot no longereyeballs his targets and then fires. He sees them on hiscomputer-driven radar at a distance of 40 miles and can killthem from 20 miles away with &quot;smart&quot; missiles. That makesupgraded planes much more lethal. &quot;You couldn't ignore anenemy aircraft like that,&quot; says Y.P. &quot;They are going to killyou 100%.&quot;   The pilot, who says he has shot down seven enemy MiGfighters in combat, believes the speed of the computer oftenmakes the crucial difference. His last dogfight, he recalls,lasted only 20 seconds.   On bombing runs, the pilot of the upgraded A-4 can flycomfortably high above anti-aircraft fire and wait for hiscomputer to calculate the precise moment when releasing hisbombs will make them fall near the target. In the hands of askilled pilot, Y.P. asserts, such an A-4 virtually has thepowers of the U.S.-built F-16, a plane that is a generationyounger.   This rejuvenation poses a major new worry for armscontrollers: From a distance, the old aircraft and theupgraded version look much the same, making it harder for onenation to measure the threat posed by another. This is likelyto add a new measure of uncertainty and tension in someinternational hot spots.   &quot;We worry about the fact that we can't keep track of whosells components to whom,&quot; says Ian Anthony of the StockholmInternational Peace Institute, which publishes one of theworld's few public annual surveys of the arms business.   The upgrade business also spreads military secrets. SmithsIndustries discovered that recently when it competed againstIsrael to improve Singapore's fleet of F-5 Tigers, anothervariety of U.S.-built fighters nearing obsolescence. Thefinal decision hasn't been announced, but the Israelis appearto have won. Nino Cugliari, director of marketing for SmithsIndustries, isn't happy about it.   &quot;They {Singapore} wanted a full technology transfer, andwe wouldn't do it,&quot; says Mr. Cugliari, explaining that hiscompany was forbidden by U.S. rules to reveal the software ofthe U.S.-made computers and other components it was selling.&quot;Now the Israelis agreed to release that information.&quot;   Israel was happy to pass on the technology, acknowledgesDavid Onn, Israeli Aircraft's vice president of marketing.But, he insists, it was home-grown knowledge created in anation with few resources but brainpower. &quot;We are prepared toshare our technology and engage in joint projects from thevery outset,&quot; he explains. &quot;We know what our customers wantbecause we were in the same position ourselves not so verylong ago.&quot; He won't comment on the sale to Singapore, sayinghis company doesn't identify customers unless they agree.   But he does insist that Israel isn't selling U.S. secrets.Rather, he says, it is beating the U.S. competition byselling better products. He cites the &quot;Phalcon,&quot; Israel'sbargain-basement AWACS (Airborne Warning and Control System),whose radar and computers he claims top the U.S. version.   Some American officials, troubled by Israel's willingnessto ship weapons technology to South Africa and China, feelIsrael is giving away U.S. secrets while unfairlyundercutting U.S. companies in other markets. They complainthat much of Israel's technology begins with modifications onhigh-tech weaponry given to Israel by the Pentagon. Moreover,production and sales of the Israeli version, they argue, areenhanced by hidden government subsidies and lower wages paidto Israeli engineers and scientists.   Mr. Onn denies that Israeli Aircraft competes unfairly.&quot;No one is subsidizing any of our activities here,&quot; he says.   His company sees large markets for its product. There aresome 4,000 F-4 Phantoms around the world. There are also 205airworthy Boeing 707s in existence, and Israeli engineershave planned second careers in the military for many of theaging airliners.   By ripping out the seats and installing extra fuel tanksand pipes, Israeli Aircraft makes tankers out of the 707s. Ithas sold four to the Australian Air Force and a fifth to anation it won't identify.   For more money, Israeli technicians install in the old707s a battery of computers and a new phased-array,computer-steerable radar. The result is an AWACS for a pricethat Israeli Aircraft says is roughly a third of the $250million price for the U.S. military version.   The Gulf War, and the subsequent U.S. campaign to curb theflow of weapons into the Middle East, have only intensifiedIsrael's feeling that it needs its own high-tech weapons. Anddefense experts say that to be able to afford to producearms, Israel must continue to export them.   While Israel initially got into the upgrade business toensure its own survival, American companies are beginning tosee gold in upgrading. Leading the way is LTV, which, amongother things, is upgrading Norway's fleet of 15 F-5 fighters.Anthony B. Gill, an LTV program manager, says the upgradewill give the planes many of the capabilities of an F-16 forwhat he estimates is about 10% of the $25 million cost of thenewer plane. The key, he says, is installation of a lasergyro system and a computer that tells the pilot instantlywhere he is in relation to targets.   But old assumptions -- such as that old planes have to bereplaced, one for one, with new planes -- die hard in thearms business. Serge Dassault, president of Dassault AviationS.A. of France, counts 6,000 aging combat aircraft in theWest and 4,000 in the Soviet Union. Those planes, he assumes,will have to be replaced. &quot;Time is working for us,&quot; he says.   And pilots will always assume their governments want themto fly the latest and best. A few years ago, the New ZealandAir Force sent a team of pilots around the world on a missionto prove it would be cheaper to buy a new fighter-bomber thanto upgrade its senescent fleet of A-4 Skyhawks. The teamtested every new plane available in the Western world,including the F-16, the F-18, the French Mirage 2000 and theBritish Tornado.   They bought none. &quot;The cost of new aircraft was at least$400 million,&quot; said one government account of the trip. &quot;Thismoney was not available. The choices were: Keep the Skyhawkor have nothing.&quot;   So &quot;Project Kahu&quot; was born. New Zealand took its 14 A-4's,bought 10 more used ones from the Australian Navy and broughtin the Lear Siegler division of Smiths Industries to do theupgrade. &quot;We have 80% of the capability of the F-16,&quot; boastsWing Commander Des Ashton, who says the project cost $168million.   The cold numbers of defense economics indicate that NewZealand's pilots won't be flying their old fighters alone.The next generation of fighters will present even starkerchoices for small and even midsized nations struggling tokeep their defenses up. Price estimates for the next U.S.fighter, the stealthy ATF, begin at around $80 million.</TEXT></DOC>