<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920225-0013</DOCNO><DOCID>920225-0013.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- On Sports:   Schussing and Sliding; U.S. Finishes `Good' Games   ----   By Frederick C. Klein</HL><DATE>02/25/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><LP>   Albertville, France -- Who's the better athlete, HerschelWalker or Donat Acklin?   Walker, of course, you answer, and you're probably right.He's a veritable mound of muscle who numbers his dailypush-ups and sit-ups in the thousands. He was the best U.S.collegiate football player of 1982, with a Heisman Trophy toprove it, and a near-Olympic-level sprinter to boot. He earnsnearly $3 million a year playing the physically testing gameof professional football.</LP><TEXT>   Acklin is a well-enough set-up young Swiss bobsledder(6-foot-2, 215 pounds), but his overall credentials areunimposing. &quot;Does he play other sports?&quot; echoed a Swissjournalist I queried. &quot;I don't think so. Why should he?&quot;   Off the results of the two-man bobsled competition thatday at lofty La Plagne, the fellow's question was apt,because Acklin wound up with a gold medal, while Walker hadnone. Not only did the Swiss sled he pushed beat theWalker-pushed, seventh-place Yanks, but it out-started theU.S. sled in three of the four heats as well, meaning thatAcklin outpushed Walker. One can only conclude that Acklin, achild of the Alps, knows something the Georgia-raisedHerschel doesn't.   It is well to keep the above example in mind whenassessing the results of the 16th Winter Olympics thatconcluded here Sunday. Yes, the U.S. had a good Games inrelative terms, with its 11 medals, and five golds, amountingto the best showing since it won 12, with six golds, as thehome team at Lake Placid, N.Y., in 1980. But others on thisplanet are far more at home in the ice and snow than we are.   I mean the newly unified Germans, who topped the medallist with 26, and the newly disunified ex-Soviets who, as theludicrously -- and no doubt temporarily-named Unified Teamfrom the Commonwealth of Independent States, were second with23. I really mean the Austrians and Norwegians, who made offwith 21 and 20 medals, respectively.   If you figure national medals on a percapita basis, theonly fair way, the Norwegians, with a population of about 4.1million according to my almanac, won one medal for each205,000 inhabitants and the Austrians one per 357,000, whilethe German figure was one per three million and the ex-Sovsone per 11 million or so. US? About one per 23 million.   And as at every quadrennium, the athletically patrioticamong us should be grateful that a few hardy and red-cheekedlads and lasses (mostly lasses -- they won nine of ourbaubles) are willing to endure long hours of chilly practicein obscure sports in order to shine at the Winter Os. Youprobably could hold a convention of all the seriousspeed-skaters, lugers, bobsledders, curlers, biathletes andski jumpers in this land in the Holiday Inn in Bemidji andstill have a few vacant rooms.   (Such is not the case with skiing. An estimated 10 millionAmericans partake of this sport -- more than there are peoplein Norway, Austria, Switzerland or Sweden -- yet the U.S.medal take here was two Alpine silvers, and that was two morethan we won in 1988 at Calgary. Those who oversee the sportsay that most of the better athletes in our mountain statesare, like others, bewitched by the big-bucks lure ofbaseball, basketball, football, tennis and golf. But you'dstill think that some of them could be persuaded to schussseriously. Maybe distributing an unexpurgated biography ofAlberto Tomba might help convert some of the boys.)   Withal, though, these Games were a success in themost-important way, which is to say that for 16 days thedoings on the rinks and slopes took precedence over otherconcerns. The Winter Olympics generally have been sparedextraneous political hassles -- would-be protesters don'tlike the thought of getting their feet cold, I guess -- butin this one the count was near zero.   I say &quot;near&quot; because of an incident in which the Frenchtelecast of the opening ceremony was interrupted brieflybecause a cable had been cut. Someone from a group callingitself the COUIC phoned Agency Presse France to claimresponsibility. The caller said the initials stood for theCoordination of the Offensive Using Interruptions andOutages, and the action was aimed at protesting the&quot;techno-junk&quot; baggage of the Games. That sounded like a joketo me. It also sounded like something many of us could getbehind.   Also near zero was the tally of controversies stemmingfrom actions by athletes or officials of the contestingnations; I can't think of another Olympics -- summer orwinter -- that went so smoothly.   Again I say &quot;near&quot; because of an incident involving DanQuayle, our vice president in charge of attending majorsporting events. The afternoon of the opening ceremony, Mr.Quayle showed up for lunch at an athletes' housing compoundin the village of Brides Les Bains with an entourage ofprotectors and co-celebrants numbering about 50 -- twice asmany as were expected -- and the town's mayor who had come towelcome him, and others, said they were roughed up in thecrush. I, too, have been shoved around in the wake of aQuayle visit to a sports event (last year's NCAA-basketballFinal Four at Indianapolis), and can't help wondering if Ihelp pay the bills for those trips.   The French, generally, gave a wonderful account ofthemselves in staging these Games. Thanks to weather that wasrarely bad at the wrong time or place, events went off prettymuch as scheduled, and efforts to keep the narrow Alpineroads clear of traffic succeeded, albeit at the cost ofholding down attendance at the more-distant venues. Theopening ceremony was spectacular, the best show I've seensince the Cirque du Soleil, which, by the way, is Canadian.   Praise-worthy, too, were organizers' moves to hold downcosts by building temporary facilities for some events. (Theland under the speed-skating oval, for example, will beturned into a soccer field, with the refrigeration equipmentshipped off to Japan.) Who says you have to go broke to havean Olympics?   And speaking of going broke, a tear should be shed for themerchants of Albertville and environs, who geared up for lotsof business but, by all accounts, got little. Some of theblame should fall on the International Olympic Committee,which puts a hammerlock on host-area hotel reservations yearsin advance of a Games, taking it off only after manypotential tourists have been scared away. It's doing this inBarcelona, too.   As for athletic heroes, there were many, as usual. Theraces against the clock that dominate the Winter Games maynot be entirely satisfying, but I think they particularlytest an athlete's inner resources. Most winter-sportscontestants are alone as well as cold; their main competitioncomes not from other humans but themselves. The winners --Tomba, Bonnie Blair, the ski-jumper Toni Nieminen, thecross-country skier Lyubov Yegorovaare those who can putaside concerns for safety or &quot;face&quot; and let their talentsrip.   Canadian skier Kerrin Lee-Gartner had undergone five kneeoperations in pursuit of her sport. Yet she said that whenshe stood at the start of the women's downhill, &quot;I toldmyself it would be all or nothing -- that I didn't come hereto `ski well' or finish fifth or 10th.&quot;   She won, by .06 seconds. Probably less than the speed of anegative thought.</TEXT></DOC>