<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900502-0139</DOCNO><DOCID>900502-0139.</DOCID><HL>   Slow Death:   Life With Alzheimer's   Is Often the Hardest   On Families of the Sick   ---   New Jersey's Copsa Institute   Has Relief for Loved Ones   And Day Care for Patients   ---   Painting a Future for Millions   ----   By Brent Bowers   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)</IN><LP>   PISCATAWAY, N.J. -- Florence Jordan sits, bewildered, asher three children talk about how her Alzheimer's disease hasmade a hell of their lives.   Chris, the middle child and a recent college graduate,moved back in with her 54-year-old mother in Old Bridge,N.J., after seeing her pull a flaming dishrag from the oven,drop it onto the living-room rug and leave it there to burn.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;You find yourself thinking about {Alzheimer's} everyhour,&quot; says Jimmy, 22, who is still in college. &quot;It takesover your mind.&quot;   Alzheimer's disease insidiously corrodes its victims'brains. Over a period of years, it progressively destroystheir memories, their ability to reason and their hold onreality. Before it kills them, it robs them of speech andmakes them incontinent. Some four million Americans areafflicted; about that many people are said to suffer otherforms of dementia.   As the illness progresses, most victims cease to graspfully what is happening to them. And that, mercifully,tempers their suffering. But it doesn't temper the sufferingof the relatives and friends who feed, bathe and nurse them,who watch over them day and night, and who mourn their slowdeaths. The families often suffer more than the victims do.   In Piscataway, the state-financed Copsa Institute forAlzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders is bringing reliefboth to dementia victims and to the husbands, wives andchildren who care for them. For the patients, it offers aday-hospital program that allows them to socialize, exercise,play games and practice simple mental tasks. It has adiagnostic clinic and, for relatives, it provides counseling,information and a desperately needed six-hour reprieve --several times a week -- from exhaustion and despair.   A look at the Copsa Institute's experience shows a way oflife that may well await tens of millions of Americans.   ---   At 9:45 one Friday morning, about a dozen patients troopinto a room and take their places at an oblong table. (Theinstitute requested that only first names of most patients beused in this story.) A majority of them meet clinicalcriteria for &quot;probable Alzheimer's disease,&quot; officials say,while the rest suffer dementias from vascular or othercauses. A definite diagnosis of Alzheimer's, a degenerativeillness of the brain and nervous system with no known causeor cure, is made only in a post-mortem examination of braintissue.   Today, participants have spent half an hour outside in thelobby getting reacquainted, exchanging pictures of themselvesand pinning on name tags. Decorative paper snowflakes danglefrom the ceiling.   Staff nurse Sandy Egan opens the daily orientation periodwith questions about time and place. &quot;What day is this?&quot; sheasks. &quot;Friday,&quot; several voices pipe up. &quot;Good]&quot; Ms. Eganwrites the word &quot;Friday&quot; in large letters on a board. On acalendar, she crosses out yesterday's date. &quot;What day of themonth is today?&quot; she asks. This time, there is a pause, andonly two or three hesitant replies.   After questions about famous movie actors, patients'birthdays, this and that, the group moves to a smaller roomto have their thought-processes jogged. They are showncolorful pictures of improbable scenes -- a worker drilling ahole in a library floor, a man walking upside down on aceiling, an outsize telephone plunked onto a small table.   &quot;What do you think of this one?&quot; asks Lisa Berbig, theprogram's coordinator.   &quot;It's a good picture,&quot; a man named Bill replies.   Esther says: &quot;I think the little girl is going to thelibrary, and he is doing some drilling.&quot;   Nobody mentions the giant phone.   The group has better luck with aphorisms. Asked tocomplete the phrase, &quot;Absence makes the . . .&quot;, severalvoices cry out happily, &quot;. . . heart grow fonder.&quot;   Next comes a 15-minute walk, followed by grouppsychotherapy. Pauline describes her favorite photo, in whichshe is sitting in her grandmother's lap. Rinalda remembershow she used to crack the whip with her own daughter andseven -- or was it eight? -- sons. &quot;I'd call their names inItalian,&quot; she says, her face crinkling into a grin. &quot;They'dsay, `C'mon, let's get outta here. Mom's mad.'&quot;   Lunch is chicken soup, rolls, manicotti and green beans,with peaches for dessert. To avoid confusion, patients eachget just one utensil to eat with. Some patients sing along totapes of old favorite songs.   After a rest period, health specialist Florence Meyers,the mother of seven and the widow of an Alzheimer's victim,leads an exercise period. Next comes dance time, and Ana, whohas seemed quite reserved, seizes two bright scarves providedfor the occasion and sashays about, swiveling her hips. Billasks Ms. Egan, the staff nurse, to dance.   ---   The Copsa Institute's day-hospital program was the firstin New Jersey when it opened in 1982, and it has been a modeland training ground for many of the 32 such facilities thathave since sprung up in the state. While day-care facilitiesremain relatively rare in the U.S., people in the fieldpredict they will be commonplace in the next century as theranks of the elderly swell, to 68 million people over 65 inthe year 2040, from 30 million now.   As this session comes to a close, the blinds are drawn toprevent pandemonium at the sight of arriving relatives. Ms.Berbig leads the group in imitating chickens -- pressinghands to nose to form a beak, flapping elbows like wings andsquawking. There's more singing and dancing, then &quot;wrap-up&quot;time, a review of the day's activities.   As people pick up the patients for the night, FlorenceJordan -- the woman who lives with her 23-year-old daughterChris -- struggles to get into her coat. Though her left armis in one sleeve and Ms. Berbig is holding the other for her,she gropes around the back of her neck, searching in vain forthe opening. After several seconds, Ms. Berbig guides herhand.   ---   One of the biggest blows to Florence's son and daughters,they say, has been the abandonment of the family by some oftheir close relatives. Once, desperate for assistance, &quot;wewent begging&quot; to them for a few hours of their time, saysFlorence's 26-year-old daughter Kathy Ciacciarelli, &quot;but theydidn't want to get involved.&quot; She, like her brother andsister, is active in her mother's care.   There have been some pleasant surprises, too. FlorenceJordan's former husband, now remarried, helps out with money.The Jordans' children are closer to one another now becauseof their 54-year-old mother's situation. And while they nolonger can have sensible conversations with her, they try tomake sure she enjoys herself. She likes going to movies,taking walks and eating Chinese food.   As a guest is about to leave Mrs. Jordan's apartment,Jimmy, a thick-chested former football player, walks over tohis mother and gives her a squeeze. &quot;Hey, Ma, how youfeeling?&quot; he asks, grinning. She beams.   ---   Florence Jordan's own parents are still living. Afterspending a day at their apartment in a high-rise for theelderly in Sayreville, she is eager to go home. Once she hasleft, her father, 84-year-old Joe Colombo, shakes his head.&quot;As soon as she got here this morning, she wanted to leave,&quot;he says.   Mr. Colombo used to take his daughter for walks, but herecently had heart surgery and he has arthritis. When he andhis 86-year-old wife, Vera, discuss their daughter, onequestion keeps coming up: Why? &quot;Sometimes I ask God why hedid this,&quot; Mr. Colombo says, adding quickly that he doesn'tblame God. Vera rejects any suggestion that the disease wasinherited. Joe seems to disagree: &quot;It could be a little genethat snuck in,&quot; he says.   Mrs. Colombo brightens when she remembers Florence as alittle girl. &quot;She had eyelashes that turned way up,&quot; shesays. &quot;She was always running.&quot;   ---   It is late afternoon, and Jule Sloane, a jauntygrandmother in plaid slacks, heavy silver earrings andwire-rimmed glasses, pours glasses of chilled white wine forherself and a guest at her home in Summit.   As her 72-year-old husband, John, a grandson of ThomasEdison, mutters on a couch nearby, she speaks about the happyyears of her marriage. Mr. Sloane, a Yale graduate, went towar after they were married in 1942. When he returned fromhis service in England, Italy and North Africa, he took a jobas a writer for a house organ at Westinghouse Electric Corp.,translating scientific jargon &quot;into plain English,&quot; she says.   &quot;He was a quiet guy,&quot; she says. &quot;He never looked rushed.But everything always got done. He was very funny in a dryway, always punning.&quot;   She talks about her husband's deteriorating mental stateand the loss of his personality. His condition has beendescribed as &quot;senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type,&quot; butMrs. Sloane believes his illness has been complicated bystrokes. He began to show signs of disorientation in theearly 1980s, forgetting what errands had brought him to town,for example. Recently, she has had to withdraw him from aday-care program because his behavior was becomingdisruptive; he was always trying to leave the place.   Mrs. Sloane observes: &quot;I don't say, `Why me?' I say, `Whyhim?'&quot; He peers at his wife, frowning, searching for words.He is a handsome man -- tall, slim, and nattily dressed in aplaid shirt and blue suspenders. His wife goes to him, giveshim a hug. &quot;It's OK, honey, now you just don't be upset,&quot; shesays, and kisses his cheek.   ---   At a spouse-support group meeting at the Piscatawaycenter, a dozen men and women ranging in age from mid-50s tolate 70s sit in a circle and talk about their anguish.   Once, they had dreamed of retirement as a reward for livesof hard work. Now, instead of traveling and spending timewith friends, they stay at home and feed and dress theirhusbands and wives. The fatigue is evident in their faces.The ailments of old age plague them. They are angry at whatthey see as government favoritism for the poor over themiddle class; they feel Alzheimer's disease, the nation's No.4 killer (after heart disease, cancer and stroke) gets shortshrift from the media. They wonder if they will ever enjoylife again.   One husband gets nods of understanding when he says he hasfantasies about asphyxiating himself and his wife by &quot;goinginto the garage and turning on the key&quot; to the ignition ofhis car. A wife says she has devised &quot;three ways&quot; to killherself.   A man named Gus says, &quot;I'm at the end of my rope.&quot; Hiswife is 60 years old but is &quot;going back to her childhood,when she was seven or eight,&quot; he says. &quot;Sometimes, she getsviolent.&quot; Roger says his wife can get &quot;kinda tough.&quot; He goeson: &quot;She might strike me, or throw water.&quot; Tears well up.Though seated, he is panting, nearly out of breath. &quot;I get alittle emotional,&quot; he says. &quot;I myself have emphysema. So it'sextremely difficult.&quot;   Other participants murmur their support. Here, people haveempathy.   They also offer practical, tough-minded advice. There is alively discussion about the best locks to use for foilingAlzheimer's patients' midnight wanderlust. Larry Benjamin,who was an advertising-makeup man for the New York TimesMagazine before he retired, has been caring for his wife forabout 15 years. He continues to feed her twice a day, thoughshe has been in a nursing home since 1988. Mr. Benjamin, whois 74, gently urges younger participants in the group not toget their hopes up about the possibilities of new drugs, andnot to look askance at restraining devices for agitateddementia victims. &quot;Restraint isn't cruel,&quot; he says. &quot;It's{just} a bit of netting. You have to modify your thinking onthis.&quot;   Several participants chastise Gus for letting his wife gethim into arguments he can't win. Gus says he keeps tellingher she will never find things she has &quot;lost&quot; because theydon't exist.   &quot;You're already in trouble,&quot; scolds Milton. &quot;You can neverwin by reasoning with an Alzheimer's patient.&quot; Several peopleurge Gus to bring his wife to the Piscataway day-care center,and they suggest ways of overcoming her resistance to theidea. One says he tricked his wife into such a move bytelling her they were going to church. By the time theyarrived, she had forgotten the purpose of the trip.   Everyone laughs. The horror stories have their comic side.The laughter is easy because families see their ownexperience in the stories others tell. They laugh when Ana,who married her husband 11 years ago, in late middle age,describes how he poured Coke into a jar of grated cheese andstarted drinking it. They laugh when Gus says he has read allthe handbooks on coping with Alzheimer's patients but,unfortunately, &quot;the books say one thing, and my wife doesanother.&quot;   ---   Legal-services attorney Janice Chapin tells a crowded roomof dementia victims' families how to cope with Medicaid rulesthat can gobble up all of one's savings in return for a placein a nursing home. One recommendation: Set up a big burialaccount free from the state's grasp, bequeath the unusedportion to yourself or your children, and order a cheapfuneral when the time comes.   No, she tells a gnarled old man, the eligibilityinformation he got from a Medicaid office was wrong. Abureaucrat's mistake might have cost him thousands ofdollars.   The questions at the lecture organized by the CopsaInstitute go into the nuts and bolts of nursing-homeplacement and reimbursement. Standing chalk in hand next to ablackboard, Ms. Chapin explains that the assets, but not theearnings, of a healthy spouse can disqualify a patient fromMedicaid. But, she says, some assets, like a home in whichthe healthy spouse is living, can't be touched.   &quot;So what am I going to do?&quot; asks one exasperated member ofthe audience. &quot;Bury the money in the cellar?&quot;   Ms. Chapin replies: &quot;Basically, you've got to spend itall.&quot; Instead of putting it in the bank, she suggests, whynot &quot;buy a new roof for your house?&quot;   ---   William E. Reichman, the youthful, bearded medicaldirector of the Copsa Institute, sits at his cluttered deskand talks about Alzheimer's. Dr. Reichman describes it as a&quot;familial disorder.&quot; As a researcher, he seeks more-effectivedrugs to treat the disease, especially the hallucinations andpsychotic behavior relatives find even more upsetting thanthe memory loss. (Sample: the impostor syndrome, in which aspouse becomes a feared intruder.) As a psychiatrist, Dr.Reichman tries to guide families &quot;through a grieving process&quot;as Alzheimer's eats away at a loved one's very identity.   The day center, he says, gives participants &quot;their peerrelationships back.&quot; The elaborate structure of theactivities is crucial; long after Alzheimer's patients havelost reasoning power, they still seem to know how to act infamiliar situations.   Most Friday afternoons, Dr. Reichman examines dementiavictims in nursing homes where few other psychiatristsventure. Consultations are difficult, and the state is stingyabout paying doctors.   &quot;As soon as I show my face in a nursing home to see Mrs.X, the nurses start grabbing me, begging me to look atpatients Y and Z,&quot; Dr. Reichman says.   He tries to maintain a physician's professional detachmentfrom the suffering he sees, but it isn't always possible.&quot;Some families are remarkably powerful at pulling you in,&quot; hesays. In California, where he got his early training atUCLA's Neuropsychiatric Institute, the teen-age son of anAlzheimer's patient interviewed him for a school report. Dr.Reichman got a copy of the essay in the mail as a gift, andhe keeps it in his office. He reads excerpts:   &quot;My father was a very bright man. He worked on developingthe space shuttle. . . . What was once a sweet, kind, caringpersonality is now almost completely gone. . . . There isn'ta moment of any day that he isn't on my mind. . . . Fromwriting this paper, I also learned to deal with my ownfeelings. . . . I thought I was going to have a nervousbreakdown.&quot;   ---   In a nursing home a few miles' drive from Piscataway, Marylies sedated and stretched out on a special restraining&quot;geri-chair&quot; in her room, a towel wrapped around a swollenleft leg. Mary, who is about 80, suffers from Alzheimer's andfrom an injury to her head sustained in a car accident. Shehabitually becomes agitated at about this time -- 5:30 in theafternoon -- but today she is still asleep. A nurse's aidebends over her, shouting, &quot;Mary, wake up, the doctor's here.&quot;Mary stirs. &quot;Oh, God,&quot; she moans.   This is Alzheimer's in its last, worst stages. Typically,the disease strikes people in their 70s and 80s -- though themiddle-aged aren't immune -- and it results in death, oftenfrom pneumonia or other infections, five to 20 years afterits onset.   Dr. Reichman examines Mary. He asks her to look at him,then loudly repeats the request. She stares vacantly. Anurse, Merlene, smoothes Mary's hair and gives her a hug.&quot;How are you today, honey?&quot; she coos.   Leaving the room, the doctor explains that the trick is tohit the &quot;exact balance&quot; of all the drugs Mary is taking.Then, she would be able to sleep well yet stay composed inher waking hours. But administering proper dosages is tricky:Sloppy record-keeping, often by poorly trained oroverburdened nurses with little or no guidance frompsychiatrists, is a big problem in nursing homes.   In a tiny alcove, Dr. Reichman pores over log books andbarks questions at nervous personnel about patients'reactions to medications.   ---   There are some slivers of light in the Alzheimer'snightmare.   There is Florence Meyers. Nursing her husband in the late1970s and early '80s while raising seven children was sophysically strenuous, she says, that when she finally checkedher husband into a clinic and got a few days' respite, &quot;ithit me like a truck. My entire body ached from all thatrelease.&quot; Today, as a health specialist at the Piscatawayfacility, she lights up the faces of the patients with herjoshing, her hugs and an occasional tickle.   There is Tom Johnson, Copsa's clinical coordinator, whoseuncle and aunt had Alzheimer's and who acknowledges that heis &quot;obsessed&quot; about his own prospects of getting the disease.Many of the sons and daughters of patients, he says, wonderif they are condemned by their genes to their parents' fate.Researchers say only about one in six patients suffer thevariety of Alzheimer's that runs in families. Mr. Johnsonfeels that counseling gives people hope. &quot;I see that lifegoes on, the world doesn't cave in,&quot; he says. &quot;In thenarcissism of being well, we say, `Oh, God, I'd kill myself.'But in the thick of the disease, people cope. They suffer --but they cope.&quot; What strikes him is the stubborn lovefamilies show victims even in the final stages of Alzheimer'sdisease.   There is Carmine Cascella, a retired factoryproduction-department superintendent who does volunteer workat the institute two afternoons a week for the satisfactionof thinking &quot;maybe I've made {patients} a little happier.&quot; Hesays that &quot;after a while, they sort of recognize you. Youdance with them. You sing with them.&quot; Before he came to Copsa2 1/2 years ago, he had no idea what Alzheimer's was. Givinga helping hand, he says, &quot;is like I'm giving something back&quot;to society.   There is Mildred Potenza, who organized a grass-rootsorganization in the late 1970s to lobby the state to set upthe Copsa program. Her duties as the institute'sresource-center coordinator include fielding questions fromall over New Jersey on an 800 line. She often talks toworried relatives &quot;for half an hour or more. Even if I can'toffer anything concrete, they feel much better.&quot;   Finally, there are all the exhausted husbands, wives andchildren whose love shines through. The wife of a formerschoolteacher, married to him for nearly 60 years, andherself once a professional musician, struggles to rememberhow many children she has. Finally, she stammers, &quot;Three, notwo boys . . . and a girl.&quot; He gently corrects her: &quot;No,honey, it's two girls and a boy. You're doing just fine.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>