<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910211-0111</DOCNO><DOCID>910211-0111.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   A Tale of Two Monetary Policies in Conflict   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>02/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)BANKS (BNK)FORECASTS AND ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)</IN><LP>   George Bush's punishment of Saddam Hussein is winning theU.S. renewed respect, and even some admiration, in theworld's democracies. But his &quot;domestic&quot; policies are becominga subject of dismay among European and Asian economists.   These people don't acknowledge that any U.S. policy can bepurely &quot;domestic,&quot; even if it deals with programs asrestricted to Americans as medical insurance or agriculturalsubsidies. The U.S., with its $5.5 trillion economy and its$1.45 trillion federal budget, is simply too big for U.S.policy errors, domestic or foreign, to be treated lightly.Such failures invariably knock down the value of the U.S.dollar, a currency that governments, corporations andindividuals around the world use widely for transactions andas a store of value. There is an immediate pocketbook impacton all continents.</LP><TEXT>   What Europeans see is another American president fallingvictim to the temptations of Keynesianism -- orneo-Keynesianism for the economic purists. What made LordKeynes the darling of politicians world-wide was his theorythat vigorous government spending could counter recession.The politicians interpreted &quot;demand management&quot; to mean thatthe thing they like to do most, spend someone else's money,is good economics all the time, not just during recessions.Politically motivated profligacy finally had intellectualrespectability.   George Bush's fiscal 1992 budget, which will push federalspending up to its highest percentage of gross nationalproduct since World War II, is the very model of a Keynesianbudget. Unable to resist the spending pressures of Congress,the administration is opportunistically calling the sharprise in federal spending that is now well under way anantidote for recession. This despite a historical recordclearly showing that when governments waste economicresources on bureaucracy and subsidies -- which is where alot of Bush administration money will go -- economies do notgain but suffer. Either taxpayers or lenders have to financethe waste, and the diversion of resources to nonproductiveuses only aggravates recession. Thus, it was no surprise thatthe U.S. dollar -- already weak -- took another dive on thebudget news. Central banks were forced to conduct yet anotherdollar rescue effort last week.   Compounding the overseas chagrin is the administration'sseeming belief that the rest of the world should help financeits excesses, even at the risk of world-wide inflation. Theweek before the budget announcement, that belief produced arift between David Mulford, U.S. Treasury undersecretary forinternational affairs, and Karl Otto Poehl, president ofEurope's central bank (more precisely known as the GermanBundesbank).   The U.S. wanted the Bundesbank to lower short-terminterest rates in harmony with a rate cut by the U.S. FederalReserve. President Poehl instead did the opposite. On Jan.31, Germany raised its discount rate to banks by a halfpoint, to 6.5%, similarly increasing the key Lombard rate ahalf point to 9%. When the Fed went ahead the next day andcut the U.S. discount rate by a half point to 6%, the marketeffect was easily predictable. The dollar, already weak,began a determined plunge, reaching record lows around 1.45deutsche marks despite central bank efforts to arrest itsfall.   At a press conference Jan. 31, President Poehl hadexplained the Bundesbank action by saying that his primaryresponsibility was to protect Germans from the inflationarypressures generated by the need to finance eastern Germany'sreconstruction and other demands. The pressure of those needsis reflected in the fact that Germany last October became anet importer of capital after having been a major exporterfor several years previous. Mr. Poehl also noted that themark had become generally accepted as the anchor currency ofthe 10-nation European Monetary System (EMS) and that hefeels a responsibility to maintain the soundness of thatsystem as well.   John Major of Britain, who joined with Margaret Thatcherin linking the pound to the EMS last fall, was underpolitical pressure last week to devalue to combat a Britishrecession, but he seemed to be inclined to stick to hisanti-inflation fight as well.   It should be said that from a strictly U.S. perspective, acut in the Fed discount rate seemed justified. Although someforecasters are predicting that U.S. inflation will riseabove 5% this year from last year's 4.5%, recessionarysignals are more worrisome to U.S. policy makers. Auto salestook a dive in late January. Real estate prices have droppedsharply in some places. Unemployment is inching upward. TheU.S. financial sector is shaky.   Inflation signals, by contrast, are more confusing.Although the dollar is sagging against major currencies, thedollar price of gold is relatively steady and dollar pricesof many other commodities are soft. Moreover, both stock andbond prices in the U.S. rallied on the Fed's discount-ratecut, further bolstering the idea that the Fed had made theright move. Interestingly, long-term bond prices in Germanyalso rallied on the Bundesbank's rate increase, suggestingthat it had made the right move as well.   But aside from the short-term response, the idea that theFed alone can pull the U.S. out of recession doesn't get muchsupport from the historical record. In his budget message,U.S. Budget Director Richard Darman chose to blame therecession in part on &quot;monetary policy,&quot; neatly sidesteppingany blame himself. Certainly tight money can cause arecession -- sometimes with quite beneficial long-termresults, as was the case after the 1981-82 U.S. recession.But whether a central bank, merely by supplying liquidity,can cure a recession is more problematical. A lot depends onthe total environment.   The U.S. environment -- with government waste,protectionism, taxation and punitive regulation once more onthe rise -- is no longer especially friendly towardrisk-taking and growth. If the only effect of supplyinggreater liquidity is to push the economy into stagflation,the unhappy pattern of the 1970s will repeat itself.   What the Poehl rebuff signifies is a possibility thatEurope will be increasingly prepared to go its own way inmatters of economic policy. Talk of policy &quot;harmonization&quot; inthe forums of the &quot;Group of Seven&quot; largest industrial nationsseems ever more removed from reality. The breakdown of theGATT talks on freer international commerce last fall was onemanifestation of an unwillingness to accept U.S. economicleadership. The result was that an opportunity to provide agenuine stimulus to the international economy was at bestdelayed, and perhaps missed altogether.   The U.S. may well be sacrificing its economic leadershipeven while it is exercising political leadership. After thedebacles of the 1970s, Ronald Reagan restored the U.S.economy and the U.S. leadership role. The next time around,it may not be so easy.</TEXT></DOC>