<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900917-0051</DOCNO><DOCID>900917-0051.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Court Rules Company Lawyers   Can Sue Over Retaliatory Firings   ----   By Ellen Joan Pollock and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9</SO><CO>   GDV TIC</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SECURITIES (SCR)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)FULL LINE INSURANCE (INF)INSURANCE (INS)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)</IN><GV>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   An appeals court in Illinois has ruled that in-houselawyers can sue companies that have fired them in retaliationfor giving unwanted advice.   The ruling, by the Appellate Court of Illinois, isbelieved to be among the first to give staff lawyers theright to sue employers for retaliatory discharge. The casehad been closely watched by in-house lawyers and legal ethicsexperts because courts in Illinois and Texas had ruled thatin-house lawyers could not sue employers.</LP><TEXT>   The case involves Roger J. Balla, an in-house lawyer firedin 1985 by Gambro Inc., a distributor of kidney dialysisequipment. Before he was fired, Mr. Balla had told thecompany that a shipment of dialyzers was &quot;misbranded and/oradulterated,&quot; according to the court opinion.   A lower court ruled that Mr. Balla could not pursue hisretaliatory discharge claim against Gambro, now based inLakewood, Colo., its German parent and Swedish affiliate. Butthe appeals court said that Mr. Balla could pursue his claim,even though other courts had refused to allow in-houseattorneys to sue on such grounds &quot;fearing that the attorneyswould breach their fiduciary duty by disclosing theirclient's confidential information.&quot;   &quot;The sanctity of the attorney-client privilege is not anabsolute bar to disclosure,&quot; the court ruled, when &quot;publicpolicies&quot; or &quot;serious bodily harm&quot; are at stake.   Mr. Balla's suit against Gambro will be heard by a lowercourt.   Arthur Sternberg, the Chicago lawyer who representsGambro, said his client will seek to appeal. He said thedecision makes in-house lawyers &quot;second-class citizens&quot;because it will encourage companies to limit their &quot;use ofin-house attorneys to more mundane types of tasks rather thanputting them in sensitive situations.&quot; He said the dialyzerswere &quot;not defective in any way.&quot;   Alan O. Amos, the Chicago lawyer for Mr. Balla, said thedecision shows that in-house lawyers have &quot;the same rightsthat any other employee would have under the samecircumstances.&quot; He said the decision will discouragecompanies from hiding behind the attorney-client privilege.   The American Corporate Counsel Association (ACCA), a tradegroup, has taken the position that in-house lawyers shouldnot be able to sue their employers, according to board memberLawrence A. Salibra. But ACCA will consider the issue againat its annual meeting in November, said Mr. Salibra, seniorcounsel at Alcan Aluminium Corp.   ---   SEC DROPS BID for spot on Drexel creditors' committee.   Instead, the Securities and Exchange Commission hasaligned itself with a court-sanctioned group ofsecurities-litigation claimants suing Drexel Burnham LambertGroup Inc.   The SEC moved to join the creditors' committee soon afterDrexel filed for bankruptcy-law protection on Feb. 13. TheSEC is owed $150 million as part of Drexel's settlement ofcharges against the company last year. Although that claimmakes the SEC one of Drexel's largest creditors, the motionsparked controversy because of a dispute over whetherbankruptcy law allowed a regulatory agency to serve in thatrole.   Now, however, the SEC says its interests are betterrepresented through the newly formed securities litigationclaimants group. The group will negotiate with Drexel and thecreditors' committee over how to provide for litigationclaims in the company's bankruptcy reorganization plan. Morethan 400 suits are pending against Drexel.   The group includes the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.,which is expected to file a huge claim against Drexelstemming from the failure of several savings and loans. Thegroup also represents investors who have filed class-actionsuits against Drexel and Michael Milken, the company's formerjunk-bond chief. The group, which isn't an officialbankruptcy committee, was approved in a court order by U.S.Bankruptcy Judge Howard Buschman III last month.   Richard Kirby, the SEC's senior litigation counsel, saidthe agency joined the litigation group because of theimportance of addressing the eventual claims that Drexel willhave to pay. The SEC's $150 million claim is meant to bedistributed to investors who were hurt by alleged wrongdoingby Drexel. In a reorganization plan for Drexel, the moneycould be combined with other payments by Drexel to set up afund for litigation claimants.   &quot;This case can't progress toward a feasible reorganizationplan&quot; until an estimate is reached on the litigation claims,Mr. Kirby said.   In court filings, Drexel and the creditors' committeeagreed to negotiate with the litigation group to develop aprocess for estimating the claims. They also said they willinclude the group in negotiating a reorganization proposal.   ---   CRAVATH HAS LOST General Development Corp. as a client.   Cravath Swaine andamp; Moore, a New York law firm, and thetroubled Miami real-estate developer said the parting of wayswas mutual and had been planned since the spring. In the 13months ended April 30, the company paid Cravath $4.8 million,the law firm said.   General Development was indicted in March on federalfelony charges of defrauding thousands of home buyers and wassubsequently placed in Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings.Some critics, including Miami Beach attorney Paul Steinberg,who represents certain General Development shareholders,assert that Cravath ought to be held liable for advisingGeneral Development that its marketing practices were legaland sound.   Meanwhile, two General Development directors said theywill call for an independent review of Cravath's legalrepresentation to assess whether the law firm actedresponsibly. The directors -- Chairman Charles J. Simons andChesterfield Smith -- said they are not alleging impropriety,but rather feel an independent investigation is a soundfiduciary move in light of criticism of Cravath.   Ronald Rolfe, a Cravath partner, said &quot;We think Cravathhas no liability or potential liability at all.&quot; Paul Dodyk,who was Cravath's lead counsel for the company, declined tocomment.   Mr. Smith, whose Miami law firm, Holland andamp; Knight, isslated to succeed Cravath as lead counsel, said &quot;it is in theinterest of all concerned to ascertain if the allegations aresubstantial or insubstantial.&quot; The company's board hasn't yetformally considered an independent inquiry, which wouldreview the roles of all involved parties -- not just Cravath,Mr. Simons said.   General Development had a close relationship with Cravath;its former chairman, David F. Brown, who is facing federalfraud charges, was a former associate at the firm and thenbecame general counsel to City Investing, a Cravath client,before going to General Development.   Cravath will continue representing the company in threematters, it said.   ---   STATE JUDGE REJECTS ethics charges against a chemicalfirm's lawyers.   Travelers Indemnity Co. of Hartford had alleged thatlawyers for Stauffer Chemical Co. tried to prevent potentialwitnesses from testifying in a suit concerning who should payfor a cleanup of toxic waste.   The company named in the suit is now a unit of ICIAmericas Inc., of Wilmington, Del., and is called StaufferManagement Co. A company currently called Stauffer ChemicalCo. is not involved.   The Travelers Corp. unit, a plaintiff, alleged Staufferlawyers violated ethics rules when they sent letters urgingformer employees to call Stauffer lawyers at the Wilmingtonlaw firm of Morris, Nichols, Arsht andamp; Tunnell, the Washingtonlaw firm of Kirkpatrick andamp; Lockhart, or the Philadelphia lawfirm of Morgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius if they were contacted by theinsurance companies.   In a ruling last week, Judge Vincent J. Poppiti ofWilmington wrote that Travelers failed to prove that theletters prevented the insurer from obtaining information thatwould otherwise be available. He said he would refer thematter to counsel for a lawyers' disciplinary board.Stauffer's lawyers declined to comment.   In a separate order, Judge Poppiti wrote that Jeffrey A.Januzzo and Pamela G. Ostrager, lawyers at the New York firmof Coudert Brothers, which is representing Travelers, hadmisled him about the practices of investigators working onbehalf of the insurer. Stauffer had alleged that theinvestigators failed to properly identify themselves toformer employees. The judge terminated the lawyers' right toappear before the court.   The Coudert lawyers declined to comment. In a preparedstatement, Mark Lebow, head of Coudert's litigationdepartment, said, &quot;Two of the most respected ethics expertsin this country, Professor Stephen Gillers of New YorkUniversity and Professor Geoffrey Hazard of Yale University,filed affidavits with the Delaware court attesting that theconduct of the Coudert Brothers lawyers was ethical.&quot; ATravelers spokesperson said they would appeal.   Judge Poppiti also ordered Travelers to turn over toStauffer any statements obtained from former Staufferemployees and said they would not be admissible at the trial,set for February 1991.   ---   PENNY-STOCK INVESTIGATION NETS three more F.D. Robertsofficers.   Three former owners of F.D. Roberts Securities Inc. lastweek pleaded guilty to federal felony charges in connectionwith their roles in a high-pressure penny-stock scam.   The U.S. Attorney's office in Newark obtained guilty pleasfrom Fred Galiardo, former F.D. Roberts board chairman; AlanLieb, former vice president in charge of trading and adirector; and John Perfetti, a former vice president incharge of trading and a director. The three are among the 25F.D. Roberts brokers and officers who have either pleadedguilty or been convicted on charges stemming from thetwo-year federal investigation.   The three pleaded guilty to federal racketeering,securities, mail fraud and wire fraud charges. Mr. Galiardoand Mr. Lieb face maximums of 20 years in prison and finesequal to twice their gain or their victims' loss andrestitution. Mr. Perfetti faces 10 years in prison and amaximum of $100 million in fines.   James Galdieri, Mr. Lieb's attorney, said that his client&quot;accepts full responsibility for his wrong act.&quot; A lawyer forMr. Perfetti declined to comment. Mr. Galiardo's lawyer couldnot be reached.   ---   CRIME BILL: The U.S. Senate passed an amendment sponsoredby U.S. Senator Arlen Specter (R., Pa.) and U.S. SenatorEdward Kennedy (D., Mass.) that would require allpost-secondary education institutions that receive federalaid to publish annual security reports that include thenumber of violent crimes committed against students. Thereport would be distributed to students and universityemployees. Prospective applicants could receive theinformation upon request. The drive to improve campussecurity has been spearheaded by Connie and Howard Clery, aBryn Mawr, Pa., couple whose daughter was murdered by afellow student at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa.   ---   Martha Brannigan in Atlanta and Amy Dockser Marcus in NewYork contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>