<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910225-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>910225-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Breakthrough:   U.S. Hails Invasion   Of Kuwait and Iraq   As `Dramatic Success'   ---   Troops Meet Little Resistance   But Allied Forces Face   Political, Military Risks   ---   Long Columns of Iraqi POWs   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP FREST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- With the ground battle to liberate Kuwaitproceeding with surprising speed and success, Bushadministration officials are optimistic the Persian Gulf warcan begin winding down in a matter of days.   The enormous ground offensive by U.S. Marines and Armytroops, at least during its first 24 hours, met only sporadicIraqi resistance as it quickly penetrated deep into Kuwaitand parts of Iraq, military officials said. According topress pool reports, U.S. Marines are already on the outskirtsof Kuwait City.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;So far, the offensive is progressing with dramaticsuccess,&quot; said a buoyant Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, commanderof U.S. forces. Similarly, while cautioning about theuncertainty of early battle reports, White House spokesmanMarlin Fitzwater said late yesterday that &quot;the operation hasbeen very successful.&quot; Amid reports that thousands of Iraqisoldiers had surrendered, administration aides were alsoupbeat in private, with one even talking of victory within aweek.   But even continued military success carries political anddiplomatic risks for President Bush and the U.S. The alliedrejection of the last-minute Soviet-led diplomatic effort toavoid the ground war enabled Mr. Bush to seize the initiativefrom an Iraq seemingly bent on dictating peace terms. But ithas offended some, especially in Arab countries, who nowbelieve that Mr. Bush's real objectives are the demise ofSaddam Hussein and the destruction of the Iraqi military, notjust the liberation of Kuwait.   &quot;Why have a war?&quot; asked Abdul Latif Shekar, a customsofficer in Egypt, a country participating in the attack onIraqi troops. &quot;I think the Gorbachev plan was a good one.Iraq was ready to withdraw.&quot; Now, he says, &quot;it looks like theWest just wants to destroy Iraq.&quot;   Despite the early indications of success, the alliedforces could still suffer greater casualties and becomebogged down militarily, especially when they encounter thetough Republican Guard, which is entrenched along theIraq-Kuwait border. If so, and if it appears that theAmerican goal actually is to destroy the Iraqi regime even atthe cost of badly hurting Iraqi society, &quot;the lingering costof that could be high,&quot; worries former national securityadviser Zbigniew Brzezinski. But, he notes, &quot;If everythingcrumbles totally, that won't be such a problem.&quot;   American officials staunchly disavow any interest indriving through Iraq toward Baghdad, either in pursuit ofSaddam Hussein himself or to set up some American-controlledgovernment inside Iraq. The Americans say their battle planscall for operating against forces inside Iraq as far north asthe city of Basra, about 30 miles north of Kuwait, but saythere isn't any plan to drive beyond that.   Indeed, French President Francois Mitterrand saidyesterday that some allied forces are crossing Iraqiterritory as part of a &quot;pincer&quot; movement to trap the soldiersoccupying Kuwait, but insisted, &quot;The purpose isn't to invadeIraqi territory, that's not the aim, that isn't the mandate.&quot;   Nevertheless, American officials over the weekend becamemore open in declaring that by destroying Saddam Hussein'smilitary machine they hope to destroy his regime -- a goallikely to be supported by most Americans.   In a pre-attack message, Lt. Gen. Walter Boomer, the topMarine in the Persian Gulf, told U.S. Marines that their goalis to &quot;restore {Kuwait} to its citizens.&quot; He went on to addthat &quot;in so doing you not only return a nation to its people,but you will destroy the war machine of a ruthless dictator.&quot;   Secretary of State James Baker said on ABC-TV's &quot;This WeekWith David Brinkley&quot; that the series of United Nationsresolutions condemning Iraq's invasion of Kuwait &quot;imply thatthe restoration of peace and stability in the Gulf would be aheck of a lot easier if he and that leadership were not inpower in Iraq.&quot;   Of course, it is still far too early to assume that themilitary situation on the ground will stay as smooth forallied forces as it appears to have been so far. Iraq stillhas the potential to cause significant problems by usingforces and weapons that don't yet seem fully engaged.   For one thing, Iraq still apparently hasn't unleashed itsstockpile of chemical weapons. Gen. Schwarzkopf said thatsome early reports that chemical weapons were used againstallied troops turned out to be &quot;bogus.&quot; Iraq is believed tohave the ability to deliver chemical weapons in artilleryshells or, perhaps, atop Soviet-made Frog7 missiles.   Perhaps more important, it appears that allied troopshaven't yet fully engaged Iraq's vaunted Republican Guard,which has been sitting just north of the Iraq-Kuwait borderand is considered the most potent element in the Iraqidefense. It remains to be seen how much damage the allied aircampaign was able to inflict on the Guard, and whetherPresident Hussein will commit his most valued troops to afight-to-the-death finish.   Certainly Saddam Hussein continues to implore his countryto fight on. &quot;Fight them,&quot; he urged Iraqis in a radioaddress. &quot;All Iraqis, fight them with all the power you have,and all struggle for everything.&quot;   American war planners have long assumed that the earlystage of the ground attack, in which American forces woulduse their speed to sweep around Iraqi defenses and theirstrength to punch through the relatively weak Iraqi frontline, would be the easiest part.   Despite these early successes, the mere fact that a groundcampaign has begun almost guarantees that the Bushadministration will face fresh problems growing out of themilitary situation. There are likely to be additionalAmerican prisoners of war taken, and there are signs thatPresident Hussein is taking Kuwaiti hostages. U.S. andKuwaiti officials say there are reports that large numbers ofcivilians from Kuwait City are being rounded up and held byIraqi troops, apparently either for use as human shields orfor use later in bargaining once the war is over.   President Bush's political argument for going to a groundwar has been strengthened by the growing stream of reports ofwanton Iraqi destruction inside Kuwait. U.S. officials saythat hundreds of Kuwaiti oil wells now may have been setafire. And Robert Gates, Mr. Bush's deputy national securityadviser, asserted in an interview on the Cable News Networkthat Iraqi troops have set fire to &quot;large sections&quot; of KuwaitCity.   Mr. Bush and his aides were leaning toward a militaryconclusion of the crisis even before the latest reports ofIraqi atrocities in Kuwait came to light. The president andhis top aides tentatively decided on Feb. 11 that a groundwar would be necessary. The decision was made after DefenseSecretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of theJoint Chiefs of Staff, returned from a visit with militarycommanders in Saudi Arabia, administration officials say.Then, a week or so ago, Gen. Schwarzkopf secretly pickedSaturday night as the optimal time to start the offensive.   The date was unaffected by the last-ditch Soviet peaceinitiative. The real problem with the Soviet proposals, U.S.officials now say, was that they all would have requiredlifting economic sanctions against Iraq. The Bushadministration considers the sanctions essential to keepingSaddam Hussein under control should he survive the war.   Mr. Bush forestalled further diplomatic maneuvering byissuing an ultimatum on behalf of the allies demanding thatIraq withdraw within a week, starting at noon Saturday.Administration aides said that the idea of the ultimatum wasGen. Powell's. He argued setting an explicit deadline forSaddam Hussein to break would, when it was broken, give theU.S. military a clear green light to proceed.   In setting out his final challenge to Saddam Hussein, Mr.Bush continued the intensive personal diplomacy he beganafter the invasion last August. After cabling world leadersabout his intention to give Saddam Hussein a final deadlineto exit Kuwait, he offered him a week to withdraw fully,instead of the four days he originally considered, because ofobjections from some European partners that four days seemedpunitive and unrealistic.   And when he and President Gorbachev spoke about thedecision in a talk lasting nearly an hour, the President tookpains to listen to what his counterpart had to say, althoughhe already had decided that the Soviet alternative to theallied deadline was unacceptable.   Finally, when Iraq failed to respond to the U.S.ultimatum, Mr. Bush let the ground offensive begin aspreviously planned Saturday night.   The attack was lightning quick, as allied forces punchedthrough tall sand berms on the border and pushed forward intoIraq and Kuwait. U.S. Marines were said to have breachedtroublesome mine fields along the Iraqi lines but Pentagonofficials said no amphibious assault on Kuwait's beaches hadbegun. Long columns of Iraqi prisoners of war could be seentrudging through the desert toward the allied rear. U.S.commanders said 5,500 Iraqi prisoners were taken in the firsthours of the ground war, though some military officials latersaid the total may have climbed above 8,000.   The U.S. hopes its troops will drive Iraqi forces out ofKuwait quickly, leaving much of Iraq's offensive militaryequipment destroyed or abandoned in Kuwait. It expects thattens of thousands of Iraqi soldiers will surrender to theU.S. and its allies over the next few days.   If the allies succeed, Saddam Hussein will have plungedhis country first into a fruitless eight-year-long waragainst Iran and then into a humiliating war against the U.S.and the allies to defend his conquest of Kuwait, leaving muchof his country's military establishment and moderninfrastructure in ruins.   Meanwhile, the U.S. hopes, economic sanctions and aninternational arms embargo will remain in effect until Iraqpays war reparations to Kuwait to cover war damages. Thatwould undermine any chances of rebuilding either Iraq or itsarmed forces in short order as long as Saddam Hussein remainsin power. The American hope is that someone from within Iraq,perhaps from the army's professional ranks, will step forwardand push Saddam Hussein aside so that the country can beginrecovering from the disaster.   Outside analysts think Saddam Hussein's position is indeedprecarious. &quot;I think frankly Saddam is finished, no matterwhat happens,&quot; says Christine Helms, a Middle East scholarwho has written extensively about Iraq. &quot;These guys simplydon't retire to condos over the Euphrates.&quot;   Despite the lack of any obvious successors, the Iraqileader's internal power base appeared to be narrowing evenbefore the war began. Some analysts say he appeared to berelying on a smaller and smaller circle of close advisers andrelatives. If that's true, the narrowing of his support wouldmake it easier for someone to push him aside from within.   Yet, paradoxically, the perception that the U.S. wants todestroy Iraq may increase Saddam Hussein's support within theIraqi military. And the U.S. now will face sharper questionsin the Arab world since it didn't back the peace proposalsworked out in Moscow. &quot;We looked to the United States, weexpected you to have the moral edge,&quot; says Nasser Tahboub, aJerusalem-born Jordanian who has an American wife and adoctorate in political science from Duke University. &quot;Now wesee that edge eroded. For me, it is a great tragedy. For thefirst time in history, the U.S. has gone to war with an Araband Muslim nation, and we know a peaceful solution was inreach.&quot;   ---   Geraldine Brooks in Amman, Jordan, and Craig Forman inCairo, Egypt, contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>