<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910830-0182</DOCNO><DOCID>910830-0182.</DOCID><HL>   The Yeltsin Military Strategy   ----   By Therese Raphael</HL><DATE>08/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6</SO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)SOVIET UNION (UR)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   For decades the Soviet military has been the country'suntouchable -- the institutional deity immune to budgetary orstructural tampering. No longer. In the wake of last week'sfailed coup, the institution that made the Soviet Union aworld-wide threat to peace is targeted for massiverestructuring.   Russian President Boris Yeltsin, having long promoted arestructuring of the military (and the KGB), now appears tobe in a position to carry out his plans. What may result is amore efficient military, but one that is less threatening tothe world.</LP><TEXT>   New Defense Minister Yevgeni Shaposhnikov and the militaryreformers will tackle a massive force with four million men,a huge nuclear and conventional arsenal, and chemical andbiological weapons. Western strategists have a few cluesabout what will result. Over a year ago, Vladimir Lopatin, aYeltsin deputy assistant, wrote a military reform planinitially doomed for the shelf. Western analysts believe itwill be revived, at least in part, now that Mr. Yeltsin hasemerged from the attempted coup as the country's strongestleader.   If the reforms envisioned in the Yeltsin plan succeed, therestructured armed forces will eventually be whollyprofessional -- volunteer rather than conscript -- with a lotfewer troops. For the first time in Soviet history, themilitary will be under the direction of democraticallyelected officials, who will exercise budget oversight,appoint personnel and approve military doctrine. Moreover,the military's enormous claim on resources will be reduced.   The first step is to remove the direct influence of theCommunist Party. Some 80% of Soviet officers hold partycards, according to one estimate, but that is less importantthan the key role Communist political commissars have playedin exercising party control over military units. The purge ofparty cells from the military and other Soviet institutionsalready has begun, spurred by Mr. Yeltsin. Most likely,significant numbers of high-ranking officers will be retiredand replaced by younger men who have demonstrated theirloyalty to Mr. Yeltsin and his military doctrines. Yesterday,the Supreme Soviet voted to suspend all Communist Partyactivities and freeze its finances.   Under the Yeltsin plan, the number of men under arms wouldbe pared to about 1.5 million. The remaining Soviet force,after conscripts and irredeemable Communists are released,would be two-tiered. The first tier would be a federal force,stationed in the Russian republic, with some units perhapsresembling the West's rapid deployment forces. The secondtier would comprise territorial defense troops under thecontrol of the interior ministries of the republics.   The military-industrial complex that has been steadilyexpanding and modernizing the Soviet arsenal will alsoundergo dramatic changes, Western analysts believe. It hasbeen an economy within an economy, relatively unrestricted inits claim on resources and Kremlin subsidies. MikhailGorbachev himself has caustically described it as the &quot;holyof holies.&quot;   President Gorbachev has promised repeatedly to undertake abear-sized program of &quot;conversiya&quot; -- refitting the defenseindustries for civilian production. Just before the G-7meeting last month he pledged to convert 80% of Sovietdefense factories. But such pledges are mere fancy without amarket economy to determine what goods and services consumerswant and to enforce efficient production.   With some 90% of the defense industry in Mr. Yeltsin'sRussian Federation, there is now the opportunity for a realconversion. This might entail selling some defense plants toprivate owners interested in using them to produce civiliangoods.   The strategic implications of the military restructuring,barring any political about-faces, are several. Quitepossibly, a smaller military would be less of an offensivethreat to territories outside the Soviet Union, although italmost certainly would be more effective, man for man, thantoday's demoralized, partly conscripted service. TheRussia-based regular army, with its naval, air force androcket components, presumably would be more defensivelyoriented than in the past, both in terms of its arsenal andits military doctrine. That might mean a reduction inoverseas commitments in, say, Cuba and Afghanistan.   The republics seeking independence want territorialintegrity agreements that would remove regular Russiantroops, which would create new buffer zones around most ofRussia's periphery. The agreement that Russia negotiatedyesterday with Ukraine is likely to form the basis of othersuch agreements.   Nevertheless, the Russian arsenal will continue to beformidable -- and nuclear. The democratic processes now underway could be undermined by volatile inter-republic orinter-ethnic conflicts.   The military &quot;will still retain considerable capabilitiesof interfering with the neighboring republics or states andtherefore is not a defensive force in the wrong hands,&quot;cautions Frank Gaffney, director of the Washington-basedCenter for Security Policy. &quot;Far more important than the sizeand composition of the Soviet military is the character ofthe government to which it is responsible.&quot;   One of the remaining questions -- now being giventremendous headline play in the West -- involves the futureof the 25,000 nuclear weapons, about 35% of which are outsidethe Russian republic. Messrs. Yeltsin and Gorbachev haveagreed that the major nuclear missile sites in northernKazakhstan, Ukraine and Byelorussia will be moved to theRussian republic. For their part, these republics have beenexplicit in their desire to be rid of the weapons. Smallertactical weapons stationed across the Soviet Union have agreater chance of falling into the wrong hands. Anothersalient issue will be determining the extent to whichbiological and chemical weapons have been protected fromdangerous leakages.   The changes in the military are now little more thanproposals. None of the plans initiated by Boris Yeltsin,although partly conceded to by Mr. Gorbachev, have yet beentranslated into real slashes in hardware and armed men.Western analysts are predicting the transition will takeabout 10 years, during which time there are significanthurdles to jump.   The first will be deciding whether this will be a Russianmilitary or an all-union one. Mr. Yeltsin is increasinglyassuming control over security policy, and appears to haveimportant support within the military itself, where someofficers like the idea of professionalizing the military andtaking it out of politics. But the central government is notquite dead yet, and the military remains under the titularcommand of Mr. Gorbachev.   Since neither Mr. Yeltsin nor Mr. Gorbachev appears towant the dissolution of the union, the regular forces willprobably remain Soviet in name even as they become moreRussian in composition and command. Releasing many thousandsof conscripts and officers from duty each year will poseproblems, as the repatriation of forces from Eastern Europehas foreshadowed. In an economy already rife with redundantlabor and low on foodstuffs and housing, the winter will be atough time to turn soldiers onto the streets.   Leashing the military-industrial complex will also be adifficult task. The problems associated with finding privateowners, dismissing unnecessary employees and retooling in theabsence of efficient supply channels or market-determineddemand mean that the process will be a long one. Further, thecountry is by no means rid of old-system beneficiariesunwilling to accept changes.   Nonetheless, if the democratic forces continue to carrythe momentum, changes will follow. During the transition,Western nations are faced with a unique opportunity toencourage the Soviet Union to stay on track with its militaryrestructuring. They cannot afford to lose the historic chanceto promote the democratization and diminution of a militarystill capable of enormous destruction. British Prime MinisterJohn Major has set a good example, wisely supporting theproposed changes but rejecting any significant economic aiduntil concrete force reductions are achieved.   If the envisioned changes are carried out fully andfaithfully, the new Soviet force could be less threatening,despite its weaponry and professionalism. For the first timethere is the possibility of a tamed Soviet military, free ofthe Communist Party and under the supervision of electedcivilians.   ---   Miss Raphael is a Brussels-based writer specializing inpolitical and military affairs.</TEXT></DOC>