<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910110-0132</DOCNO><DOCID>910110-0132.</DOCID><HL>   A Clear Win, Bearable Cost   ----   By Albert Wohlstetter and Fred Hoffman</HL><DATE>01/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   As Congress opens its debate on American policy towardIraq, it is important to recognize that the key problem inthe seemingly interminable war in Vietnam was a lack ofclarity in our objectives. In Iraq, the agreed-upon goal isthe demand announced on the day of the invasion by the WhiteHouse and the U.N. Security Council and repeated ever since:the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqiforces from Kuwait.   To achieve this objective, we proposed on this page inSeptember that Kuwait and its allies resume control and useof its territory, starting with its air space. It would befor Saddam, then, to choose war or peace. If he chose war,the coalition would seize and use air supremacy quickly toisolate, attack and encourage large-scale surrender of Iraqiequipment and ground forces. If Saddam agreed to withdrawbefore the coalition resumed control of Kuwaiti airspace, itwould then immediately take control of the air to startre-establishing Kuwait's authority and to monitor and ensurecomplete withdrawal.</LP><TEXT>   This option has clear advantages for the short and longrun over other alternatives in the public debate: (a)continuing to rely solely on an embargo of indeterminate --and perhaps forever indeterminable -- length, (b) animmediate ground assault on unweakened Iraqi divisions in andnear Kuwait or (c) an immediate use of strategic bombing todestroy all of Iraq's military power deep in its heartland.   In Vietnam, the lack of clear objectives ensured the warwould drag on, and also made it impossible to tell, for allthe &quot;body counts&quot; and other statistics, whether we weremaking any genuine progress toward achieving theseobjectives. From the beginning we did not try to stop theflow of arms and other supplies from North Vietnam to theViet Cong and the North Vietnamese forces in South Vietnam.We said we would use &quot;gradually increasing pressure&quot; to makeit &quot;unacceptably costly&quot; to the North Vietnamese to continuethat supply. But we had no way of knowing just what costs HoChi Minh, Le Duc Tho et al. were willing to see inflicted ontheir cadres who had made their way to South Vietnam. Ho andLe Duc Tho had a very high tolerance for pain inflicted ontheir subjects, much higher than our tolerance for the painof inflicting it. We found it &quot;unacceptably costly&quot; tocontinue, long before they did. That's what they expected.   That's also what Saddam expects. He has an almostunlimited contempt for the West's willingness to use force tooppose him. He will do anything he thinks he can get awaywith. He thought he could get away with seizing Kuwait, andhe still thinks so.   The real parallel with Vietnam may be the embargo,supported by leading figures in Congress and principalwitnesses before the Senate Armed Services Committee. Theembargo is intended to make it unacceptably costly to Saddamto continue to occupy Kuwait. However, it inflicts painprimarily on the civilian population, and Saddam has a veryhigh tolerance for pain inflicted on his civilian population,whether by outsiders or by himself. The embargo also reducesimports of supplies for the military forces, but Saddam willsee to it that the military will feel it much less than thecivil population. And the reduction in the efficiency of hismilitary force, like the increase in the efficiency of ours,would be important only if we actually use military forceagainst him. He doesn't believe we will.   On the other hand, members of the coalition are incurringcosts. There have been huge losses most obviously to theKuwaitis, in blood as well as treasure. There has beenenormous suffering as well as monetary loss on the part ofthe Palestinians who had been working and living in Kuwait,on the part of the Egyptians, Indians and many other ThirdWorld nationals who worked there and on countries like Turkeythat have lost large revenues from their oil pipeline andother trade. Also hurt have been the East European countriesmoving precariously toward capitalism and democracy,dependent on oil and trade with Iraq, and with large creditsearned in Iraq.   The democracies of the West will continue to incur avariety of costs, not least of which is the mischief done byfringe members of the coalition -- such as Syria in Lebanon,China in its prosecution of Tiananmen dissidents and theunion government in the Soviet Union in its use of the KGBand the army to suppress the movement toward independence andthe genuine rule of law. Saddam is likely to tolerate thepain the embargo will inflict primarily on his civil societylonger than the domestic and international coalition wouldbear the high political and economic costs of insisting onhis getting out without compromise.   No &quot;decent interval&quot; after Saddam's withdrawal willdisguise the attempt to appease him. Nor would it actuallyappease him, any more than Sudeten Czechoslovakia satedHitler's appetites. Saddam could back his next try with muchmore convincing threats of mass destruction.   ---   We have a strong interest in reducing Iraq's ability anddisposition to use weapons of mass destruction and othermilitary power to disturb the peace in the future and gaincontrol. Why not then take a strategic bombing offensiveaimed at destroying his military power as the immediate focusof coalition action against Saddam?   The first reason is that such an offensive would divertresources from the urgent objective of getting Saddam out ofKuwait swiftly and totally. It would delay us. A second,associated reason is that the job is much harder, especiallyif it's undertaken at the outset, than the task of reclaimingKuwait. It involves deeper penetrations of air defenses inIraq as well as Kuwait, including active defenses ofstrategic targets that are both denser and harder tosuppress. Look at a map: Kuwait is only 6,200 square miles,compared with more than 172,000 square miles of Iraq.   Third, there are better options for cutting off fromnational command the 550,000 or so troops that Saddam has inKuwait than by trying to find and destroy the NationalCommand Authority in Baghdad. Saddam boasts of hiselusiveness and probably compares favorably with Castro inthis respect, who is reputed to have at least 28 alternativeplaces to stay. Saddam almost surely would be someplace elseat the time of attack. Fourth, the same point applies inparticular to the problem of finding and destroying keymaterials for making nuclear weapons and other weapons ofmass destruction. Saddam's small lumps of highly enricheduranium are not likely to be found at any known places.Uranium and other critical materials and facilities can bereliably found only after the defection of a large part ofSaddam's army makes a change of government and an inquiry onthe spot feasible.   Fifth, the objective of destroying Saddam's military powersounds clear enough, but actually is troublingly vague. Doesit mean that we should destroy at the outset of this war anyfacilities that could support Iraqi military power now and inthe future, even if they have a double function to supportIraqi civil society? Members of the administration haveindicated, with good reason, that destroying Iraqi powercompletely -- if it could be done -- would only make it moredifficult to contain the power of Syria or a resurgent Iran.   Finally, there is the problem of destroying Iraq's civilsociety unintentionally. We want to neutralize Saddam'smilitary force. Saddam would prefer us to kill Iraqicivilians. If, as some in the public debate seem to propose,we were to try simply to use non-nuclear weapons in thefamiliar scenario for Mutual Assured Destruction, we wouldrun through a Bombing Encyclopedia of targets, many of themembedded in population centers. We'd be unlikely to get theNational Command Authority but very likely to get Baghdad. Ifwe attacked a biological weapons facility like Salman Paq(some 53 kilometers southeast of Baghdad and near the TigrisRiver and the population there), we might do a great deal ofunintended harm -- and not only to the local population. Adispersed cloud of anthrax might reach Iran or Turkey,depending on how the winds blew.   ---   The key is to present Saddam unequivocally with the fact-- to make it a fact -- that if he continues to defy thecoalition, it will use force. That's possible only if thecoalition has a clearly visible way of applying force withrapid and decisive success, and at tolerable costs. Even ouraccumulation of an enormous military force in the PersianGulf will not be enough to persuade Saddam, unless hebelieves that we will actually use it.   The putative experts appearing before Congress and writingnews analyses and op-ed pieces or repeating their positionendlessly in sound bites on CNN emphasize the huge number ofbody bags they believe are likely to be sent back to the U.S.from Iraq, especially if we try a frontal ground attack onunweakened forces in Iraqi divisions on the Kuwaiti border.They seem only to confirm Saddam's repeated judgment that theAmerican public won't accept the costs of using force in thePersian Gulf. And starting with a head-on ground assaultindeed would involve large and unnecessary costs in Americanlives.   The kernel of the proposal we make for an immediate focuson reclaiming Kuwait, beginning with the actual use by Kuwaitand its allies of its airspace, is to make it as certain aspossible that we will use force if Saddam challenges Kuwait'sresumption of control of its airspace or if he yields controlof the air, but not the ground. The details and some of theuncertainties may be shown in the form of a step-by-stepoutline:   The Kuwaitis would tell Saddam that: In accordance withU.N. Article 51 and Resolution 660, aircraft invited byKuwait and only such aircraft will be allowed to use theirsovereign air space. Saddam would be warned to keep hisfighters out of Kuwaiti airspace and Kuwaiti bases and not toturn on the radars of his surface-to-air missiles. If, facedwith overwhelming air power, Saddam nonetheless stays andchallenges the reclaiming of Kuwaiti airspace, then Iraqiaircraft, SAMs, SSMs, sensors, communications, filtercenters, etc. that could directly challenge control of Kuwait-- whether in Kuwait or Iraq -- would be disabled, jammed ordestroyed.   After establishing control of Kuwaiti airspace -- bydefault if Saddam doesn't resist, or by destruction ofcountervailing Iraqi air power if he does -- the coalitionwould give Saddam the opportunity to pull out his troopscompletely, leaving behind the tanks, armored personnelcarriers, SAMs and other weapons systems that he hasintroduced illegally into Kuwait. If he does not comply, thecoalition would begin the process of air attack on Iraqiground forces in Kuwait and their lines of resupply.   Such attacks would avoid Kuwait City and minimize damageto American, Kuwaiti and other foreign and Iraqi civilians byconcentrating on those targets, such as drinking water forIraqi troops, that can have immediate effect when disrupted.Shortages of drinking water for the troops have been reportedby defectors continually from near the start of the invasion.Even marginal further disruption to the inadequate andvulnerable system of distributing water to the divisions indeserts in or near Kuwait could encourage defection.   Air power could also be used to permit the introduction ofresistance and other special ground forces to monitor andreport Iraqi military movements, to cut lines of supply, toharass troops and, where feasible, to infiltrate populationcenters and to join other Kuwaiti resistance fighters inprotecting Kuwaiti and third country civilians. To deterSaddam's threat to set fires in the Kuwaiti oil fields, whichwould be very difficult to extinguish, the coalition would:(a) Make clear that if Saddam severely injured Kuwait's oilfields he might have to compensate the Kuwaitis by yieldingoil fields of his own; and (b) Air drop special forces toprotect these oil fields, which are in any case distant fromthe Kuwaiti metropolitan area.   At the same time, the coalition would beam voicebroadcasts by free Kuwaitis and free Iraqis, as well as otherArabs, directly at the Iraqi military forces in Kuwait. Thepurpose of such broadcasts should be to encourage defectionand honorable surrender to brother Arabs, i.e., Kuwaitis,Saudis, Egyptians, etc. Preparation by Arab members of thecoalition to handle such large-scale defections would requirea substantial but essential effort. (During Iraq's invasionof Iran, three times as many Iraqis surrendered as Iranians,especially when on land they had seized.) This process wouldcontinue until front-line divisions and reserves had beenweakened enough to permit the breakthrough (at reasonablecost) by coalition armor and other ground forces in order toreclaim and reoccupy Kuwaiti territory.   Kuwait City would be bypassed and isolated to avoiddoor-to-door fighting, which is costly both to civilians andto coalition military forces. Drinking water for Kuwait Citywould not be cut off. Neither would the water from Turkey orSyria to Iraq.   The encirclement and surrender of the huge force Iraq hasput into Kuwait would be an enormous military disaster forSaddam. One doesn't have to kill every soldier to destroy amilitary force. Moreover, the retaking of Kuwait and thedestruction of a good part of Iraq's combat aircraft, SAMs,etc., would facilitate further action against Iraq, includingselective air strikes if necessary. This military disaster toIraqi military forces would very likely bring change in theIraqi government.   In any case, whether or not it does bring down thegovernment, the coalition could continue the economicembargo, backed by the overwhelming force in place and by anow plainly credible threat to use force. With the mostwidely agreed-on immediate objective clearly achieved, thecoalition would be in a better position to press forcompensation for the damage done to Kuwait, a reduction inIraq's military power to a level that doesn't threaten itsneighbors and especially an end to its program for gettingthe ability to deliver, at short and long range, nuclear,biological and chemical weapons.   To achieve our short-term objective of getting Saddam outof Kuwait rapidly, completely and unconditionally, we shouldfocus our attention on targets that serve that task.Finishing that task will mean compelling the surrender ordestruction as an organized force of the huge armies Saddamhas assembled in and near Kuwait. That, in turn, can servethe larger and longer-term goal not only of ending Iraq'snuclear, biological and chemical programs and itspreponderance in the Gulf, but also the broader purpose ofpreventing any other power from gaining such a preponderance.   ---   Mr. Wohlstetter is president of Pan Heuristics, a researchgroup in Los Angeles, and a fellow of the Rand GraduateSchool. Mr. Hoffman consults on energy and defense mattersfor Pan Heuristics and other organizations.</TEXT></DOC>