<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920213-0022</DOCNO><DOCID>920213-0022.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Milbank Tweed Dismisses Lawyers   Kept On in 1980s as Non-Partners   ----   By Ellen Joan Pollock and Jonathan M. Moses   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/13/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)</IN><NS>LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Milbank, Tweed, Hadley andamp; McCloy, which encouraged lawyerswithout partnership potential to remain at the firm in the1980s, is now asking most such &quot;senior attorneys&quot; to leave.   The move, which could cost up to 30 lawyers their jobs, islikely to be copied by other large law firms feeling theeffects of the recession, legal-management specialists say.</LP><TEXT>   The senior-attorney program at the 450-lawyer New Yorkfirm was instituted as a way to keep associate lawyers at thefirm even though they had failed to reach the partnershipranks after eight years. Previously, lawyers who did not makepartner at that point were asked to leave.   Many law firms started such programs during the 1980s. Atthe time, the &quot;up-or-out&quot; tradition made little sense becauselaw firms were unable to recruit enough associates, andexperienced lawyers, who billed at near-partner rates, werein demand. The downturn in the economy, however, has leftmany law firms with too many lawyers performing too littlework.   Jacob J. Worenklein, a member of Milbank's executivecommittee, said that the decision to abolish the program waspart of the firm's efforts to become &quot;a lower cost providerof legal services.&quot; He said that clients would benefit byhaving more junior lawyers do their work at lower rates.Milbank said in a memo to its lawyers that the plan &quot;willincrease our competitiveness over the long term and enable usto offer improved training&quot; for young lawyers.   The policy change, which will take place over a two-yearperiod, is expected to affect nearly 30 salaried lawyers,most of whom will be given at least one year's notice.   Milbank, founded in 1866, is best known for itsfinancial-services work. The law firm's clients include theChase Manhattan Bank and the Rockefeller family, Citicorp'sCitibank and the Teachers Insurance andamp; Annuity Association ofAmerica.   Wendeen H. Eolis, a New York legal consultant, said thatsimilar changes are &quot;being seriously considered in betterthan half a dozen firms whose partners have consulted with meabout it.&quot; She said that other firms, without formallyabolishing non-partnership career tracks, have beendischarging lawyers from those ranks &quot;more aggressively than{from} among other groups of associates.&quot;   ---   BLACK EMPLOYEE is ordered removed from job inreverse-discrimination case.   Judge Joyce Hens Green of the federal trial court inWashington, D.C., issued the unusual order in the case of awoman denied a municipal job because she is white. The judgesaid that the black woman now holding the post ofadministrator of the D.C. Armory must be removed so the whiteplaintiff can receive a promotion she should have gotten.   More typically, a judge will order that an employer mustgive a victim of discrimination a job equivalent to the oneshe was improperly denied. But Judge Green said in herdecision earlier this week that &quot;the position of armorymanager is one-of-a-kind . . . one for which no equivalentvacancy could be projected.&quot; The armory houses the Washingtondetachment of the National Guard and is the site for variousentertainment events. It is supervised by city and NationalGuard officials.   Judge Green acknowledged that &quot;while it is certainly aharsh result that another person has to be displaced by thisremedy,&quot; the city and the guard &quot;are in the best position&quot; tomake sure that the displaced administrator receives atransfer or some other form of relief. Beverly Burke, alawyer for the city, said officials are considering anappeal, but she declined to comment on what might happen tothe incumbent armory manager, Mary Wilhoite.   A lawyer representing the victorious plaintiff, BettyUnderwood, said she intended to take the armory post eventhough she is 65 years old. Ms. Underwood is also seekinghundreds of thousands of dollars in back pay as part of herlawsuit.   Judge Green said in her opinion that Ms. Wilhoite receivedthe post in late 1981 because city officials wanted a blackperson to be hired. Ms. Underwood, a veteran armory employee,was clearly more qualified and deserved the job, Judge Greensaid.   (Underwood vs. D.C. Armory Board, U.S. District Court,Washington, D.C., Civ. Act. No. 83-2843)   ---   LAWYERS GET $795,000 in class action that provided nomoney for clients.   Justice Helen E. Freedman of New York State Supreme Court,a trial court, decided to award the fees to plaintiffs'lawyers despite written objections by some members of theplaintiffs' class.   The two-year-old litigation arose out of complaints' aboutcompound interest that brokerage firms charge on marginaccounts. The plaintiffs' lawyers argued that such a practicewas illegal under New York law. They sought damages and anorder prohibiting future compounding.   But after the litigation began, the New York Legislaturepassed a law specifically allowing the compounding ofinterest on the accounts. No longer able to ask for an orderprohibiting the practice, the plaintiffs' lawyers agreed to asettlement requiring that customers be notified of it. Theagreement also provided that the seven brokerage houses paymore than $1 million in legal fees to the lawyers.   Justice Freedman, in her decision issued last week,reduced the fees by about 25%, saying that while the qualityof legal work was high, she wasn't sure all of it wasnecessary. However, she rejected the arguments by about dozenclass members that the litigation was frivolous.   &quot;We had a super case until the legislature changed thelaw&quot; to allow compounding, said Mordecai Rosenfeld, one ofthe plaintiffs' lawyers.   ---   FREE DEFENSE must be provided by New Jersey lawyers, courtrules.   In a unanimous decision, the New Jersey Supreme Courtruled that all attorneys in private practice will be requiredto provide free legal services to criminal defendants intowns that don't employ salaried public defenders. The rulingcomes at a time when many state courts are consideringwhether to require attorneys to defend indigent clientswithout charge.   Last year, a Texas state district judge dismissed alawsuit that sought to force the State Bar of Texas torequire lawyers to provide a designated amount of free legalservice each year. Now New York State Chief Judge SolWachtler is mulling a proposal to require that all lawyersprovide free legal service on behalf of the poor andnot-for-profit organizations.   The New Jersey case involved the failure of the townshipof Delran to pay a lawyer who defended an indigent defendantin a drunken driving case. The lawyer, Allen S. Ferg, claimedin a lawsuit that the town had taken his property withoutjust compensation.   Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz, writing for the court,rejected the constitutional claim and ordered that, beginningMay 1, even attorneys who don't practice criminal law will beassigned municipal court cases in towns without publicdefenders.   Mr. Ferg said he won't appeal the decision. But he calledthe ruling a &quot;terrible solution&quot; because, he said, mostlawyers without a criminal specialty aren't skilled enough tooperate in criminal courts.   (Madden, Ferg et al. vs. Township of Delran, N.J. SupremeCourt, Feb. 10, 1992)   ---   POLLSTER PATRICK CADDELL owes lawyers $264,000 in fees,judge rules.   The default judgment by a federal judge in Manhattan comesdespite requests by the New Hampshire primary campaignmanager for former California Gov. Jerry Brown that the judgegive Mr. Caddell more time to respond to the suit filed lastOctober by the New York law firm Paul, Weiss, Rikind, Whartonandamp; Garrison.   Judge Thomas J. Griesa set a hearing for Feb. 18 todetermine if Mr. Caddell has to pay additional damages toPaul Weiss. Mr. Caddell may also have to pay interest. Mr.Caddell, who served as pollster to President Carter and hasworked in other Democratic presidential campaigns, did notreturn phone calls seeking comment.   Mr. Caddell had retained Paul Weiss to sue Doak andamp; ShrumInc., a political consulting firm, over fees earned on the1986 campaigns of California Sen. Alan Cranston andPennsylvania's Gov. Robert Casey, and others. The casesettled on Dec. 19, according to Gregory B. Craig, a lawyerin the Washington office of Williams andamp; Connolly, whorepresent Doak andamp; Shrum. Mr. Craig would not comment on theterms of the settlement.   At the time Paul Weiss sued seeking legal fees from Mr.Caddell, the pollster said the suit was the result of amisunderstanding. Paul Weiss, home to several leadingDemocratic lawyers, agreed to hold off on their suit for onemonth while they negotiated with their former client.   But in November, Paul Weiss began attempting to servesummonses on Mr. Caddell giving him until Jan. 6 to respond.On Jan. 6, according to court papers, Brown campaign aideMichael Borbeau requested and received an extension untilJanuary 14. Mr. Caddell's subsequent failure to respond tothe suit triggered the default judgment by Judge Griesa.   Reached at Mr. Brown's Manchester campaign office, Mr.Borbeau said he got involved in the case because Mr. Caddellis a friend of Mr. Brown's. The Brown campaign said that Mr.Caddell has no formal role in the Californian's 1992presidential bid.   ---   BASKETBALL PLAYERS to get more National BasketballAssociation money.   In a settlement with the players association, the NBAagreed to increase the players' share of NBA revenue by $50million to $60 million, covering the 1992-93 and 1993-94seasons. Each NBA team's share of the extra money will becalculated under a complex formula.   In their lawsuit, players had charged that the NBA usedaccounting gimmicks to exclude some revenue, including skyboxrentals, foreign broadcast rights and arena advertising, fromgross-revenue calculations. Players get a percentage of grossrevenue in return for accepting a cap on their salaries. Theplayers' total of the gross last year was $365 million.   The settlement, which was reached late last week, doesn'tmean the NBA is acknowledging liability, said a leaguespokesman. The league and players &quot;agreed to disagree&quot; fornow over whether skybox rentals and other income should bepart of gross revenue, said James W. Quinn, a New York lawyerfor the players association. The extra money will be drawnfrom a variety of sources, including licensing.</TEXT></DOC>