<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920211-0037</DOCNO><DOCID>920211-0037.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>02/11/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE WEST LAUNCHED an airlift of relief supplies to formerSoviet republics.   Secretary of State Baker, in Germany to oversee the startof the two-week airlift of food and medicine, said theflights symbolized Western nations' commitment to &quot;helpfreedom flourish in these new lands.&quot; At the same time, hesaid the U.S. and other industrialized nations may be calledon to provide billions of dollars to bolster the currenciesof the former republics. Baker said such a stabilization fundmight be needed to supplement hoped-for assistance from theIMF and World Bank.</LP><TEXT>   Russian bread prices will have to rise again to preventbakeries from going bankrupt, an industry official said,citing the high cost of ingredients.   ---   Mike Tyson was convicted by an Indianapolis jury of rapinga beauty pageant contestant who said he had lured her to hishotel room and overpowered her. The former world heavyweightboxing champion faces a maximum sentence of 60 years inprison.   ---   Sen. Tom Harkin won decisively in caucuses in Iowa, hishome state, as his rivals for the 1992 Democraticpresidential nomination skipped the contest in favor of nextweek's New Hampshire primary.   ---   Eight policemen were ambushed and killed in two separateattacks in Algeria. The assaults came on the first full dayof a state of emergency imposed by the military-backedleadership to crush Muslim fundamentalist agitation forelections. Six of the officers were shot dead in the Casbah,the ancient heart of Algiers.   ---   Maryland's highest court ruled that a state law limitinghow much juries can award accident victims for &quot;pain andsuffering&quot; is constitutional. The decision will likelybolster the efforts of other states to set similar caps.   ---   Pakistani soldiers set off landslides to block mountainroads and stop Muslim militants from marching intoIndian-held Kashmir. Both Pakistan and India said they fearedthat a military confrontation could be touched off by themarch, scheduled today as a show of support for Kashmirisfighting to secede from predominantly Hindu India.   ---   Venezuelan police stormed the offices of a leadingnewspaper, El Nacional, and ordered the presses to stop, thepaper's publisher said. Since last week's failed militarycoup, the government has censored or confiscated severalpublications in a bid to re-establish order. El Nacionalrecently had stepped up criticism of the government.   ---   An Atlas rocket was launched into space with a militarycommunications satellite intended to link the White Housewith U.S. forces overseas during nuclear attacks or othercrises. In peacetime, the $130 million satellite is to serveas a switchboard for calls between military commanders.   ---   Spain took the unprecedented step of filing criminalcomplaints against three Basque politicians in a crackdown onseparatist threats to disrupt the Summer Olympics and theSeville world's fair this spring. The complaint didn't chargethe men with specific terrorist attacks but rather accusedthem of aiding terrorism by threatening officials.   ---   Erich Mielke went on trial in Berlin for the 1931 murdersof two policemen. Mielke, 84, the chief of East Germany'ssecret police for more than three decades, arrived in awheelchair at the court as police held back hundreds ofonlookers. His lawyers had argued Mielke was too ill to betried, but doctors ruled otherwise.   ---   An Israeli cabinet minister attacked U.S. policiesconcerning an Israeli request for $10 billion in loanguarantees. Health Minister Olmert criticized Washington'sdemand that Israel curtail Jewish settlements in occupiedlands in exchange for receiving the guarantees, saying itwill be almost impossible to satisfy conditions set by U.S.officials.   ---   Japanese opposition parties hardened their demands for aparliamentary inquiry into scandals involving associates ofPrime Minister Miyazawa. There were hints that the rulingLiberal Democratic Party, after its loss in a Nara prefectureby-election Sunday, would agree to some of the demands.   ---   Haiti's military promoted a hard-liner believed to havebeen behind the September coup that ousted PresidentAristide, dashing Western hopes that the army would takeaction against the official, Francois Michel. InPort-au-Prince, the U.S. Coast Guard said Haitian officialsagreed to let refugees be brought back at a faster rate.   ---   South Africa's de Klerk accused the African NationalCongress of giving conflicting signals to foreign investorson economic policy. He said potential investors wereconcerned about contradictory ANC statements on loanrepayment and nationalization when democracy supplants thecurrent white minority government.   ---   Canadian provincial premiers asked Mulroney to revive theeconomy by boosting government spending. But the primeminister told them during a meeting in Ottawa that Canada'shuge national debt prevented him from taking such action.   ---   Died: Alex Haley, 70, author noted for books including thePulitzer Prize-winning &quot;Roots,&quot; a fictionalized saga of hisfamily's history, and &quot;The Autobiography of Malcolm X,&quot; inSeattle, of cardiac arrest. . . . William W. McQuilkin, 84,former chairman and president of Bausch andamp; Lomb, Thursday, inRochester, N.Y., of Alzheimer's disease.</TEXT></DOC>