<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900807-0098</DOCNO><DOCID>900807-0098.</DOCID><HL>   No Appeasement of Iraq   ----   By Karen Elliott House</HL><DATE>08/07/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   The world changed last week. A grandiose Middle Eastdictator took control -- not just of a neighboring sheikdom,but of the West's economic destiny in the 1990s.   Saddam Hussein, an insular leader who has had almost nocontact with the Western world, nonetheless appears to haveread the West's aversion to military involvement withunerring accuracy. Indeed, President Bush took four days evento suggest forcing the eviction of Iraqi invaders from Kuwait-- and to dispatch his secretary of defense to Saudi Arabiato seek &quot;permission&quot; to protect that country. The Iraqileader effectively has what he wants, for now -- the abilityto dictate world oil prices through the occupation orintimidation of major Middle East oil producers.</LP><TEXT>   The West is congratulating itself on a rare show ofrhetorical unity, is pledging boycotts of Iraqi-Kuwaiti oiland is making feeble noises about resisting Iraqi aggressionagainst &quot;vital interests&quot; in Saudi Arabia, the world'slargest repository of oil. But it all looks to be too littletoo late.   Our vital interest is not merely some particular piece ofMiddle East real estate. It is the free flow of oil attolerable prices. And that already has been lost. Regainingit is entirely possible -- but only with patience,persistence and, yes, military power. It is false comfort tobelieve that if Saddam Hussein stops at Kuwait, the problemhas been contained. Saddam Hussein certainly is smart enoughto know that he doesn't need to invade Saudi Arabia todictate its oil policy; his invasion of Kuwait and theabsence thus far of a serious Western response ensures thatSaudi King Fahd meekly will follow Iraq's line on oilproduction and pricing. Saddam is the wolf and Fahd thesheep. But it is Western consumers who will wind up beingslaughtered.   Just as Western leaders in the late 1930s deludedthemselves in believing that Adolf Hitler's ambitions couldbe bought off with one more little piece of Central Europe,the West today deludes itself in believing that SaddamHussein's ambitions end with Kuwait. Whether he chooses togobble another oil sheikdom now or later, the Iraqi leaderhas an ambition: to rule the Middle East through militarythreat, political intimidation and economic might. BarringWestern military action, little stands in his way. SaddamHussein used $50 billion in Kuwaiti and Saudi loans over thepast decade to buy weapons he now uses against Kuwait. Incoming years he will use Western money extorted for oil tobuy weapons he uses against future victims.   A West that can't seem to learn the military lessons ofMunich now at least has the possibility of reordering itsflabby political and economic priorities. To begin with,Americans ought to dispense with the illusion that we nowlive in a kinder, gentler world. A multi-polar world withregional aggressions unrestrained by superpower influence isgoing to be a more dangerous and violent age. The end of theCold War, in short, will be the beginning of an era of HotWars. One need only watch the Soviets flapping in rhetoricalchorus with the West over Iraq's aggression to realize thatsuperpower amity has little effect on regional enmity.   As the president and Congress continue to argue over thedegree to which the military budget should be slashed, allparties owe the American people a greater degree of honesty.Those seeking to decimate the defense budget ought to atleast grant that it will make America's response to actionslike Saddam Hussein's not just improbable but impossible.   Those, like the president and the Pentagon, who argue formaintaining military strength legitimately can be asked thequestion: Under what circumstances do you ever intend to usemilitary force? If the military's purpose is to protectAmerica's vital national interests, surely those amount tomore than rescuing a few score Americans in a Liberian coup.   Military analysts talk of the year it would take toassemble a ground defense of Saudi Arabia. What, one wonders,has the Pentagon been doing during the 1980s? If theproponents of maintaining military strength are correct --and they are -- then the U.S. response cannot be to wallow inthe experience of Vietnam. If $300 billion buys us a militarycapability that truly cannot be employed, then the U.S. wouldbe better off following the Japanese example and using thatsum to &quot;buy&quot; friends and bribe adversaries.   That's no policy for a great power. But the sad truth intoday's Washington is that the distinction between doves andhawks comes down to a choice between low-cost or high-costappeasement.   In the end, the question is this: what, if not the West'soil supplies, constitutes a vital national interest? Lest weforget, it was only 17 years ago that Americans fumed in longgas lines and the country believed itself hostage to Mideastoil producers' whims. In 1974, only about 12.3% of America'soil imports came from the OPEC countries. That figure is nowabout 28%.   It may not be part of Saddam Hussein's agenda to putAmericans back in the gas lines. But almost surely it iswithin his power. In a recent interview with this newspaper,the Iraqi leader stated that it was his policy to raise theprice of oil in order to acquire funds to rebuild hiswar-exhausted economy. He also said he wanted to acquiresophisticated weaponry sufficient at least to equal Israel.   Noting that the price of oil was around $14 a barrel, thepresident in late June said &quot;this does not represent half ofthe real value of the oil price in 1971. Who is responsiblefor this injustice? They are some of the Western states andsome of my friends in the region who do not see beyond theirnoses. . . . No one can rule out using the economy or therole of his economy to defend himself.&quot;   The West mustn't delude itself about Saddam Hussein'sgrand design: dominating oil prices is but a means todominating the Middle East. He is no Mideast madman to becowed by threats, bought off by bribes or grudginglytolerated as a Gadhafi-like nuisance. He is shrewd,calculating, relentless and ruthless. Most important, he isvain and amoral, unchecked by any internal or externalinhibitions. He is loyal only to himself. For instance, hisfriend and supporter, Jordan's King Hussein, who visitedBaghdad less than 24 hours before the Kuwaiti invasion, wasunwittingly dispatched home to call Mr. Bush and assure himSaddam Hussein had no intention of military action againstKuwait.   Over the next days and weeks the world is likely to seemore evidence of Saddam Hussein's calculating character.Almost certainly, he and his new Kuwaiti puppets willcontinue to round up foreigners -- Americans, British, French-- and threaten their lives if the West seeks to retaliate.Saddam understands, far better than Americans, the degree towhich Western policy can be made hostage to hostages.   Saddam may even eventually pull some substantial portionof his forces out of Kuwait. But the Iraqi leader plays forthe long term. He survived an eight-year war with Iranbecause he cares nothing for the human costs to his people.He will count on outlasting any short-term show of Westernresolve.   To a journalist who has spent substantial time in SaudiArabia over the past decade, the Saudi reaction in comingmonths is fully predictable -- as was Saudi unwillingnesseven to condemn strongly the invasion of a fraternalsheikdom. The Saudi royal family, which numbers some 4,000princes, has presided over its vast oil reserves by havingonly one policy -- an insurance policy that pays protectivepremiums to every tough-guy or terrorist in the region. It isa policy that hopes for the benefits of an American securityblanket without paying the political price of allowing anAmerican military presence in the kingdom. It is the samepolicy that the Kuwaitis pursued. If the Saudis persist, theyalmost surely will come to the same end.   The one safe assumption about Saudi reaction these days isthat the princes are fueling their private planes and furtherfeathering their overseas bank accounts, while whispering toSaddam Hussein that they will defer to him on oil prices.   For the U.S., the point is not to be deceived by SaddamHussein's cunning, deterred by Saudi Arabia's cowardice ordistracted by the inevitably vain search for unified Westernaction. America has simply to pursue its own interest -- thefree flow of oil at acceptable prices.   Saddam Hussein now controls oil prices. He must be forcedout of Kuwait and the U.S. must demonstrate its staying powerin the region to preclude future Iraqi intimidation of majorMideast oil producers. The U.S. must immediately institute anaval blockade of Iraq, which is the only way to enforce atleast a partially effective boycott of Iraqi-Kuwaiti oil. Afully effective embargo would require disrupting pipelinesthat carry the flow of Iraqi oil through Saudi Arabia andTurkey. These nations should act immediately to stop thoseflows. Anticipating this, Iraq has already sharply reducedthe flow of oil to Turkish pipelines. It is possible SaudiArabia might be persuaded by Defense Secretary Richard Cheneyto shut the flow through its country.   Surely, given American air and naval dominance, this levelof immediate military confrontation is feasible andsustainable. The U.S. is, after all, a nation that once waswilling to institute a naval blockade of Cuba in the face ofSoviet threats of nuclear Armageddon. It is a nation that waswilling to maintain a 15-month military airlift tobeleaguered Berlin. If the rest of the Western world wishesto assist the U.S. that is good -- but America can't make itsinterests hostage to the absence of a Western consensus.   It is of course true that an effective blockade of Iraqwould remove 20% of the world's oil production from themarket, driving prices higher and making a recession morelikely. So be it. American consumers are going to pay higherprices for their gasoline one way or another. Better to paythat price as a temporary byproduct of stopping SaddamHussein than to pay it in perpetual ransom to a tyrantholding the global economy hostage.   The time has come to present the Saudis with a simple andrealistic ultimatum: Accept an American military presenceimmediately or an Iraqi military domination down the road.Minimally, the Saudis ought to allow U.S. naval and airforces to use Saudi ports and airfields and to permit theprepositioning of materiel for a possible land defense of thekingdom.   If the Saudis decline U.S. help now, it will make theirown demise that much more likely. It also will make U.S.military intervention in the region that much more difficult-- but in the end, no less inevitable. For all of today'sflapping and dawdling, for all the concern over diplomaticniceties and military difficulties, the handwriting is on thewall. Whether this month, next year or somewhere in the1990s, this country will conclude that the world's oilsupplies and its own economic destiny simply cannot besubject to the whim of a single Middle East despot. The U.S.will have to act for its own self-preservation.   ---   Ms. House is vice president, international, of Dow Jones andamp;Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal.</TEXT></DOC>