<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900810-0108</DOCNO><DOCID>900810-0108.</DOCID><HL>   Real Estate (A Special Report): Troubled State   ---   Total Eclipse:   Arizona's Real Estate Has   Lost Its Place in the Sun   ----   By Charles McCoy</HL><DATE>08/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R12</SO><IN>REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)HOME CONSTRUCTION (HOM)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   PHOENIX -- In the shadows of the White Tank Mountains 40miles northwest of here, deep in the desert where few butdevelopers dare to tread, the Sun Valley Parkway bends acrossan overheated wasteland of cactus and low scrub. It's a fineArizona road, wide, flat, unspoiled, and a straight shot intothe shimmering heart of real-estate disaster.   For the Sun Valley Parkway is a road to nowhere, virtuallyuseless except as metaphor for all the grandiose notions andcrazy schemes and alleged fraud that have left Arizona withits worst land and lending mess ever.</LP><TEXT>   Built by a partnership of some 1,000 private investors ata cost of $82 million in 1987, the road was supposed toprovide easy access to the community of Sun Valley. Thatthere was no community of Sun Valley at the time did notdeter the confident investors, who were led by one RobertBurns, a Phoenix developer who dreamed up the project. Thatlittle detail would be taken care of in due time, by buildinga lovely retirement resort on 48,000 acres of maximum desertthat had been purchased by those same investors for roughly$100 million more of borrowed money. There would be golfcourses and swimming pools and 300,000 happy residents, andit would all be worth some $34 billion someday, thedevelopers calculated.   Today there is just the road, a welter of lawsuits and ahandful of mysteries in the desert suggesting past humanactivity of indeterminate purpose. A green highway signproclaims that Sun Valley is eight miles up ahead; someonehas defaced the sign with red spray paint. Eight miles upahead are a few bulldozer scratches in the sand, some cementdrainage ditches and a solitary sign marking the nonexistentintersection of Sun Valley Parkway and 29th Avenue. A fatdead rodent is draped over that sign, fittingly ifinexplicably. It is as desolate and eerie as ruins left byany other seemingly advanced civilization that stretched toofar in search of gold or conquest.   &quot;Sun Valley,&quot; remarks Ralph Shattuck, a local real-estateconsultant, &quot;is in total eclipse.&quot;   Much the same could be said for most of the real-estatesector in Arizona. It's rare for a state to be beset bysimultaneous fiascoes in every cranny of its dominantreal-estate market, but that's precisely what's happening inArizona's Valley of the Sun, where Phoenix is situated andwhere most of the state's people and empty buildings reside.Despite almost three years of tumbling real-estate values,the Phoenix area still has an office-space vacancy rate ofjust under 30%, unchanged since 1988. Moreover, the dollaramount of commercial real-estate foreclosures in Phoenix in1990's first quarter rose 20% to $2.41 billion, even thoughthe number of foreclosures declined slightly; this means it'sincreasingly the bigger, newer, more expensive officeprojects that are failing. In Tucson, the commercial vacancyrate also hovers at about 30%.   Apartment vacancies have eased recently, but that's mainlybecause construction of new units has virtually ceased. Wholeshopping centers stand vacant, and more are still beingbuilt. And alarmingly, single-family-home foreclosures, whichwere relatively low through the early stages of the collapsebefore soaring late last year, remain high -- 8,074 throughJune 30, compared with 7,832 a year earlier. Prices of somehomes have plummeted as much as 35% in the past 12 months and60% in the past three years.   Curiously, the disaster is largely confined to thefunnel-shaped Valley of the Sun, which stretches for 100miles between ranges of rough desert mountains, Phoenix atits heart. Other cities such as Flagstaff, Sedona andBullhead City never saw the frenzied building that the Valleyof the Sun did and have been plodding along pretty well,real-estate brokers say. Furthermore, the Arizona economyoutside the real-estate sector is still relatively buoyant;Arizona State University's Center for Business Researchexpects the state's economy as a whole to grow about 3.1%this year, despite little action in the construction andhousing sectors. And population growth continues to run about2%, well above the national average; when Texas tanked a fewyears back, it was actually losing population.   Still, two-thirds of the state's 3.5 million people livein the Valley of the Sun, and 2% population growth is notnearly enough to make much of a dent in the vast overhang ofempty buildings and raw land weighing on the market. Indeed,half-finished or barely started projects were based on thebelief that population growth would average 7% annually wellinto the mid-1990s.   So the impact of the bust, at least in the valley, spreadsfar beyond just real estate. Small businesses are droppinglike flies. Four years ago, Eddie Alvaro's auto-repairbusiness earned him about $187,000. He moved his family intoa four-bedroom house in a tony North Phoenix neighborhood.Last year, the business lost about $10,000. In May, thebusiness closed. &quot;I used to have BMWs and Mercedes all overmy lot, and I used to live good,&quot; Mr. Alvaro recounts,sitting in the public library with a newspaper in his lap,opened up to the classifieds. &quot;Now I'm broke, and I'm lookingfor work.&quot;   Mr. Alvaro, 34 years old, fears he may lose his house. &quot;Iremember standing in my back yard, looking at my swimmingpool and thinking, `Man, you've got the American dream,you've got it made,'&quot; he says, shaking his head. &quot;It amazesme that I'm even sitting here in this place, just another guyscratching around for a job.&quot;   Jobs aren't as plentiful as they once were, but someplaces are hiring. The federal bankruptcy court, for example,has tripled its staff in the past three years and expects tohire more to deal with a caseload that has grown from 11,467filings in 1987 to 16,278 in 1989. Through June of this year,filings are running 18% ahead of last year's pace. Chapter 11filings -- filings made by businesses -- have exploded,running 59% ahead of last June's level.   The Resolution Trust Corp. is also hiring, whichunderscores what is perhaps the most damaging ripple from thereal-estate bust: the demolition of the state's lendingindustry. Seven of the state's 10 savings and loans --representing about $17 billion of the Arizona thriftindustry's $23.5 billion of assets -- are in the hands of theRTC, the government agency set up to deal with dead thrifts.They include some of the nation's biggest and most outlandishfailures, such as Western Savings andamp; Loan, which catapultedhuge chunks of money into some of the most remote corners ofthe Arizona desert (Sun Valley, for example), acting as bothlender and developer on resorts, trailer parks, housingdevelopments, malls and about any other project that came itsway. The official estimated taxpayer tab: $1.7 billion. Theunofficial estimate from local real-estate professionalsfamiliar with Western: $2 billion to $3 billion, maybe more.   Many of the state's banks are fading or gone, too. Andneither banks nor thrifts are making loans: Total thriftloans declined by $851.5 million between last Dec. 31 andMarch 31. Total bank loans declined by $283.1 million. C.W.Jackson, a Tempe businessman with interests in real estateand banking, estimates that the government either controls orsoon will control some $27 billion of the state's $65 billionin banking assets. &quot;It is my opinion that in coming years, inArizona and the country as a whole, bureacrats at theregulatory agencies will have more influence on the economythan the Federal Reserve Board,&quot; Mr. Jackson says. &quot;Thatscares the hell out of me.&quot;   Arizona, of course, has had more busts over the years thana bad blackjack player. In a sense, the state's whole historyis defined by people's up-and-down efforts to develop livable-- or at least salable -- real estate out of places that arenaturally hospitable only to cactus and Gila monsters.   The state was largely the domain of scattered bands ofApaches and Pimas until well after 1848, when the Treaty ofGuadalupe Hidalgo ended the Mexican War and awarded Mexico'svast holdings in today's southwest to the United States.Modest booms came and went until World War II, when warproduction -- and government fears about having defensecontractors located on the West Coast, near waters whereJapanese aircraft carriers might someday lurk -- triggered ahuge defense, manufacturing and housing boom that onlyaccelerated when the boys came marching home.   That boom was marked by the kind of can-do boosterism thatArizona's movers and shakers still pride themselves on. Atone point in the 1950s, for example, Sperry Rand Corp. hadgiven up on a plan to move a big plant to a desert site nearPhoenix because all the water wells its engineers had dugcame up dry. But John Jacobs, then chairman of Arizona PublicService Corp., arranged for a noted local water witch to turnhis forked stick on the site; as the story is told here, Mr.Jacobs had a well sunk at the spot marked by the old man andhis stick, water was struck, and Sperry Rand moved in. Thepostwar boom busted in the 1960s, picked up again in the late1970s, busted again in the early 1980s.   All the past blowouts featured some of the same suspectsthat have figured in the present one: greed, incompetenceand, of course, fraud. Arizona has produced some of thenation's most memorable swindlers. James Addison Reavis, forone. A real-estate developer and forgery expert who gothimself out of the Civil War by faking discharge documents,Mr. Reavis by the 1890s had amassed landholdings totalingsome 12 million acres in Arizona and New Mexico. He claimedthem under old Spanish and Mexican land grants issued to thePeralta family, whose descendants, he said, had bequeathedthe land to him. He took to calling himself the Baron dePeralta y Cordova, married a woman after convincing her shewas the long-lost daughter of the Peralta patriarch,hobnobbed with U.S. senators and even sued the governmentwhen he felt it was interfering with his operations. Onlyyears later did it become clear that the baron had in factinvented the Peralta family and forged the land grants --even going so far as to travel to Mexico City and Madrid tocreate a convincing but utterly phony record of the Peraltafamily tree. In 1895, he was convicted of land fraud.   By the mid-1960s, Arizona had been christened the &quot;LandFraud Capital of the World&quot; by the popular press for itsabundant scams, many of the variety perpetrated by DoryAuerbach, the promoter of an alleged paradise he called LakeMead Rancheros. Mr. Auerbach blanketed the country withnewspaper ads trumpeting its virtues: &quot;A new community,coming to life. . . . You can own a king-sized Western estatewith roads and electricty, water and phones. . . . Build nowand move in]&quot; He neglected to mention that the nearest powerand phone lines were six miles away or that the only watersource -- a pipe that jutted out of the desert floor andoperated only when a quarter was deposited -- was 12 milesaway. Mr. Auerbach sucked in millions of dollars before beingconvicted of 22 counts of land fraud.   Some Arizonans find a pattern here, as if it is Arizona'sdestiny to skid from one land bust to the next, withintermittent periods of high rolling and low crime. Partlythe reason is economic: Land is one of the only things thatArizona has plenty of to peddle. But Marshall Trimble, awriter and professor of history who has lived here all his 50years, sees something deeper at work.   &quot;It is part of that old notion that the West is always acornucopia, that every man is a law unto himself, opportunityawaits those who dare and there is no end to the good times,&quot;Mr. Trimble says. &quot;That draws a lot of good people.&quot; Hepauses, then adds: &quot;It draws a lot of con men, too.&quot; It isalso why this bust isn't likely to be the last, he and othersopine. &quot;The only thing we ever learn from these slides isdifferent variations on the deals, different kinds ofswindles,&quot; Mr. Trimble remarks. &quot;There will be future boomsand future busts.&quot;   Still, this bust is distinct in Arizona history, in waysthat mean the state will probably stay busted for years. It'sbigger, for one thing. In Phoenix, despite three years ofslowing construction, there is still about a seven-yearsupply of empty office space. More is on the way: ArizonaPublic Service and a few other big companies still havesizable office complexes under construction that will addmillions of square feet of uninhabited chrome and glass tothe skyline.   As a consequence, commercial real-estate values are stillsliding. A case in point: The RTC recently sold Western'soffice tower in Mesa, east of Phoenix, for $20.8 million.Western had acquired the building, a bizarre-looking affairfeaturing blue neon stripes, for $55 million in 1987 from itsdeveloper, Conley Wolfswinkel. Mr. Wolfswinkel, a 350-pounderwho is one of valley's most prominent landowners, once owedWestern about $150 million, but sold Western the building andseveral other properties in a complex transaction that wassupposed to reduce Western's exposure to Mr. Wolfswinkel.   The latest bust is also unique because it has taken thestate's financial system down with it. Between that and thetough stance of federal regulators, there is almost no creditavailable for real-estate deals that might help refloat themarket. Signs of a credit crunch are all over Phoenix, someof the most interesting being the signs and billboardsadvertising Chase Manhattan Corp.'s Chase Bank of Arizonaunit. &quot;We're still lending,&quot; the signs proclaim. They're partof a campaign designed to take advantage of public grumblingabout the tightness of credit, especially for home mortgages.The signs began appearing about two months before Chaseclosed its mortgage-banking operations in Arizona.   Brokers and developers offer more concrete signs ofliquidity problems. &quot;It is extremely difficult, if notimpossible, to get any credit,&quot; grouses Alan Kennedy,president of DeHaven Investments Co., a developerspecializing in raw land. He tells of approaching the RTCwith a proposal for buying a $2 million parcel of land; inthe past, Mr. Kennedy would have expected to put 20% to 25%down and finance the rest over seven years or so. &quot;But theRTC said no dice, they wanted all cash,&quot; Mr. Kennedy says.&quot;That's unheard of.&quot;   Further proof of the tough new climate: Mr. Kennedy justgot a letter in the mail from the RTC advising him to find anew mortgage to replace one held on 11 acres of undevelopedland DeHaven owns. Mr. Kennedy has never missed a payment,but the mortgage is held by defunct Blue Valley Savings andamp;Loan of Kansas City. &quot;The RTC is telling me it doesn't wantto be a lender, so go find another one,&quot; Mr. Kennedycomplains. &quot;Well, just where am I going to do that? It wouldbe next to impossible.&quot; He adds: &quot;I have no obligation to doso, and I don't intend to.&quot;   Regulatory heat is closing off other credit avenues.George Green, a Phoenix real-estate broker, cites the case ofa healthy bank that refused a mortgage on a $100,000 house toa man making $50,000 a year who was willing to put 20% down.The reason: Several months before, the man had made acredit-card payment late. &quot;That loan would have been aslam-dunk in the old days,&quot; Mr. Green says. Mr. Jackson, theTempe developer and banker, says regulators made him classifyas a loss a $150,000 loan to man with $10 million of networth. The loan was unsecured, but current. &quot;The regulatorshave gotten ridiculous,&quot; says Mr. Jackson. His bank, CentralArizona Bank, failed earlier this year.   With the traditional credit well running dry, theso-called hard-money crowd is flourishing, a further sourceof potential trouble for the real-estate market. These areprivate investors with plenty of cash who will make loans --at witheringly high rates. Mr. Green says one customer,spurned by banks and other traditional lenders, got financingat 15 7/8% from a hard-money operator; the rate means thatthe customer -- whom Mr. Green describes as &quot;financiallymarginal&quot; -- will pay $400 more a month than he would havewith a more traditional lender. &quot;His house is going to beback on the market very soon,&quot; Mr. Green says. &quot;Hard moneydistorts the market even more.&quot;   Comments Ed Preston, a Sedona real-estate agent: &quot;There'san old saying about Arizona: It has more grazing land andfewer cows than anywhere, more rivers and less water, morepreachers and less religion. Today you might add, more cashand less credit.&quot;   So the bust goes on, and monuments to real estate gonewrong spring up everywhere. From a home on a corner ofCamelback Road, down the way from a canyon of new and largelyempty office buildings, a six-foot-tall yellow sign with redlettering yelps: &quot;MUST SELL] PRICE REDUCED] MAKE OFFER]&quot; It'sa beautiful ranch house, spacious, three bedrooms, swimmingpool, big fireplace. A scrawled sheet of legal paper on thefront door declares mournfully: &quot;Was priced at $595,000.Reduced to $385,000. Or what do you want to offer TODAY?Offer a fair deal. Owner is ready.&quot; Another sign affixed to awall inside the house refers to the $385,000 and pleads: &quot;Ifyou don't like that give us a fair offer.&quot; The house has beenon the market about a year.   About 30 miles west out in the desert, not far from theRoy Rogers and Dale Evans Happy Trails resort but not closeto much of anything else, Jim Eastham's sand-encrusted Buickbumps to a halt along a dirt road. &quot;Do you know where 191stAvenue is supposed to be?&quot; Mr. Eastham asks a passer-by. Mr.Eastham, who serves foreclosure notices for a living, istrying to post papers on raw land so far out in the boondocksthat it doesn't seem to appear on any map or even on thestacks of plats and surveyor's documents piled in Mr.Eastham's front seat.   &quot;You gotta wonder about why somebody'd buy this far out,&quot;says Mr. Eastham, surveying a broiling griddle of scrub andcactus that stretches out to the horizon. The temperature is120 degrees. The site is so remote that Mr. Eastham openlyworries about dying if his car breaks down.   Incidentally, the Happy Trails resort was another WesternSandamp;L project. It's open but unprofitable. The government ownsit now.   Other lost places loom up out of the waste every so often.One spectacular one is Estrella, undertaken by CharlesKeating, the owner of failed Lincoln Savings who has beencast by many as a chief villian in the thrift debacle. Mr.Keating and his backers have invested an estimated $200million in this project. Blacktop winds through mountainsstudded with tiny placards marking empty lots. Farther in,mostly empty houses ring lakes with gurgling fountains. Greengazebos dot the shore. Mr. Keating still believes people bythe thousands will come here someday, but on a recentafternoon, Estrella was the private preserve of three boyswho were taking a break from raking leaves to swim in thelakes and an older gentleman hacking uninterestedly at a palmtree with a machete.   Sometimes it's impossible not to marvel at the gloriousindifference to the past evident in many of these projects.Back out in the desert near what was to be Sun Valley, withinsight of the turnoff for the destinationless Sun ValleyParkway, a single, rusted sign rears up out of the desertsand, faded lettering just visible. &quot;West Phoenix Estates,&quot;it says. Close inspection reveals rusted-out lot markerspoking up, almost reclaimed by the desert. The foundations ofroads scraped out of the sand like the ancient Nazcla linesof Peru stretch toward nothing in particular.   West Phoenix Estates was the Sun Valley of a differenttime, started in the 1970s and quickly abandoned to one ofthat era's busts. Kevin Hull, a construction worker who haslived out in the desert since 1972, remembers the developersthen. &quot;They were just like these Sun Valley guys,&quot; heremarks. &quot;They were going to make everybody rich. You'd thinkthese people would learn something from experience, but Iguess not.&quot;   ---   Mr. McCoy is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal'sSan Francisco bureau.</TEXT></DOC>