<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920228-0192</DOCNO><DOCID>920228-0192.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Cut Off From `Mother Russia'</HL><DATE>02/28/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)LATVIA (LV)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)RUSSIA (RS)COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (UR)</RE><LP>   The concerns raised by several Russians in your Feb. 4page-one article &quot;Colonial Refugees: Soviet Union's DemiseStrands Many Russians in Hostile Republics&quot; about theirfuture status in Latvia indicate a misunderstanding of boththe draft law on Latvian citizenship and current economicconditions. You consequently present a distorted picture ofthe situation in Latvia.   Those Russians interviewed are clearly unaware of a lawadopted by the Latvian Parliament on March 19, 1991, whichexplicitly guarantees equal rights &quot;to all nationalities andethnic groups&quot; and &quot;guarantees to all permanent residents inthe Republic, regardless of their nationality, equal rightsto work and wages.&quot; The law also prohibits &quot;any activitydirected toward nationality discrimination or the promotionof national superiority or hatred.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   While the Latvian government can set public policy, itcannot legislate personal relations between privateindividuals. The article focused on isolated claims ofprejudice, implying that this is a common occurrence. What itomitted were interviews with the large number of Russians whohave not experienced this prejudice. Such interviews wouldhave presented a more balanced picture.   The article also fails to explain the implications ofLatvian citizenship. All governments view citizenship as aprivilege, not a right, and set certain requirements toacquire that privilege. Latvian law guarantees basic humanrights to all residents, whether they are citizens or not.The only special privileges citizenship confers on anindividual are the right to vote in elections, to hold highgovernment office and to own land. Most residents of Latvia,regardless of nationality, can acquire these privileges ifthey have resided in Latvia for at least 16 years and have arudimentary understanding of Latvian. This is not anexcessive requirement from a government that seeks aninformed citizenry.   According to some estimates, of the more than 900,000Russians who entered Latvia over the past 50 years more than80% have lived there for more than 16 years and are thusentitled to citizenship. Those who fail full citizenshiprequirements at this time but choose to remain as permanentresidents will not be asked to leave the country, abandontheir apartments or give up their jobs. Latvian law forbidsit. In fact, the daily lives of landed immigrants will differlittle from those of citizens.   Residents of Latvia are indeed losing their jobs, but notbecause of ethnic discrimination. Layoffs are occurring atthose Soviet-built factories in Latvia that can no longercompete in a free-market economy. A majority of the laborforce in these factories is made up of non-Latvians whoimmigrated to Latvia specifically for these Soviet-createdjobs. They are losing jobs because the Soviet command economyis now defunct. Under Soviet occupation, many Latvianfactories were designed to rely exclusively on raw materialssupplied from Russian sources. Following the breakup of theSoviet Union, the Russian government has either cut off thissupply or begun demanding hard-currency payments, which thefactories cannot pay.   It has been argued that all Soviets citizens who settledin Latvia between 1940 and 1992 did so illegally, since theyentered Latvia as part of an illegal occupation force. Duringthat period tens of thousands of ethnic Latvians weredeported to Siberia, while those who remained behind weretargets of systematic discrimination by the new SovietRussian settlers. These colonizers routinely enjoyed specialprivileges at the expense of the indigenous Latvianpopulation. The government of independent Latvia has no wishto punish these people, but simply wants to restore a levelplaying field for all residents of Latvia. The elimination ofprivilege is not discrimination, but simply the restorationof equality. Living conditions for noncitizens in Latvia willbe no different than for legal immigrants in the U.S.   Ojars Kalnins   Minister Counselor   Embassy of Latvia   Washington   ---   You step over the line of civility when you forget thatone-third of the entire Baltic population was forced by theSoviets to become refugees or be deported to points east ofthe Ural Mountains. By 1959, in Latvia alone, 210,000 of itscitizens had disappeared from their homes -- deported ormurdered. Latvians today still remember the occupiers fortheir atrocities of murder, rape and pillage.   As the transitional government in Latvia tries to adoptproperty rights and restore private ownership, the retiredofficers of the occupation army are aghast that they cannotclaim their residences as &quot;war booty.&quot; They are surprisedthat there are still the rightful owners who, for 50 years,had to survive in substandard accommodations such asbasements, attics and warehouses, their families fragmentedby the occupation. No new housing was ever built for thedisplaced indigenous population.   The term Russification was real and should not belegitimized by quotation marks. The occupying governmentdeclared Russian to be the official language, banned allLatvian cultural and religious organizations and renamedstreets and towns, spelling them in Cyrillic. Latvian youthswere offered jobs in Siberia while handsome inducements weremade to Russians to come live in Latvia. Latvian youth wasforced to participate in Communist indoctrination.   The Latvian government is totally preoccupied in trying toprevent starvation, trying to secure emergency medicalsupplies and energy resources, begging for fuel oil -- not torun factories but to provide heating for hospitals and homesfor the aged. Despite the agreements to barter Russian oilfor Latvian produce, not a single barrel of oil has beenallowed this year for Latvia by &quot;Mother Russia.&quot; Thiseconomic emergency has detracted human energy away from thereal political challenges. No laws have been adoptedregarding citizenship and the right to residency. Thetemporary government is not empowered to pass suchlegislation, yet there is much discussion. This is unsettlingto the non-Latvian population.   Latvian people have always attracted multiculturalcommunities, but the laws of Latvia, including citizenship,have and will be determined by Latvians. For centuriesLatvians have provided a window to Europe for trade andcommerce. Their profound respect for human rights and theattendant rights to property ownership have always been amagnet, not a barrier, to residency in Latvia.   Aivars Jerumanis   Consul of Latvia   Glendale, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>