<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920113-0060</DOCNO><DOCID>920113-0060.</DOCID><HL>   Squeaky Wheels:   GATT Talks Resume,   With France and India   Calling Many of Shots   ---   Tariff Cuts and Freer Trade   Hinge on Narrow Interests   Like Wish to Copy Drugs   ---   Taking Care of Agriculture   ----   By Bob Davis   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/13/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FORGN TAXES</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>CLOTHING AND FABRICS (CLO)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE, GATT (GTT)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TAXES (TAX)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)INDIA (II)JAPAN (JA)NETHERLANDS (NL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- If the U.S. fails to win broadliberalization of trade in global negotiations set to resumetoday in Geneva, don't bash Japan.   Look instead to shrewd negotiating by India and France,blunders by the U.S. in shaping the talks, and a tradingsystem that favors the most obstinate nations. To get itsway, France once called out its farmers, Soviet-style, todemonstrate against a proposed settlement. India, meanwhile,once threatened to walk out of the world trade negotiations.</LP><TEXT>   Those tactics have reduced U.S. negotiators to sputteringrages. &quot;French actions on agriculture have been nothing shortof outrageous,&quot; says Bill Brock, a former U.S. traderepresentative.   &quot;India has become a symbol of things we don't like&quot; intrade, adds Bill Frenzel, who spent years as a congressionaldelegate to the talks.   Passion isn't an emotion usually associated withnegotiations at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,an international organization with all the glamour andvisibility of an accountants' convention. But the rules beingnegotiated will affect the fate of nearly every company inthe world that does international business or faces foreigncompetition. GATT tariffs are figured into the pricesconsumers pay; GATT rules on markets and quotas create orkill jobs.   The talks are at a critical juncture. Last month, GATTDirector-General Arthur Dunkel tried to break afive-and-one-half-year deadlock by submitting his ownproposal to vastly expand the reach of the GATT andliberalize trade in agriculture. Today, negotiators from the108 nations in the current GATT talks are expected to givetheir countries' views of Mr. Dunkel's text. And over thenext few months, they will try to work out how steeply to cuttariffs and how liberally to open service industries tointernational competition.   France reiterated its hard-line views yesterday, after aEuropean Community meeting when its agriculture minister,Louis Mermaz, said that accepting Mr. Dunkel's ideas aboutfarming &quot;would be the ruin of European agriculture.&quot; Francewasn't able to torpedo the pact now, before it has even beennegotiated. But the EC took the position that it wouldrequire substantial changes, particularly in agriculture.   Events are taking place against the backdrop of the U.S.presidential and congressional elections. Partly as a resultof President Bush's trip to Tokyo, Americans are growing moresensitive to trade issues and also more protectionist. If theGATT talks don't produce an agreement by early spring, U.S.trade experts say, the negotiations are as good as deadbecause Congress won't approve an accord in the middle of anelection campaign. The upset U.S. Senate victory last year byHarris Wofford in Pennsylvania weighs heavily in Washington;he campaigned against a trade pact with Mexico. The Frenchare openly talking about delaying the negotiations untilafter November -- a tactic that seems calculated to increasepressure on Washington, which wants a quick resolution.   France's power at the GATT negotiations comes from itsability to influence the negotiating position of the EC, nowthe world's biggest market, and its single-mindeddetermination to protect French farmers from foreigncompetition.   Last fall, France blocked negotiations between the EC andthe former Communist countries of Eastern Europe becauseFrench farmers opposed the import of Polish meat and wereturning back meat trucks at the French border. Thedisagreement was resolved last month only after the EC agreedto guarantee payment for the Polish meat -- so long as muchof it was exported to nations of the former Soviet Union, notto France.   &quot;France is willing to stand up for its national interestsat the expense of the European Community's interests,&quot; arguesFrancine Lamoriello, a senior manager at the accounting firmKPMG Peat Marwick, who followed EC internal affairs as aCommerce Department official.   India's influence is more subtle. Despite its relativelysmall trade activities, India has long been a leader amongthe developing countries. Three Indians occupy seniorpositions in the GATT bureaucracy, and they have power toinfluence its direction.   India's GATT delegation is seen by many as one of the mosttalented and hard-working in Geneva. Last month, it puttogether a clever deal under which India supported additionalprotection for European farmers in return for Europeansupport of a plan giving India 10 more years before itscompanies would have to quit selling rip-offs of Westerndrugs. The negotiations &quot;sold the pharmaceutical industrydown the river,&quot; says Harvey Bale, a former U.S. tradeofficial who represents the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers ofAmerica.   The Dunkel package now under consideration throws out theEuropean end of the deal but, strikingly, preserves theprotections for Indian drug makers.   World trade must take account of world poverty, says B.K.Zutshi, India's ambassador to GATT. He defends India'scounterfeit drug business, which has big exports to Africaand elsewhere, as an economic necessity. &quot;With some reverseengineering, we can make {drugs} cheaply,&quot; he says.&quot;Otherwise, the cost is so high we can't afford them.&quot;   Mr. Zutshi's influence is widely felt. Robert Tritt,director of international trade at Canada's Communicationsdepartment, who chaired a GATT negotiating panel ontelecommunications, says Mr. Zutshi, a 52-year-old textileand trade expert, was one of the few ambassadors attendingthe highly technical talks. Mr. Zutshi argued that even ifcomputer communications were open to competition, India mustbe able to preserve its basic telephone service monopolywhile it develops its phone network. That is a positionothers with telephone monopolies find appealing, but it isopposed by the U.S. which wants to open alltelecommunications to international competition.   The influence of India and France has frustrated the U.S.plans for a grand deal at GATT, which it has been pushingwithout much headway since 1982. At that time, Mr. Brock, aformer Tennessee senator, proposed what he calls a&quot;politician's&quot; solution to world-trade problems: a swapbetween rich nations and poor ones.   The U.S. and Europe would open their markets inagriculture and textiles to developing nations by slashingquotas and subsidies. In return, developing nations wouldwelcome Western banks, insurance companies, computer-serviceoperations and other high-tech businesses, while alsoagreeing to extend patent protection to Western goods. Worldtrade would soar, Mr. Brock promises.   The new round of negotiations would build on the successesof seven other rounds held since 1947. In this period of morethan four decades, tariffs on thousands of industrialproducts fell from an average of about 40% to 4.7%. Worldtrade boomed. GATT dispute-resolution panels settled tradeconflicts that historically might have exploded into tradewars, or even shooting wars.   But Mr. Brock underestimated the opposition. India saw theproposal on services as a way for multinational companies todominate the Indian economy, and threatened to bolt from GATTnegotiations if it so much as discussed the idea. Thatdelayed the start of talks for four years, until 1986, whenIndia and other leaders of the developing world, includingBrazil and Egypt, agreed to at least consider the proposal.But since then the talks on services have floundered. About30 nations have made offers to negotiate removing somebarriers to service companies, but not a single barrier hasfallen so far. The U.S., for its own part, wants to keep theshipping trade along U.S. coasts reserved for U.S. shippingcompanies.   &quot;It's like 90 sumo wrestlers circling the ring, trying tofigure out who to body-block first,&quot; says MargaretWigglesworth, director of the Coalition of ServiceIndustries, which represents banks, insurances companies andother concerns that want to expand abroad.   France saw the U.S. plan as a sneaky way to curbagricultural competition from the EC, especially from Frenchwheat farmers. &quot;The U.S. gives the impression that its soleobsession is to destroy European agricultural policy,&quot; saysFrench Trade Minister Jean-Noel Jeanneney.   In some ways, U.S. farm officials acknowledge, the Frenchare right. U.S. farmers have watched with dismay as EC farmsubsidies have grown sixfold since 1975. This year, they areexpected to reach $44 billion in budget outlays -- andanother $85 billion paid by consumers as higher food prices.Shoppers in Paris, for instance, pay 20% more for milk thando those in Washington, D.C., twice as much for sugar, andtwo-and-a-half times as much for butter, largely because ofEC farm policy.   The U.S. figured in the early 1980s, incorrectly as itturned out, that it could find common ground with Europe inreducing agricultural subsidies, as a way to slash budgetsand increase efficiency. Agricultural subsidies in the U.S.will cost the nation $10 billion in budget outlays this yearand another $30 billion in consumer costs.   Instead of common ground, the U.S. found a French wall.France has a romantic attachment to the rural life -- andthree times as many farmers as the U.S., per capita, to worryabout politically. It has consistently pushed to keepsubsidies high to protect its farmers, who still bitterlycomplain that the government isn't doing enough to help them.   A French priority in the current round of talks is to givespecial protection to the names of geographic regions wherewine is produced. &quot;People all over the world are using thename Champagne, although it's a region in France,&quot; complainsJean-Daniel Tordjman, minister for economic affairs at theFrench embassy in Washington. Backed at EC meetings byGermany, France has been able to prevail in agriculturalmatters against Britain and the Netherlands, among others.   &quot;France was always the country that was putting its footon the brake,&quot; says Aart Dezeeuw, a former Dutch farmofficial who chaired a GATT negotiating panel on agriculture.(And French farmers became known for their extreme means ofexpression, such as burning foreign sheep alive and sprayingFrench politicians with liquid manure.)   GATT is turning into a nightmare for the U.S., says ClydePrestowitz, a former trade official who heads the EconomicStrategy Institute in Washington. &quot;We should have been allieswith Europe over Japan,&quot; he says. &quot;Instead, we end up with afight with Europe while the Japanese stand on the sidelinesand pick up the marbles.&quot; In GATT negotiations, Japan, whichwants to keep its rice market closed and its trade surplusbulging, invariably follows EC rejectionists on agriculture.   It was thanks to France that the negotiating roundcollapsed in December 1990. At that time, a Swedish diplomatproposed that countries cut export subsidies by about 30%.The U.S. and other large agricultural producers were ready toaccept the deal, though they themselves had been demandingfar higher cuts. In the EC, Britain and the Netherlands wereready to go along, too, says Mr. Dezeeuw.   But France wasn't. The French agriculture minister urgedfarmers to demonstrate, and 30,000 showed up outside themeeting in Brussels to pressure the delegates. Privately, sayEC and U.S. negotiators, France demanded that the EC followits previous policy, which didn't approve any specific cuts.Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, worried about the firstelections in a unified Germany in which suddenly there weremany more farmers than there had been in West Germany, wentalong with France. Negotiations ended.   C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute forInternational Economics in Washington, says the torturedhistory of GATT negotiations shows the ebbing power of theU.S., which used the GATT to strengthen Western economiesduring the Cold War. &quot;The U.S. wouldn't have been sodemanding in the past,&quot; he says, &quot;and if it had, theEuropeans would have had to capitulate.&quot;   A few months after the Brussels meeting, with united U.S.and European forces bombing Iraq and about to attack by land,Mr. Dunkel was able to persuade the parties to resume talks.   But not everyone is all that eager for a new world orderin trade. India, especially, has exploited a rule that letsit ban imports of fabric and clothing because it has a bigbalance-of-payments deficit. Under the GATT agreement nowbeing negotiated, the U.S. and Europe will have to phase outover 10 years quotas blocking goods from India and othercountries. The result: India will be able to sell all it canin the U.S. and Europe, but the U.S. and Europe won't be ableto sell at all to India, so long as it has its paymentsproblem.   India's Mr. Zutshi again pleads poverty. &quot;What's thechoice we've got?&quot; he says. &quot;If we can't export enough, howare we going to pay for our imports? We have to bring inindustrial goods first, not consumer goods.&quot; But WolfgangSannwald, managing director of Calwer Woolen and BlanketMills AG, in Calwer, Germany, says Indian businessmenregularly tell him they could sell Calwer's line of cashmereto affluent Indians. As for India, he says, &quot;It's almostobscene that they benefit only and do nothing in return --all in the name of free trade.&quot;   But the biggest fight at the talks beginning today remainsagriculture. Word has it that Germany -- financially pressedto pay for unification -- will finally stand up to France andpush for cuts in subsidies. A French diplomat was heard tosay that &quot;the Germans have let us down.&quot;   But U.S. negotiators say they have heard such talk before,and that in the past it was merely Germany talking tough toavoid blame for negotiation failures.   ---   Wall Street Journal reporters Martin du Bois and JulieWolf in Brussels and E.S. Browning in Paris contributed tothis article.</TEXT></DOC>