<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900411-0155</DOCNO><DOCID>900411-0155.</DOCID><HL>   Computer Glitch:   How Ashton-Tate   Lost Its Leadership   In PC Software Arena   ---   Acquisitions, New Products   Have Been Disappointing,   And Critics Blame CEO   ---   Rocky Road for dBASE IV   ----   By G. Pascal Zachary   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   TATE</CO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)SOFTWARE (SOF)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><LP>   TORRANCE, Calif. -- The chief executive of Ashton-TateCorp., Edward Esber Jr., waxed enthusiastic about thecompany's new dBASE IV computer program. He even said, at theOctober 1988 press conference unveiling it, that delays incompleting the program had been helpful because they gave theprogrammers time to ensure that it would meet &quot;qualitystandards&quot; and would be &quot;everything we'd said it would be.&quot;   But there was a problem: Mr. Esber didn't know how to usethe new program. &quot;Ed didn't use dBASE,&quot; says Roy Folk, thenhead of Ashton-Tate's product development. &quot;He couldn't justload up dBASE IV and know its condition.&quot; Thus, Mr. Esberdidn't know that the program was marred by thousands oferrors.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;This is his company's cash cow, and he can't even useit,&quot; says Pat Adams, a New York consultant. &quot;That's like LeeIacocca not being able to drive a car.&quot;   No one else at Ashton-Tate recognized the product had somany flaws, either. Within weeks, irate customers complainedthat dBASE IV lacked important features and was too slow andtoo likely to crash.   To quiet critics, Mr. Esber promised a corrected version,but some 18 months later it still hasn't appeared. Mr. Esbernow declines to say when it will.   The episode is one of a remarkable string of majormistakes. Ashton-Tate has botched three acquisitions and atleast two major product-development efforts. Mr. Esber nameda chief operating officer who irritated many members of thestaff and eventually left. Mr. Esber lost Ashton-Tate's keyengineer. And he irked Apple Computer Inc.'s chief, JohnSculley, who then turned over a data-base product and othersoftware designed by Apple to two new companies, nowAshton-Tate rivals.   The errors at Ashton-Tate have taken their toll. Thecompany was once one of personal computing's Big Threesoftware concerns, along with Microsoft Corp. and LotusDevelopment Corp. Its flagship product, dBASE, drove theacceptance of personal computers in the early 1980s by givingusers a flexible way of organizing and retrieving largeamounts of data. Yet today, many experts consider Ashton-Tateamong the software companies that have faded from leadershipto being also-rans.   Mr. Esber remains optimistic about Ashton-Tate's future.He insists that it remains &quot;the dominant player&quot; in PC databases and that he has sorted out its technical problems.Although he still won't predict when the long-overduerevision of dBASE IV will be shipped to customers, he says atest version is good enough that some evaluators are &quot;cryingout that we should release it.&quot; He adds: &quot;We're alive andwell and putting out good products.&quot;   Still, while Lotus and Microsoft grew rapidly during thepast two years, Ashton-Tate has posted losses for the pastthree quarters. Its revenue has slumped to $62.1 million inits fourth quarter, ended Dec. 31, from $87.3 million in thequarter ended Jan. 31, 1989. Its share of the data-basemarket fell from 62.5% in 1985 to 43% in 1989, according toInternational Data Corp. And Ashton-Tate failed to exploit anew approach to data bases that enabled Oracle Corp., a rivalonly one-fourth Ashton-Tate's size in 1985, to become morethan three times as large as it is today.   Simply fixing dBASE IV won't reverse Ashton-Tate's revenueslump. &quot;That's a Band-Aid,&quot; says Rick Sherlund, an analyst atGoldman, Sachs andamp; Co.   Ashton-Tate's decline shows how fleeting success can befor high-tech firms, especially in software, if seniormanagement doesn't include people with the expertise to keepup with innovation in the field. Mr. Esber is a marketing manleading a company that has virtually no tradition of productdevelopment. In his five years atop Ashton-Tate, he hasemphasized packaging over technical expertise. In contrast,Jim Manzi, the chief of Lotus and another marketing man,rescued his company from mediocrity by adding to hismanagement team Frank King, a technical ace fromInternational Business Machines Corp.   &quot;Every technology company needs a visionary who canperceive the general direction of a market,&quot; says WilliamDavidow, a venture capitalist and writer on high-tech-companymanagement. &quot;Without one, a company very quickly loses itstechnology position.&quot;   Nevertheless, things could be worse for Ashton-Tate. Ithasn't any debt, and it slashed expenses by laying off about15% of its 1,700 workers last August. It still has the mostcustomers of any data-base producer, having sold more thanthree million copies of its dBASE programs to date. With afew breaks, the company could rebound, if not to its previousglory, at least to consistent profitability.   &quot;If you asked me a few months ago if Ed could fix things,I'd have said no,&quot; says Cary Prague, assistant director offinance at Travelers Insurance, a member of an Esber advisorygroup. &quot;But I've seen significant progress lately. If dBASE1.1 {the corrected version} comes out and it works, customersaren't going to remember the problems.&quot;   But many analysts believe that Ashton-Tate has squanderedits once-dominant position in data-base software. Althoughthe company chalked up a 30% annual growth rate in the fiveyears beginning in February 1984, Mr. Esber is widely viewedas an executive who was in the right place at the right time.His path to the top was paved by the sudden death of GeorgeTate, Ashton-Tate's chief executive, in August 1984. Andthree months later, David Cole, Mr. Tate's second-in-command,left for another company.   In many ways, Mr. Esber, who joined Ashton-Tate less thana year before as a marketing vice president, wasn't anobvious candidate for the top job: Though trained as anelectrical engineer, he didn't write software applications,and he had clashed with the management of his previousemployer, VisiCorp.   But Ashton-Tate's board of directors gave him the job. &quot;Welooked outside but decided Ed was the logical candidate,&quot;says Jill Weissman Tate, Mr. Tate's widow and a director.   At first, the decision seemed wise. Mr. Esber, a HarvardMBA who had worked at IBM, was strong on procedures andmarketing. He also kept close to the ranks and, in oddcontrast to his combative relations with other executives,won a reputation for geniality among some employees.   &quot;We used to call him `the pussycat,'&quot; says Mr. Folk, theformer product-development chief, who followed Mr. Esber toAshton-Tate from VisiCorp and now is at another softwarecompany. Mr. Esber often relied on humor; he once came to astaff meeting dressed as Gen. Patton.   By mid-1986, Mr. Esber felt he needed help managing dailyoperations because he was trying to transform Ashton-Tatefrom a one-product data-base supplier into a softwaresupermarket. As the new chief operating officer, he choseLuther Nussbaum, whose only experience in the PC industry wasas an operations executive with Businessland Inc., a computerdealer.   Although credited with expanding Ashton-Tate's Europeanoperations, Mr. Nussbaum angered many people at Ashton-Tateby belittling and refusing to listen to them. &quot;My firstmeeting with Luther went pretty badly,&quot; recalls RobertGafford, then the company's chief of customer service. &quot;Hesaid, `I understand you're the best manager in the company.'Naturally, I took that as a compliment, but he quickly added:`I'm not impressed with you.'&quot; Mr. Nussbaum declines tocomment.   Mr. Esber offered little comfort to senior executiveschafing under Mr. Nussbaum's barbs. Instead, Mr. Esbertraveled frequently and &quot;got caught up in the idea he was avisionary,&quot; says Mr. Gafford, who left Ashton-Tate in 1987 tohead customer service for Claris Corp., Apple's softwareunit.   According to colleagues, Mr. Nussbaum seemed to have Mr.Esber's wholehearted support. &quot;We didn't feel we had to go toEd&quot; for decisions, says David Micek, dBASE IV's productmanager. &quot;If we got approval from {Mr. Nussbaum}, we wentahead. Everyone knew he was boss.&quot; Mr. Esber won't commentabout Mr. Nussbaum.   In the end, Mr. Nussbaum took the rap for Ashton-Tate'sproblems, which included an embarrassing failure to handleinventory properly. He quit last July.   At the same time as Mr. Nussbaum was roiling Ashton-Tateinternally, Mr. Esber was overseeing a diversification planbased on his view that software was essentially a packagingbusiness. &quot;There was a feeling that all we had to do was slapthe Ashton-Tate name on products and they'd sell,&quot; says RonPosner, an Ashton-Tate alumnus who now heads Peter NortonComputing Inc., a software maker.   To expand the product line, Mr. Esber went shopping. In1985, he spent $22 million on Multimate International Corp.,which owned a popular word processor. But key Multimatemanagers and engineers, whose knowledge of the product wasirreplaceable, soon left. For years, Multimate's salesstagnated. Recently, it released its first substantiallyimproved version of the word processor -- after competingproducts have become entrenched.   Next, in 1986, Mr. Esber paid $12.9 million for DecisionResources Inc., a maker of graphics software. Demand forgraphics software has exploded, but competitors had racedpast Decision Resources by the time Mr. Esber bought it.Today, Ashton-Tate's graphics sales are only 1% of thecompany's total revenue.   And in February 1988, Mr. Esber bought into the burgeoningmarket for Macintosh software. He thought he had acquired twoproducts, a word processor and a graphics package, that wouldbring Ashton-Tate to prominence among Macintosh users. Today,however, sales are weak, mainly because the products wereill-conceived. The word-processing program, for instance,requires twice the amount of costly computer memory as rivalprograms.   Defending his acquisitions, Mr. Esber says, &quot;If there wasany mistake we made, it was in how we integrated thosecompanies.&quot; But critics say he couldn't measure the technicalworth of software products nor develop them once the managersof the acquired companies left.   Ironically, one acquisition that Mr. Esber failed to makestill haunts Ashton-Tate. In early 1987, he nearly bought FoxSoftware Inc., a closely held data-base company. After monthsof study, Ashton-Tate's engineers agreed that Fox'stechnology could lay the basis for a new generation ofdata-base products. But the deal fell through. &quot;They could'vebought us for $10 million, but they chose to haggle us down,&quot;says David Fulton, Fox's president. &quot;In the end, topmanagement bought into the idea that they didn't need us,that they could push forward without us.&quot;   In 1988, Mr. Esber sued Fox, alleging copyrightinfringement because Fox sells a data-base program thatshares some features and the same computer language asAshton-Tate's dBASE. The case is pending in federal districtcourt in Los Angeles. Today, Fox is winning over manyAshton-Tate customers.   Mr. Esber's acquisitions might not have hurt Ashton-Tateif it had produced a stream of new products. It hasn't. &quot;Edviews programmers with great disdain,&quot; says Ms. Adams, theconsultant. &quot;He thinks these people are all interchangeable.&quot;   Shortly after taking over as chief executive, Mr. Esberclashed with Wayne Ratliff, then the company's guiding lightfor data-base products. The feud simmered for years, thenerupted in early 1987 when Mr. Ratliff resigned in a blaze oflawsuits and began writing software for a competitor.   On the technical side, Mr. Ratliff was central toAshton-Tate's success. In the early 1980s, he oversaw thedesign of the original dBASE in his spare time while workingat NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. Hetried to peddle the program on his own but failed. So he soldit to Ashton-Tate, which renamed it dBASE II (because itsounded high-tech and implied an improvement over anonexistent dBASE I). Ashton-Tate, which had never developeda software product on its own, had one of the infantPC-software industry's few runaway hits.   Since then, Mr. Esber has hired a succession of topengineers, but no one has really replaced Mr. Ratliff. Mr.Esber hasn't filled permanently the job of heading thecritical data-base group. &quot;Ed's got to find someone withtechnical vision, and he hasn't done that,&quot; says StewartAlsop, the editor of PC Letter.   Without this vision, Ashton-Tate's product-developmentefforts have floundered. For example, dBASE 3 Plus, thepredecessor to dBASE IV, was initially felled bymanufacturing and possibly programming errors. Ashton-Tatewas forced to withdraw at least 24,000 copies of it shortlyafter its introduction in January 1986. The mistake, thoughquickly corrected, cost the company nearly $600,000.   The company faced more problems with a version of dBASEfor Apple's Macintosh (dBASE had worked only on the IBM PC orcompatible computers). The program was revised so often thatAshton-Tate printed three different user manuals -- anddestroyed the first two. In September 1987, the companyshipped the program, but sales have been weak.   And finally, dBASE IV, the biggest project of Mr. Esber'stenure, is so complex that it outstripped the company'stesting procedures and crashed on takeoff.   Admittedly, the task was difficult. To fit the roughly500,000 lines of code for dBASE IV (four times the size ofits predecessor) into the standard memory limitation of theoperating system requires ingenuity. &quot;We have had a hard timecontrolling&quot; the code, says Harry K.T. Wong, a data-baseexpert who joined the company in 1987. (He says Ashton-Tatehas solved this problem by chopping up the program into manypieces, which are then swapped in and out of the PC's memoryas needed.)   Ashton-Tate also missed a chance to exploit a new approachto enabling a mix of different brands of computers to storeand retrieve data. Called Structured Query Language, it wasadopted by IBM and has spread throughout the computerindustry. Oracle has built a huge business around SQLsoftware, but Ashton-Tate still doesn't have a hookup to SQLengines.   The decline of Ashton-Tate has clearly mellowed Mr. Esber.At a gathering of PC executives last September, he requestedadvice from several competitors on how to improvesoftware-design practices. And he has asked major customersto advise him on technical matters.   To his credit, he isn't hiding from critics. Early thisyear, he met with one customer calling for his removal and,in April, appointed him to an advisory group. &quot;I still thinkEd should go,&quot; says Michael Masterson, the customer and thehead of the largest dBASE user group in Silicon Valley. Buthe adds lately that Mr. Esber is &quot;doing more of the rightthings.&quot;   Ashton-Tate's board agrees. &quot;If you look back over theyears, critics have counted us out in the past, but I'mbetting heavily&quot; that Mr. Esber can revive the company, Mrs.Tate says.   Mr. Esber insists he can, but concedes that competition istougher than ever. Once king of the data base, Ashton-Tate,he now says, lives in a world where &quot;no one company is goingto lock up all the data repositories.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>