<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900511-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>900511-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Drucker on Management:   Manage by Walking Around -- Outside   ----   By Peter Drucker</HL><DATE>05/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Everyone knows how fast technology is changing. Everyoneknows about markets becoming global and about shifts in thework force and in demographics. But few people pay attentionto changing distributive channels. Yet, how goods andservices get to customers and where customers buy arechanging fully as fast as technology, markets and demography.And they are changing fast all over the world.   The bulk of consumer electronics -- radios, TVs, VCRs,calculators -- were sold in Britain 15 years ago by thousandsof independent, locally owned &quot;mom-and-pop&quot; shops. Today thebulk of these goods is sold by four national chains. Themom-and-pop shop had to carry major manufacturers' brands andrelied on the manufacturers' advertising. The four big chainscarry their own private brands and do their own advertising.</LP><TEXT>   In the U.S. office furniture -- chairs, desks, filingcabinets -- was bought 15 years ago in specializedoffice-furniture stores. Increasingly these goods are nowbeing bought in discount stores and &quot;buying clubs.&quot;   The recent Japanese promise to repeal the law thatprotects their mom-and-pop shops and keeps out big stores andchains, has been hailed as a great American victory. But inJapan's metropolitan areas (where 60% of the population liveand shop), a majority of the mom andamp; pop shops have alreadybeen converted into franchises of huge chains such as7/Eleven or Mister Donut.   Six or seven years ago, mutual funds were distributed inthe U.S. through two channels: indirectly, through brokeragehouses and directly, through TV advertising. These twochannels still carry something like three-fifths of allmutual funds sold. But one of the big mutual-fund groups(which six years ago sold exclusively through brokers) nowsells 15% of its products through regional banks, 15% throughinsurance agencies and another 15% through professional andtrade associations.   The hospital became a major market only 25 years ago. Butthen the hospital itself bought the goods it used. Now asteadily growing share is bought by independent outsiders towhom the hospital contracts maintenance, patient feeding,billing, physical therapy, the pharmacy, X-ray, the medicallab and so on.   Increasingly even large users do not themselves buy theircomputers. They are bought instead by computer managementfirms that design, buy, install and run their clients'information systems. A major computer maker, DigitalEquipment Corp. now has its own computer-managementsubsidiary.   Where customers buy is changing fast too.   Many major department store chains are in serious trouble.Some once great stores -- Bonwit Teller, for instance, or B.Altman, only recently New York's fashion leaders -- are goingout of business. Others, such as Bloomingdale's, are inbankruptcy. But one chain, Seattle-based Nordstrom, has beendoing well. The department stores that are in trouble are allorganized and run as downtown stores with suburban branches.Nordstrom has only suburban stores. We may be seeing thefirst result of the slow but steady move of office work outof downtown and into the suburbs where the office workerslive.   The big &quot;wire houses,&quot; the New York-based stockbrokerssuch as Merrill Lynch and Shearson Lehman, did exceptionallywell only a few years ago. Now they are losing sales andprofits. But some large &quot;regional&quot; houses (i.e., brokers notheadquartered in New York) such as A.G. Edwards in St. Louis,are doing fine. And so are some &quot;institutional brokers&quot; suchas New York-based Sanford Bernstein.   The wire houses serve both the &quot;retail customer&quot; -- theindividual investor -- and the &quot;wholesale customer&quot; -- thepension funds. A.G. Edwards serves primarily the retailmarket, Sanford Bernstein exclusively the institutionalmarket. Traditionally large stockbrokers were successful inserving both markets. But in no other line of business, doretail customers and wholesale customers shop in the sameplace. Are the securities markets now segmenting themselvesthe way every other market has?   Changes in distributive channels may not matter much toGNP and macro-economics. But they should be a major concernof every business and every industry. Yet they are verydifficult to predict. What's worse: They do not show up inreports and statistics until they have gone very far. Theyare what statisticians call &quot;changes at the margin.&quot; And bythe time such changes become statistically significant, it isusually too late to adapt to them, let alone to exploit themas opportunities.   The one way to be abreast of them is to go out and lookfor these changes. Here again are a few examples:   Alfred P. Sloan built General Motors into the world'spremier manufacturing company, in the '20s and '30, byactually working with customers. Once every three months hewould disappear from Detroit without telling any one where hewas going. The next morning he would show up at a dealer'slot in Memphis or Albany, would introduce himself and wouldask the dealer's permission to work as a salesman for acouple of days or as an assistant service manager. Duringthat week he would work like this in two more dealerships intwo other cities. The following Monday he'd be back inDetroit, firing off memoranda on changing customer behaviorand changing customer preferences, on dealer service and oncompany service to the dealer, on market trends and styletrends.   GM in those years had the most up-to-date andcomprehensive customer research in American industry. And yet-- at least so I was told by the then head of customerresearch at GM-Sloan, by actually working in the fieldspotted more and more important trends than did customerresearch, and spotted them earlier.   The late Karl Bays made American Hospital Corp. the leaderin its industry during the 1970s. He himself credited hissuccess largely to his going out into the field. Twice a yearhe would take for two weeks each the place of a salesman onvacation. When the salesman came back, Bays said (with atwinkle in his eye) &quot;the customer always complained about theincompetence of his replacement and about the dumb questionsI asked.&quot; But selling, Bays said, was not the point of theexercise; learning was.   Another variant: two men who together took over a smalland lackluster chain of fashion shops in the mid-'50s builtit into one of America's retail giants. For 30 years, untiltheir retirement, each spent every Saturday in a differentshopping mall. They did not visit their own stores. Theyspent the day in other companies' stores -- some fashionstores, some book shops, some stores for household goods andso on, watching shoppers, watching sales people, chattingwith store managers. And they insisted that every one oftheir senior executives do likewise, including the lawyer,the controller and the vice president for personnel.   As a result, the company foresaw in the early '60s thecoming of the &quot;youth culture&quot; and built or remodelled storesto attract teen-agers. A few years later, when every onetalked of the &quot;greening of America&quot; the company realized thatthe youth culture was passe and changed merchandise andstores to attract the young adult. And another 10 yearslater, well before 1980, the company saw and understood theemergence of the two-earner family.   To be able to anticipate changes in distributive channelsand in where customers buy (and how, which is equallyimportant) one has to be in the marketplace, has to watchcustomers, and non-customers, has to ask &quot;dumb questions.&quot; Itis almost 40 years since I first advised executives to &quot;walkaround&quot; -- that is, to get out of their offices, visit andtalk to their associates in the company. This was the rightadvice then; now it is the wrong thing to do, and a waste ofthe executive's scarcest resource, his time. For now we knowhow to build upward information into the organization. Todepend on walking around actually may lull executives into afalse sense of security; it may make them believe that theyhave information when all they have is what theirsubordinates wanted them to hear.   The right advice to executives now is to walk outside.   ---   Mr. Drucker is a professor of social sciences at theClaremont Graduate School in California.</TEXT></DOC>