<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910729-0133</DOCNO><DOCID>910729-0133.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Missing Links in the Mideast `Peace Process'   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>07/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)ISRAEL (ISR)IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)SYRIA (SY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Syrian President Hafez Assad's offer to sit down at aconference table with Israel is the latest big news in aMideast &quot;peace process&quot; that has racked up mostly failures inthe 3,500 years since Moses negotiated the Exodus. Given theharsh political climate of the region -- a place that has had10 significant wars and thousands of skirmishes just sinceWorld War II -- even suspect concessions make headlines. Thatonly means that it is easy to fan hopes, not that hope isnecessarily justified by any maneuver of an Arab dictator.   A string of American secretaries of state dating back toJohn Foster Dulles of the Eisenhower era has wrestled withthe Mideast. Mr. Dulles handed over the Suez Canal to GamalAbdel Nasser, an ingrate who merely sought furtherself-aggrandizement. Henry Kissinger used his patentedshuttle diplomacy to damp the fires of the Yom Kippur War butaccomplished little else. The patient Cyrus Vance got theCamp David process underway, a notable achievement. Butcynics say he was aided by the fears of both Menachem Beginand Anwar Sadat that Jimmy Carter might inadvertently deliverthem both to the Russians.</LP><TEXT>   James Baker's record in the region is, at best, ambiguous.His State Department may or may not have touched off theinvasion of Kuwait by giving Saddam Hussein a wrong signal,depending upon whether you think Ambassador April Glaspie wasfirm or fuzzy in her pre-invasion conversation with Saddam.His State Department may or may not have delivered Lebanon toAssad, depending upon whether you think State was trapped byAssad's offer to help defeat Saddam. And his State Departmentmay or may not have insured future trouble with Saddam bycounseling the President not to take Baghdad, depending uponwhether you think it was the President's own idea.   Now, however, Mr. Baker has budged Assad from hislongstanding refusal to take part in a peace conference. Ormaybe he has, depending on whether there first can be anagreement on two issues. One is who will represent thePalestinians at the peace table. Israel does not want anyrepresentatives of the PLO or any Palestinian from EastJerusalem, a place it says it won't surrender even for peace.And it was a mistake if Mr. Baker left Assad with theimpression that the U.S. intends to help him recover theGolan Heights, which Syria lost to Israel in the 1967 Six DayWar. Israel equates the return of the high ground separatingit from Syria to something approximating national suicide. Itformally annexed the area in 1981, has settled it and doesn'tplan to give it up.   So what are the chances that Mr. Baker might finally scorea diplomatic success in the Middle East? Notwithstanding hisconsiderable diplomatic skills, they are not great.   In assessing the chances for a true peace, it is useful toask first what would constitute a &quot;true peace.&quot; The mostimmediate answer is the old-fashioned one, an absence of war.But beyond that there are the contracts of peace, such astreaties, mutual diplomatic recognition and the relativelyfree movement of goods and people from country to country.Israel has set this kind of peace as its goal since it wonits independence in 1948. But it so far has been able only toreach a fragile accommodation with Egypt, and that only afterreturning some of the land it conquered in 1967 and after aU.S. pledge of substantial financial support to both sides.   Are any of today's conditions similar to those that led tothe Camp David agreement and do they raise chances for asimilar type of settlement with Syria and Jordan? It seemsdoubtful. Jordan's King Hussein clearly misplayed his hand insupporting Saddam Hussein in the Gulf War, thereby losing thesympathy of the U.S. and the Gulf Arabs. But, if anything,the main barrier to his making a peace with Israel has grownlarger. That is the presence of militant Palestinians on hissoil, a number that has been swollen by refugees from Kuwait.The war has worsened, rather than relieved, the king'sPalestinian problem.   On the other hand, if the solution to the Palestinianproblem is simply to kick out the king and his fellowHashemites and turn Jordan over to the Palestinians -- asIsrael's Ariel Sharon has long advocated -- that is anothermatter entirely. But that probably won't happen either, giventhe king's widespread support.   Syria, for its part, has learned, as Saddam did, that itcan no longer count on the Soviet Union for backing, which nodoubt explains its more conciliatory attitude towards theU.S. But it has come out of the war clearly better off thanbefore. It can claim to have been a U.S. ally, although itwas a nominal one at best. It has consolidated its positionin Lebanon, where it now stations some 40,000 troops. And,most important of all, it has received a $3 billion aidinfusion from the Gulf Arabs, about half of which it will useto further expand its supply of arms.   If the U.S. would have liked to maneuver Syria into aposition of feeling heavy economic and political pressure tomake peace it has failed to do so. It can partly thank theGulf Arabs, its erstwhile allies in Desert Storm, for that.The counsels of the Gulf Arabs, in particular Saudi Arabia,may also account for why the U.S. was unwilling to unseatSaddam Hussein by force. The Saudis, who playbalance-of-power games of their own, have never beenparticularly eager to have a strong U.S. presence in theregion, except, of course, when they themselves were inimminent danger. The U.S. has too many funny ideas, aboutdemocracy and the like, that don't appeal to kings andprinces.   Which raises yet another issue, particularly with regardto Assad and Saddam. Peace is not necessarily a happycondition for dictators. Regimes that have never beenvalidated by popular elections are constantly seeking ways tounify and control the populations they govern. In suchendeavors, it is useful to have enemies, even if it meansgoing to war with those enemies from time to time -- or evenespecially so. What the U.S. failed to do with Saddam is toteach the lesson that wars can be costly not just for thepeople but for the dictators too. As the Journal's TonyHorwitz reported last week, Saddam is no hero to the Iraqipeople as they try to cope with the devastation of the war.But whereas his removal would have been popular with mostcitizens of the country, the U.S. failed to accomplish it. Sowhile the allies won the war, Arab despotism survived.   There can be no peace in the Middle East until the last ofa long line of despots stretching back into history finallyhave been removed. Failing to unseat Saddam was to miss ahistoric opportunity. Accommodating Assad, now the region'smost successful despot, will hardly remedy that error.</TEXT></DOC>