<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910227-0075</DOCNO><DOCID>910227-0075.</DOCID><HL>   Allied Forces on Verge of Taking   Kuwait City as  Iraqi Units Retreat   ---   Bush Presses Attack;   U.S. Armored Group   Engages Elite Guards   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Allied forces entered Kuwait City lastnight, while U.S. troops in Iraq began fighting SaddamHussein's vaunted Republican Guard, his last military unitcapable of large-scale organized resistance. The Iraqi armybegan what Pentagon officials called a &quot;full retreat&quot;yesterday after Saddam Hussein publicly declared that he isordering it out of Kuwait. But President Bush declared thatthe fighting can stop only if Iraqi soldiers &quot;lay down theirarms&quot; and quit the battlefield without their militaryequipment.   Iraqi troops began fleeing Kuwait City and an advanceparty of Marines already has reached the U.S. Embassy there,U.S. officials said. But they warned that one final majorbattle may yet remain.</LP><TEXT>   That decisive contest may have begun last night, as M1-A1tanks of the Army's Third Armored Division swept eastwardacross southern Iraq in a driving rainstorm to pummel anddefeat a Guard division.   Pentagon officials said that early reports from the fieldindicated that U.S. forces captured or neutralized aRepublican Guard mechanized division -- that is, one withmainly artillery and light armored vehicles. Before the U.S.bombing began last month, the division had about 10,000troops.   U.S. forces suffered only a handful of casualties, theofficials said. After the confrontation with the mechanizedGuard division, U.S. forces continued to push against Guardarmored divisions along a front dozens of miles wide, theofficials said. Those divisions contain hundreds oftop-of-the-line Soviet-made T-72 tanks, and are the prize ofthe Iraqi army.   The Persian Gulf war's final issue is rapidly becomingjust one man: Saddam Hussein. The war is continuing ratherthan being ended politically because the U.S. is intent onputting an end to the Iraqi leader as both a military threatand an Arab hero. The trick now is to accomplish that withoutmaking him a martyr in the process.   Yet even as the military rout continues, U.S. officialsare concluding that Saddam Hussein is unlikely to ever acceptPresident Bush's demand that he acquiesce to all UnitedNations resolutions condemning and punishing Iraq. And theyreluctantly concede the Iraqi leader is likely to remainstanding even after his army is totally ejected from Kuwait.So the mission for U.S. forces now is to disarm and humiliatehim so thoroughly that he isn't a serious threat during whatcould be a cold peace following the war. In addition, theBush Administration has been planning for details such as ademilitarized zone along the Iraq-Kuwait border.   &quot;He is trying to save the remnants of power and control inthe Middle East by every means possible,&quot; President Bushdeclared in a brief address in the White House Rose Garden.&quot;And here, too, Saddam Hussein will fail.&quot;   Those presidential remarks, aides said, were intended tolay down the principles that will guide the U.S. and itscoalition partners in the last stages of the war. Thefighting inside Kuwait will stop, Mr. Bush declared, whenIraqi soldiers in and around Kuwait &quot;lay down their arms.&quot;   Aside from disarming the better half of Iraq's million-manarmy that sits in and around Kuwait, the American aim is toensure that Saddam Hussein isn't allowed to frame thewithdrawal of his troops as a political victory. That isprecisely what he attempted to do in a radio addressyesterday in which he congratulated his soldiers for standingup to a 30-nation coalition assembled by the U.S.   Mr. Bush now has plenty of cheerleaders urging him on inthe humiliation of Saddam Hussein, even among those whodoubted the wisdom of the war in the first place. Emergingfrom a White House meeting yesterday, Sen. Patrick Leahy (D.,Vt.), who last month opposed the congressional resolutionauthorizing war, said, &quot;I think that the president would makea terrible mistake if he allowed Saddam Hussein to be in theposition where he could declare to his own people some sortof victory, and there is no sign President Bush intends to dothat.&quot;   As Sen. Robert Dole left the meeting, he turned to thepresident and urged: &quot;Don't let Saddam Hussein off the hook.&quot;   The Pentagon is even refusing to rule out seizing orshooting down Saddam Hussein's plane if he tries to fleeIraq.   There is a danger of overreaching. If the effort to makeSaddam Hussein lose power and face becomes too severe, theU.S. could turn his image from that of a humiliated tyrant tothat of a victim of superpower bullying. Perhaps worse, theallies could tarnish a victory if they seem willing toinflict too much damage on Iraq itself in an attempt topunish Saddam Hussein personally.   &quot;I don't care if he's a martyr, and I don't think weshould care,&quot; said former defense secretary Harold Brown.&quot;But if it appears that we are making the Iraqi peoplemartyrs, that would concern me.&quot;   The more immediate problem for U.S. officials, though, isthe final confrontation with Saddam Hussein's90,000-man-strong Republican Guard. Despite weeks of fiercebombing, officials say, the Guard unitsespecially their tankdivisions -- remain strong. According to one Pentagonestimate, less than 30% of the Guard's T-72 tanks wereknocked out of commission by the air war, primarily becauseof Iraqi expertise in camouflaging and shielding theirequipment.   The huge allied armored corps north and west of the Guardis the biggest combat tank force assembled since World WarII, with more than 1,300 heavy tanks and about 100,000 U.S.and British soldiers, supported by hundreds of Apachehelicopters and A-10 jets.   Relying on night-vision goggles, infrared scopes and theelement of surprise, the fast-moving armored column sought toflush the Guards out of their carefully camouflaged defensivepositions. At that point, facing overwhelming air power andthe cream of the allied army's tanks, Guard commanders willhave the choice of giving up or seeing their divisionsdestroyed.   &quot;The plan is to do all sorts of things to force {Iraqi}tanks into the open,&quot; Lt. Col. Terry Branham, commander of anApache squadron with the VII Corps, told reporters recently.&quot;The whole corps plan is written upon that premise, that hewill have to move to come&quot; toward advancing U.S. tankcolumns.   Late last night, Pentagon officials said that contactbetween U.S. and Iraqi tanks had been light, and it was tooearly to tell what strategy the Guards would adopt.   Early indications were that the Republican Guard isfighting back, even though it has been bombed for weeks, hashad its communication lines disrupted, and now faces anallied strike force of more than 100,000 soldiers bearingdown from the west and the north. According to preliminaryreports from the front, one Pentagon official said, itappeared that the Guard maintained discipline and thatcompanysize units weren't abandoning the battlefield withoutorders.   As the clashes with the Guard intensified, one Army unitcaptured a convoy of 50 of the big T-72 tanks trying to fleenorthward toward Bagdhad, and allied forces set up adefensive line near the Euphrates River west of Basra toblock future escape attempts.   Recently, bad weather has prevented A-10 &quot;Warthog&quot; jetsand and Apache attack helicopters from pounding the dug-inarmor, and the rain and clouds are expected to continue toinhibit air raids for the next few days.   If the Iraqi tanks remain in position and refuse tosurrender, the Army's VII Corps probably will attack thedug-in tanks with close-range, precision artillery andmissile barrages and tank volleys. Then, if the Iraqis stilldon't budge, said one Pentagon official familiar with thebattle plan, infantry units now a few miles from Iraqi lineswill creep closer in Bradley fighting vehicles and lobexplosives into the Iraqi trenches and underground shelters.   More broadly, U.S. commanders reported yesterday thatallied forces have destroyed or rendered ineffective 21 Iraqidivisions, more than half the total in and around Kuwait.   Saddam Hussein apparently was hoping to stop thisdevastation yesterday with a radio address to his troops andnation in which he said that Iraqi troops are withdrawingfrom Kuwait but that Iraqis should be proud to have stood upto a 30-nation coalition. He also didn't appear to entirelygive up his claim to Kuwait as a province of Iraq, sayingthat the country was annexed on Aug. 8 and &quot;became part ofIraq legally, constitutionally and actually,&quot; while addingthat the situation will change with the pullout.   By choosing to fight the allies initially and by refusingto clearly accept all U.N. resolutions ordering him out ofKuwait, Saddam is &quot;giving us every opportunity to shake thefoundations of his power,&quot; said one Bush administrationofficial.   U.S. officials are preparing to live with a hostile SaddamHussein for at least a while after the liberation of Kuwait.They intend to push the U.N. Security Council to keep inplace economic sanctions, and State Department officialsyesterday were working on a statement warning of theconsequences Iraq will face if it continues to fire Scudmissiles at Saudi Arabia or Israel once fighting stops.   U.S. officials say they are well aware of the danger ofmaking Saddam Hussein a martyr figure through U.S. overkill,and believe they can avoid that outcome. For starters, theU.S. hopes that the Iraqi people themselves will concludethat Saddam Hussein botched both his war with the U.S.-ledcoalition and his various attempts to stop it once it wasunderway. That, they hope, will prompt forces inside Iraq totopple him within weeks or months.   Secondly, the U.S. is calculating that Saddam Hussein willremain a sympathetic figure to those who revere him no matterhow the U.S. treats him -- and that those who are skepticalabout him will become more so.   But others, including Soviet officials who have beentrying to broker a peaceful way out for their old ally, warnof risks. Aleksander Belonogov, a Soviet deputy foreignminister, said the Kremlin favors restoring Iraq to its&quot;rightful place&quot; in the Arab world. Failure to do so &quot;wouldbe a serious mistake because this would lead precisely to thefeelings of rejection that would become the nourishing basefor various revenge-seeking tendencies.&quot;   Of course, the amount of pressure the U.S. will applydepends on how events on the battlefield play out in the nexttwo or three days.   While the tank battles began to the west, allied forcescontinued to consolidate positions around Kuwait City, amidnumerous reports from U.S. soldiers and Kuwaiti citizens thatnearly all of the Iraqi troops already have pulled out. NavyA-6 pilots fresh from air strikes north of Kuwait Citydescribed the roads there as clogged with Iraqi militaryvehicles fleeing toward Basra. They said the vehicles wereeasy targets.   &quot;This morning it was bumper tobumper,&quot; one pilot told poolreporters on the carrier USS Ranger. &quot;We hit the jackpot,&quot;another pilot was quoted as saying.   Rear Admiral Mike McConnell, director of intelligence forthe Joint Chiefs, said that allied forces found a document,which he said was written to Iraq's senior generals beforethe war started, ordering Iraqi troops to inflict &quot;maximumcasualties&quot; on U.S. troops and also to destroy Kuwaiti oilfacilities.   Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations for theJoint Chiefs of Staff, said Iraqi prisoners of war climbed toabout 30,000, but other officials said the total may becloser to 40,000 and is growing rapidly. Allied commandersface major problems in providing food, transportation andmedical care for what is likely to turn into well over100,000 prisoners. Bush administration officials have saidthat winning the good will of the prisoners and then sendingthem back to Iraq angry at their treatment by Saddam Husseinis likely to be an important tool in trying to unseat thecurrent regime.   Of course, the amount of pressure the U.S. will applydepends on how events on the battlefield play out in the nexttwo or three days. The &quot;great tank battle&quot; against RepublicanGuard units many U.S. officers anticipated &quot;hasn'tmaterialized yet,&quot; said Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director ofoperations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, &quot;and whether itwill or not remains to be seen.&quot;   To the south, allied forces continued to consolidatepositions around Kuwait City, amid numerous reports from U.S.soldiers and Kuwaiti citizens that nearly all of the Iraqitroops already have pulled out. Navy A-6 pilots fresh fromair strikes north of Kuwait City described the roads there asclogged with Iraqi military vehicles fleeing toward Basra.They said the vehicles were easy targets.   &quot;This morning it was bumper to bumper,&quot; one pilot toldpool reporters on the carrier USS Ranger. &quot;We hit thejackpot,&quot; another pilot was quoted as saying.   Overall, Pentagon officials described Iraqi forces asconfused, leaderless and battle-weary, adding that the fewGuard units that have engaged in tank duels so far haven'tbeen &quot;any tougher&quot; to defeat than the rest of SaddamHussein's army.   Gen. Kelly said Iraqi prisoners of war climbed to about30,000, but other officials said the total may be closer to40,000 and is growing rapidly. Allied commanders face majorproblems in providing food, transportation and medical carefor what is likely to turn into well over 100,000 prisoners.Bush administration officials have said that winning the goodwill of the prisoners and then sending them back to Iraqangry at their treatment by Saddam Hussein is likely to be animportant tool in trying to unseat the current regime.</TEXT></DOC>