<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911121-0124</DOCNO><DOCID>911121-0124.</DOCID><HL>   Don't Fool With Money, Cut Taxes   ----   By Robert J. Barro</HL><DATE>11/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LABOR TAXES</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)TAXES (TAX)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The questions I am asked most often these days are: Why isthe economic recovery weaker than expected? How will theeconomy do over the next year? What should the government doto help? As a first approximation, the right answers toquestions like these are: &quot;I don't know,&quot; &quot;I don't know,&quot; and&quot;nothing.&quot; But I find that such replies make reporters thinkeither that I know little about macroeconomics or else that Iam holding out on them (perhaps in order to save material formy own article).   With respect to the first idea, I can claim that I amrelatively well informed about macroeconomics, a positionthat fits comfortably with ignorance about the causes of manypast business fluctuations and with considerable uncertaintyabout the future course of the economy. This limitedknowledge not only justifies modesty about macroeconomists'ability to make forecasts, but also suggests that thegovernment should avoid efforts to fine tune the economy. Itis best for the government to provide a stable framework, andthen mainly stay out of the way.</LP><TEXT>   The weakness of the recent recovery is apparent fromstatistics on industrial production, employment, corporateearnings, and so on, and also from the recent downturn of thestock market. The behavior of short-term interests rates --real rates on three-month U.S. Treasury Bills falling to nearzero -- is also consistent with a sluggish economy. Lowinterest rates tend to reflect low demand for capital.   Some observers, such as the White House, would like theFederal Reserve to do more to stimulate the economy. There isconsiderable controversy among macroeconomists about theeffect of monetary policy on output, employment and realinterest rates. We know that monetary policy's main long-runeffect is on nominal variables, such as the level of prices.One cannot generate a permanent boom by having high or risingrates of monetary growth -- in the long run all a countrygets from higher monetary growth is higher inflation, highernominal interest rates and a less productive economy.   We know for the short run that a monetary collapse, as inthe Great Depression, contributes to declines in output andemployment, and we think that unexpected monetary expansionleads for a while to increases in output and employment.   In any event, most macroeconomists agree that it is follyfor the monetary authority to try to smooth out the businesscycle by shifting between surprisingly high and surprisinglylow rates of monetary growth. The monetary authority's majormission should be to maintain a stable nominal frameworkwithin which the private economy can operate efficiently.Future price levels and hence rates of inflation should bepredictable, a pattern that in practice requires a lowaverage rate of inflation.   Probably the best report card on the Federal Reserve isthe level and volatility of long-term nominal interest rates.These rates reflect real interest rates and prospectiveinflation over the long run. Since long-term real interestrates are reasonably stable, the main source of fluctuationsin the nominal rates is changes in the prospects forinflation. And since inflation depends in the long run mainlyon monetary policy, the long-term nominal interest ratereflects the market's view of this policy.   Nominal interest rates on U.S. government bonds with10-year maturity were low and relatively stable through themid-1960s, but then rose, along with inflation, to a peak ofabout 7% in 1970-71, an outcome that led to price controlsand the closing of the gold window. Interest rates were stillaround 7% at the beginning of 1977, but the real disaster formonetary policy was the increase to around 13% by the end of1980.   The high and volatile interest rates from 1981 through1985 can be viewed as the price paid by the Fed and theReagan administration to restore long-term credibility. Thisperiod paved the way for the lower and much more stablelong-term interest rates from 1986 to the present. Judged bythe level and stability of these rates -- and thecorrespondingly moderate and stable inflation rates -- thisrecent period merits at least an A- for monetary policy. Itwould be preferable to have interest rates that were as lowand stable as those of the early 1960s, but the recent recordis highly commendable. Anyone looking for a target to blamefor the economy's recent performance ought to look somewhereother than at monetary policy.   The economy also reacts to fiscal policy and otherpolicies of the government. Some highlights of the Bushadministration's domestic policies thus far are a taxincrease, a rise in the minimum-wage rate, no significantsteps toward deregulation of domestic markets, no progress inreforming the regulation of the financial industry, anincrease in the duration of unemployment-insurance benefits,a &quot;Civil Rights Bill&quot; that amounts to an invitation to morelitigation, and a recent flirtation with usury ceilings oncredit-card interest rates. I cannot prove that this recordhas led to the slow growth since 1989, but there is nothingin this package that looks like growth promotion.   Of course, the Bush administration's policies could easilyhave been worse: There could have been larger increases intaxes, minimum wage rates and unemployment-insurancebenefits. It could also have imposed general price controls,started an outright trade war with Japan, reregulated theairline industry, and capped home-mortgage interest rates.   As with monetary policy, a good fiscal and regulatoryframework provides clearcut, stable rules that businesses andindividuals can count on. Thus, changes should be geared tothe long run, and from this perspective, the major deficiencyof the fiscal system is its excessive taxation of income fromcapital.   Suppose, for example, that a corporation undertakesinvestment expenditures. These expenditures correspond topayments to factor inputs, workers or capital (somewhere inthe economy), and these payments are subject to incometaxation. This is the first level of taxation on investmentspending. Later on, the increased stock of business capitalleads to income from capital. The taxation of this incomerepresents a second level of taxation of investment.   The amount of tax on capital income depends on the mannerin which investment was financed. If investment is financedby debt, then some of the capital income appears as interestpayments, which are taxed by the levy on interest income. Inthis case, the investment is taxed twice: once for theinitial factor incomes and later for the flow of interestincome. Actually, the double taxation is roughly correct forlong-lived capital, but the effects are mitigated for capitalthat is depreciated rapidly. So, in addition to taxingcapital too heavily, the system favors short-lived overlong-lived capital.   If investment is financed by retained earnings or equityissue, then the capital income shows up as corporate profits,which are subject to the corporate income tax. This flow istaxed yet again when it appears as dividends (if the proceedsare paid out to shareholders) or capital gains (if theproceeds are retained). Therefore, investment is triple taxed-- once for the initial factor incomes, once for thecorporate profits, and once for the dividends or capitalgains. (The exact result depends again on the rate ofdepreciation.)   Because the double taxation of debt-financed investment ismore attractive than the triple taxation of equity-financedinvestment, corporations are motivated to use debt. Thisincentive was increased by the effective rise in thecapital-gains tax rate in the 1986 tax reform.   Unlike macroeconomics, which has many mysteries, it is nobig problem for economists to design tax systems that lessenthe distortions against investment. The main idea is to taxconsumption instead of income. One attractive setup allowsbusinesses to treat investment expenditures as fullydeductible current expenses. This tax break offsets thetaxability of the factor incomes. Alternatively, thecorporate income tax could be abolished and the taxable cashflow and tax-deductible investment expenses could be passedthrough directly to shareholders.   If these basic alterations are unattainable, then it wouldbe desirable to implement some less dramatic changes thatlower the effective tax rate on capital income, specifically,a cut in the capital-gains rate and a reintroduction of theinvestment-tax credit.   The one caveat, however, is that these changes should bepermanent features of the tax system, not additionalinstruments for the government to use to fine tune theeconomy. This worry is especially acute for theinvestment-tax credit, which was a favorite object ofmanipulation form its inception in the early 1960s until itslatest demise in 1986. These variations in the tax credittended to worsen the economy's performance because businesseswere induced to alter the timing of investment in an effortto speculate on changes in the credit.   The right policy would be to lower permanently the rate oftaxation of capital income. This would be good for therecession, good for long-term growth and good for the stockmarket. In fact, if Congress would just start talkingpositively about tax cuts for capital income, the stockmarket -- a forward-looking entity -- would jump upward evenbefore the cuts were enacted.   ---   Mr. Barro, a Harvard economics professor, is a Journalcontributing editor.</TEXT></DOC>