<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920207-0018</DOCNO><DOCID>920207-0018.</DOCID><HL>   Gun Play:   Mainstream America   Finds It Isn't Immune   To Kids Killing Kids   ---   The Death of Jason Bannon   Was Ruled an Accident,   But Is Someone to Blame?   ---   The Suburbs' Sense of Denial   ----   By Ellen Graham   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/07/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><RE>NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   EASTAMPTON, N.J. -- In the space of just three weeks lastyear, 14-year-old Jason Bannon twice had a surprise encounterwith a handgun.   While visiting relatives last January, he and his cousinwent to the home of a third boy, who pulled out a .357 Magnumpistol and pointed it at them. Jason told the boy to put thegun away, left the house and reported the incident to hisuncle.</LP><TEXT>   Reliability was typical of Jason, a freckle-faced eighthgrader whose parents closely supervised his comings andgoings in this comfortable, middle-class suburb nearPhiladelphia. &quot;You didn't have to be real strict with Jasonbecause he respected our values and rules,&quot; says his mother,Linda Forsythe. &quot;We felt safe.&quot;   But Jason's second brush with guns was fatal. Last Feb.23, while on a rare evening outing with classmates in nearbyLumberton, N.J., he was shot in the back of the head by abasketball teammate, Marcus &quot;Jay&quot; Mitchell, the 14-year-oldson of a Trenton police officer. The shooting divided thetown and sent young Jay to court, pleading that it was all anaccident.   Another wholesome, middle-class youth dead in a firearmincident. Another aberration. Or was it? In this area ofsouth central New Jersey alone, three other suburban youthsdied in shooting incidents in the seven months precedingJason's death. Though homicide statistics aren't compiled byzip code, those who track teen gun violence see evidence thatit is on the rise not just in urban centers but in themiddle-class, &quot;safe&quot; neighborhoods of America. GeorgeButterfield, deputy director of the National School SafetyCenter at Pepperdine University in Malibu, Calif., says hesees a clear migration of guns to suburban areas much the waythat drugs and gangs have also come to the middle class.   &quot;Teen shootings and weapons incidents have increasedacross the board,&quot; he says. &quot;It's just that in the suburbsyou have a lot more denial. All over the country, people tellme, `This was an isolated incident.'&quot;   In affluent Westport, Conn., where a 16-year-old wascharged with fatally shooting a classmate last October, theWestport News was besieged by critical letters when itreported on widespread drunkenness at the high schoolhomecoming game, and on a teen-age party where a youth hadbrandished a 9mm pistol. &quot;We believe Westport suffers fromthe disease of denial,&quot; the paper editorialized afterward.   In some instances, tragedies like Jason's have resulted inmore stringent gun-control laws. After her 12-year-old sonDavid was accidentally killed in 1989 by an 11-year-oldplaymate, Susan Kenney of Naugatuck, Conn., lobbied to winpassage of a state law making it a felony to fail to secure agun that a minor uses to injure or kill. Florida andCalifornia have similar laws, also spearheaded by motherswhose children died in shootings.   Linda Forsythe would like such a law passed in New Jersey,and has written to every state legislator seeking a sponsor.But it's shaping up as a lonely crusade.   In the year since Jason's death the community has beenrent with bitter recriminations and animosity over who shouldbe held accountable. Yet it appears that few have steppedback to reflect on the more general implications of theshooting: that teen-agers and guns don't mix. There's been nodiscernible re-examination of attitudes toward the presenceand accessibility of firearms, and stoutly held positions ongun control -- pro or con -- have budged little.   Nor have neighbors mobilized to try to prevent arecurrence of the tragedy. Town and school officials haveresponded with silence. There have been no outragededitorials or letters to the editor in the local press, noschool assemblies or classroom lessons on gun safety.   &quot;There was no hue and cry to do something because it wasviewed as a personal tragedy, an isolated accident,&quot; saysRichard Alaimo, head of the school board for the area highschool. Joyce Sico, who was co-president of the EastamptonMiddle School PTA last year, says that while parents of someof Jason's classmates wanted police to talk to the childrenabout guns, nothing came of it. &quot;The most frightening thingis you don't know who may have a gun in their home,&quot; shesays. &quot;It's difficult to know how safe your children are whenthey visit their friends.&quot;   Like other townships carved out of the area's farmland,Eastampton is mainly a cluster of newer developments, wherecommunity bonds are as fragile and unformed as the slendersaplings that line the immaculate sidewalks. Many parentsdrawn into the Jason case hardly knew each other before theshooting. Government services are consolidated regionally,and most shopping is done at large malls. In short, the areais emblematic of changing rural America -- where violentcrime is rising at a faster rate than in many big cities.   Children here don't usually pack pistols like some oftheir streetwise urban peers. But here -- and elsewhere inmainstream America, where hunting and self-defense arearticles of faith -- guns are at the ready: stashed in abedside table, a gun rack or, in Jay Mitchell's case, in anunlocked basement cabinet. For a youthful generationseemingly inured to media violence, this arsenal has lostmuch of its power to awe or terrify.   The last day of Jason Bannon's life was spent, like mostSaturdays, with school friends and sports. He played in abasketball tournament at school all afternoon. Afterward, hisstepfather, David Forsythe, drove Jason and teammates TimRinggold and Jay Mitchell to a local bowling alley --checking before he dropped them off that a lane would beavailable shortly. Douglas and LaVerne Mitchell, Jay'sparents, were to pick the youths up at about 10 p.m.   The boys were joined by classmate Erica Plasket, 14, atall honors student. Failing to get a lane after an hour'swait, the group decided to go to a movie and, beforehand,drop by Jay's house nearby.   His parents were out; the only person home was Jay's16-year-old brother Douglas Jr., who was watching TV in theliving room. Jay and his friends hung out in his bedroom forawhile. Picking up Jay's BB gun propped against the wall,Jason fired it into the rug. Jay, who had earned sharpshooterawards at YMCA camp, then mentioned that his father had areal gun. The talk of guns &quot;didn't really worry me,&quot; Ericarecalls. &quot;I didn't know anything about guns.&quot;   Tim Ringgold had already seen the gun -- an antique.32-caliber Smith andamp; Wesson revolver that had been given toMr. Mitchell by a relative years before. The previousOctober, Tim would later testify, Jay opened his desk drawerto reveal the revolver and five or six bullets. As Timrecalls it today: &quot;I didn't believe it was real. I pushed hishands, told him to put it back. I wanted to tell his Dad, butwas afraid Jay would beat me up to get revenge.&quot;   Now, months later, Tim's mind was more on baseball cardsthan guns. The wiry, dark-haired eighth grader had beenpestering Jay to show them his collection. So, shortly before9 p.m., they all descended to the basement for a look.   While Tim crouched over the box of cards, Jay rummagedthrough a metal cabinet. Jason, restless, said to Tim, &quot;Let'sgo, we're going to be late.&quot;   He and Erica had turned to leave when, Erica testified,Jay called out: &quot;I found it]&quot; She turned and saw Jay holdingthe gun, his right hand on the pistol grip, his left handcradling the cylinder and barrel. &quot;I didn't think anything ofit,&quot; she says today. &quot;I wasn't thinking he'd shoot us.&quot;   She says she turned away from Jay and about a minute laterheard the shot. Jason fell beside her. &quot;I thought he wasplaying a game,&quot; she recalls. &quot;I said, `Jason get up, that'snot funny.'&quot; Jay dropped the gun, ran to Jason and nudged himwith his foot. Only then did they notice blood. Erica beganscreaming.   The shot &quot;sounded like something broke,&quot; Tim recalls. Jayrushed toward him, saying he'd shot Jason. Everyone ranupstairs to get help.   Marc Sano, of the Lumberton police, found Jay in the frontyard, &quot;very excited, overwhelmed.&quot; No evidence of drugs oralcohol was found.   Jason died the next morning of massive cerebralhemorrhaging.   Late on the night of the shooting, Jay was questioned byinvestigators for the Burlington County prosecutor's office.He asserted the shooting was accidental, and said he hadlooked down the gun barrel and hadn't seen the bullet in thecylinder. He couldn't consistently demonstrate how he hadpositioned the gun, or explain how it discharged. Though hesaid he had attempted to load the revolver on previousoccasions, he couldn't explain how the single cartridge woundup in the gun the night of the shooting.   After questioning, Jay was released to the custody of hisparents. His father found five .32-caliber bullets underJay's bed later that night, which were turned over to policeafter an informant tipped them to the discovery.   The month following the shooting was a haze of shock,grief and confusion for Jason's family and friends. TheMitchells, who along with Jay declined to be interviewed forthis article, &quot;felt great grief&quot; as well, according to theirattorney, Eldridge Hawkins.   Nonetheless, Jay showed up at school the day after Jasondied. The school presented the shooting as a tragic accident,and students were urged to give Jay their support. Indeed, hejoined Jason's closest friends in grief counseling at school.   &quot;At first everybody thought, what a horrible thing for Jay-- how is he going to live with this?&quot; recalls a teacher whorequests anonymity. &quot;But the way he came to school was soincredibly upsetting. His reaction was what took everybodyaback.&quot;   Tiffany Patton, a high school student, had joined hersister Jill at the middle school that first Monday forcounseling. They say that Jay twice pointed out to them whathe said was Jason's blood on his black and white LA Gearsneakers.   Mr. Hawkins says the Patton girls' account, which theyrelated in court, is &quot;contrary to that of many otherwitnesses.&quot; As for Jay showing up at school, he says, &quot;Justbecause you are sad and upset doesn't mean you don't have anobligation to carry on.&quot; Mr. Hawkins says he saw Jay cry thefirst day of trial. He adds that &quot;in his everydayinteractions he doesn't show his remorse. He doesn't want theworld to know how he feels.&quot;   Jay attended school and joined classmates at parties andathletic events. &quot;He definitely got more attention thanbefore,&quot; Tim Ringgold says. The teacher at the schoolconcurs. &quot;It was almost like he was a hero.&quot;   On March 25 Jay Mitchell was charged with murder and takeninto custody. The Burlington County prosecutor stated at thetime that there was circumstantial evidence that the gun wasfired &quot;purposefully or knowingly.&quot; He didn't divulge theevidence publicly. Psychiatric evaluations were ordered; Mr.Hawkins says his client was found not to be a threat to thecommunity and was released to his parents. After a closedprobable-cause hearing, Judge Harold B. Wells III ruled thatthe prosecutor's case wasn't strong enough to substantiate amurder charge. The state then charged Jay with aggravatedmanslaughter, meaning it would have to prove he &quot;recklessly&quot;caused Jason's death &quot;under circumstances manifesting extremeindifference to human life.&quot; Jay pleaded not guilty.   While awaiting trial, Jay participated in schoolathletics. On Aug. 30 he reported to football practice at thehigh school. Jill and Tiffany Patton, who were watching fromthe sidelines, later testified that Jay gestured at themmenacingly, as though firing a pistol with a two-handed grip.   On Oct. 1, Jay Mitchell's nonjury trial as a juvenilebegan before Judge Cornelius Sullivan of New Jersey SuperiorCourt. A tape of his statement to investigators was played,in which he said the gun &quot;just went off.&quot; The county's chiefmedical examiner testified that the path of the bullet wasalmost parallel to the floor, supporting the state'scontention that the gun had been aimed at eye level, ratherthan discharged accidentally, as the defense argued. A policeballistics expert testified that the only way the gun couldhave gone off was if the trigger was pulled with some force.Two children who lived across the street from Jay testifiedthey had seen him brandishing the gun on two previousoccasions. Neither reported the incidents at the time.   After five days of state testimony, Mr. Hawkins moved fordismissal, arguing the state had failed to prove Jayrecklessly pointed the gun at Jason. &quot;Everyone seems to besaying that it was an accident,&quot; Mr. Hawkins said, addingthat Jay's efforts to seek help after the shooting showed hisconcern for Jason's life.   Assistant Prosecutor Martin Mooney argued that Jay wasfamiliar with the gun and had training in firearms, yet hadpointed it at Jason and pulled the trigger. Jay, he said,&quot;didn't treat that gun as if it were loaded, because if hehad, Jason Bannon would be alive today.&quot;   Judge Sullivan entered a judgment of acquittal, butassailed Jay for changing his story and being evasive duringthe investigation. &quot;When faced with a personal disaster,&quot; thejudge said &quot;. . . Jay Mitchell ran scared and lied&quot; -- about,among other things, his familiarity with the pistol andwhether he had played with it in the past. Judge Sullivanfound it &quot;credible&quot; that Jay had checked the gun and believedit to be unloaded. &quot;In light of his inexperience withfirearms, his age and immaturity,&quot; the judge said, &quot;noreasonable jury could find beyond a reasonable doubt that heconsciously disregarded a known risk that he might cause thedeath of Jason Bannon.&quot;   The Trenton police department, in an investigation by itsinternal-affairs staff, found no reason to reprimand Mr.Mitchell for the way he stored the gun. The head of Trenton'spolice and fire departments is Ernest Williams, Mr.Mitchell's uncle. Mr. Williams stated at the time thatTrenton officers are required to keep personal firearms in &quot;asecure place, but we don't define what a `secure place' is.&quot;In a later interview, Mr. Williams said Trenton police had noreason to dispute Mr. Mitchell's contention that he neverloaded or used the gun, or kept bullets for it.   Mrs. Forsythe is outraged by Jay's acquittal, and the factthat the judge didn't reprimand Mr. Mitchell for failing tosecure his gun. &quot;Here's a boy crying out for help and thejudge is saying, `OK, you're immature, so there will be noconsequences,'&quot; she says. In November, Mrs. Forsythe filed acivil wrongful-death suit against Jay Mitchell, his parentsand the Trenton police department.   Jason himself hunted with his father, Robert Bannon, wholives in Pennsylvania. And even Mrs. Forsythe argues only forresponsible gun ownership. She finds irony in the fact thatit's illegal in New Jersey for a minor to carry a firearm,yet it isn't a crime for an adult to leave a loaded gunaround the house accessible to children.   The community at large, however, has tended to sweep suchtroubling issues aside. &quot;Everybody goes, `Too bad, thesethings happen, maybe we should have gun control' and thenthey forget about it,&quot; says Gary Langan, an FBI agent wholives in nearby Medford, N.J. His wife, Marilyn, says theshooting has stiffened her opposition to handguns. She plansto help push for stricter legislation. Before Jason was shot,she says, she probably wouldn't have been spurred to act. &quot;Weget complacent,&quot; she says.   Joseph Gorman, chief of adolescent services at the localDrenk Mental Health Center, has seized guns from youngstersat the clinic, and says they are readily available in thecommunity. With impulsive adolescents steeped in the violenceof movies and TV, he says &quot;You play with a gun, then afteryou shoot it you know it's real.&quot; He likens it to when hearrived in Vietnam at age 19, flush &quot;with the culture ofcombat as seen on TV.&quot; Seeing fighter planes overhead, &quot;Isaid, Oh my God, this is real] It was almost as if I'd justwoken up.&quot;   Jason's former football coach, Richard Powell, blameswidespread parental apathy for the lack of a broadercommunity response to Jason's death. &quot;Gun control only workswhen parents know what's going on with their kids,&quot; he says.&quot;We have a tough enough time just getting parents to comewatch their kids play ball.&quot; When he asks parentspoint-blank, &quot;Don't you care?&quot; he says the response is: &quot;Idon't have the time.&quot; Jason's parents, he notes, were alwaysin the stands.   While Mr. Powell supports gun-safety education, he alsosays: &quot;I could tell you I was for gun control, but that wouldbe a lie.&quot; A hunter and target shooter who owns 19 guns, hesays his seven children have never tampered with his firearms-- because, he says, of strict training.   Following Jay's trial, Jill and Tiffany Patton moved withtheir family to Pennsylvania because of threats andharassment the girls say they underwent at school aftertestifying. Their father gave up his contracting business andtheir mother resigned from a psychiatric nursing job at alocal hospital. They left two homes unsold.   Before Jason's death, Mr. Patton had planned to teach Jilland Tiffany how to use a gun &quot;for their own protection,&quot; Mrs.Patton says. Those plans have been abandoned. Mrs. Patton noweven finds herself telling her nine-year-old son to put awayhis toy gun. Mr. Patton keeps his guns locked in a large safeand stresses firearm safety to his children. Fundamentally,Mrs. Patton says, &quot;our attitudes haven't really changed. Weboth grew up in the country, where all the men hunt and fish.Everybody has guns. To me it's not that unusual.&quot;   Jay Mitchell now plays football and runs track as afreshman at the same high school that Jason's 16-year-oldbrother Robert attends. In December, Mr. Mitchell brought Jayalong when he went to the prosecutor to ask for the return ofthe gun that killed Jason Bannon. A stunned Mr. Mooney toldhim he'd have to formally petition the court.</TEXT></DOC>