<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900427-0079</DOCNO><DOCID>900427-0079.</DOCID><HL>   Toward a Global Regionalism   ----   By Kenichi Ohmae</HL><DATE>04/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   FORGN</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   The pleas for &quot;coordination&quot; of economic policies beingmade by finance ministers of the world's leading countriesare not convincing. What these helmsmen don't seem tounderstand is that their economies are already coordinated.The role of national governments is much less important thanthey think; governments are little more than spoilers whodisrupt markets with their interference and announcements.   The economic coordination isn't perfect. Some resources(money) are mobile, others (jobs) are not. Some industriesare global (autos), others (many services) are not. Moreover,some regions of individual countries are more coordinatedthan others because of local trade and investment patterns.</LP><TEXT>   Despite these imperfections, the most fundamental truth oftoday's economic world is this: Man's ability to create,compete and consume will not be denied by those politiciansand bureaucrats who try to restrict the flows of capital,technology and information. This is a lesson not only forEastern European communists, but Japanese and Americannationalists.   The two traditional &quot;products&quot; of governments -- militaryprotection and access to natural resources -- are losingtheir value. Commodities can be arbitraged across producingcountries, and if you have the wealth to buy thesecommodities you certainly have access to them. Just 10 yearsago, during the second energy crisis, we were worried aboutthe supply of primary commodities and resources. We don'tworry so much today. The price of energy might rise, butinnovative products or services can produce much higherper-capita GNP than natural resources. Switzerland, forexample, doesn't even have a flat stretch of land, yet it hasa $25,000 per-capita GNP, the world's highest.   Thus, there is diminishing need for military power toprotect a country's &quot;scarce&quot; resources. Moreover, no amountof military power can make a people more productive. Aneducated populace with free access to information is thetruest source of wealth and national security. That's thereality that brought down the Berlin Wall and is thefundamental reason the world needs less military muscle.   Besides military forces, another benefit governments offertheir people is ideology. With their taxes, people pay forthe &quot;truth.&quot; But Cable News Network and the tales of the goodlife it spreads throughout the world have made standards ofliving, not political dogma, the criteria by whichgovernments are judged. Communism, Japanism, Monroeism aremerely packaging for this &quot;core product.&quot;   Government &quot;advertising&quot; -- which basically asks people topay for dogma -- no longer sells. People want the best goodsand services, whatever their origin. Along with the right tovote, they want the right to buy.   So governments must deliver standards of living in thisnew market for political control. Some politicians think theycan do that on a national basis. They are wrong. Nationalstandards of living have always hidden disparities in wellbeing -- disparities between families and between regions.The dirty little truth is that politicians rob other regionsto buy votes in their own. But global competition is makingthese larcenies more obvious.   If, for example, a government protects its steel industrywith tariffs, other steel-intensive industries in thatcountry, or their customers, suffer because of the higherprices they must pay. Now that markets are global,cross-regional transfers result not only in a loss of profitsand higher prices, but in lost jobs as national companieslose to foreign competition.   Multinationals in the late '60s and early '70s werestructured more or less according to a hierarchical, colonialmodel. Most production was done &quot;at home.&quot; Today's globalcompanies are decentralized and willing to manufacture,design, or assign managerial authority wherever they can bestserve the customer. The objective of Honda, IBM and otherglobal firms is to serve customers, not governments,world-wide.   Thus we now see as much intranational as internationalcompetition. For North Carolina to prosper, it has to attractEuropean and Japanese investment. In fact, one-third ofinvestment in that state over the past two years has comefrom Japan. North Carolina is not competing with Japan orEurope; it is competing with Boston and Silicon Valley forforeign high-tech investments. Boston is its biggest &quot;enemy&quot;in this regard. What should Washington do in this contestexcept stay out and make sure there is a &quot;level playingfield&quot; between these two competitors -- for example, equalaccess to educational grants?   Japan's economy is just as regional as that of the U.S.When people talk about Japan's prosperity, they are basicallytalking about the prosperity of three cities, Tokyo, Osakaand Nagoya. The rest of the country is holding on by gettingmoney from the central government at the expense of urbantaxpayers.   Like the Meiji Restoration in the second half of the 19thcentury, a Heisei Restoration is needed to transform Japan'sgovernment to one more suitable for a developed country in aglobal economy. Japan needs a new constitution that woulddivide the country into nine or 10 regions, each with somedegree of autonomy. These regions would be able to negotiatewith foreign nations on matters such as air rights andimmigration.   The governor of the northern island of Hokkaido, forinstance, would declare independence from Tokyo. He wouldabolish its 3:30 a.m. sunrise based on Japan standard timeand open stock trading two hours earlier than Tokyo. Sapporowould then attract all the financial institutions now inTokyo, Sydney and Wellington. And, because Sapporo would beable to negotiate air rights with foreign governments, itwould become a hub for transpacific flights. It would alsohave direct flights to Seoul, Taipei, Hong Kong and othermajor cities in the Pacific. Hokkaido, with its beautifullakes and mountains, would become the Switzerland of Asia.   Centrally governed countries such as Japan, the SovietUnion and China will have to go through turmoil that in thelong run will be good for them. The solution is toreconstruct on a regional basis. In order to modernize, Chinamust create 20 &quot;Singapores.&quot; To a lesser extent, but still inthe same fundamental way, America must continue to allow eachregion to integrate itself into the world economy elsewhere.   Most politicians are still living in the 19th century. InJapan, for example, most politicans come from small towns andtry to promote a concept of narrow regionalism. They ask oneregion to make sacrifices in the name of &quot;national&quot; interest.They say they can protect the rice farmers from foreignpressure and build bridges and gymnasiums with the centralgovernment's money. They use voters' nationalistic feelingsto funnel money into special interest groups or their ownconstituencies.   Nowhere is this hypocrisy more clear than in Japan-U.S.trade talks, which take on artificial nationalistic overtoneswhen in truth they are battles among special interests. Whoseinterest are being represented by the negotiators? America's?Japan's?   Only a global regionalism that ignores national boundariesmakes sense. Local communities will develop natural partners,sometimes close geographically, sometimes remote. Throughthese pairings, alert regions with global views andaspirations will develop and prosper, the same way that alertcompanies with a global perspective are already prospering.For example, Southern California can flourish through itsties with Australia, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan -- not somuch through its ties with Washington, D.C., New York orChicago. Similarly, Toronto and Vancouver can flourishbecause of their ties with Hong Kong and Wales and, morerecently, Alsace-Lorraine can flourish through investmentsfrom Tokyo, etc.   If I had my way, I'd pay a third of my taxes to aninternational fund dedicated to solving world problems, suchas the environment and famine. Another third would go to mycommunity, where my family lives and my children areeducated. The final third would go to my country, which eachyear does less and less for me in terms of security orwell-being and instead subsidizes special interests.   The role of government in a borderless world is torepresent and protect the interests of its people, not of itscompanies or its industries. It should let in the light andthen allow its people to make their own choices. Anythingless is to put the class and career interests of governmentbureaucrats ahead of the people they are sworn to serve.   ---   Mr. Ohmae, the managing director of McKinsey andamp; Co. inJapan, is the author of the forthcoming &quot;The BorderlessWorld&quot; (Harper andamp; Row).</TEXT></DOC>