<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910923-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>910923-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Bad History:   Credit-Report Firms   Face Greater Pressure;   Ask Norwich, Vt., Why   ---   Its Citizens All Became Risks,   In the Kind of Error That   Could Lead to New Law   ---   No. 1 in Consumer Complaints   ----   By Michael W. Miller   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   EFX TRW</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>DIVERSIFIED TECHNOLOGY (DTC)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)INDUSTRIAL andamp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)</GV><RE>GEORGIA (GA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)OHIO (OH)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   One day this summer, TRW Inc. turned the affluent villageof Norwich, Vt., into a town of deadbeats.   Suddenly, for no apparent reason, all 1,400 Norwichtaxpayers were red-flagged as high credit risks in TRW'snationwide network of credit records. Within a week, Norwichwas beset by an epidemic of personal-finance crises.</LP><TEXT>   A doctor couldn't use his credit card on his vacation inAlaska. At the annual town fair, a banker found himselfcornered at the bumper-car ride by an anguished jewelry-storeowner whose mortgage application had inexplicably run intotrouble. The town clerk's office was deluged with calls fromworried banks around New England. Finally, a week later, thetown clerk tracked down an alarmingly simple mistake thatcaused the turmoil.   &quot;It's a very devastating kind of feeling,&quot; says RichardBrooks, a Norwich law professor who learned his credit reportwas tainted just as he was applying for a loan to renovatehis turn-of-the-century clapboard home. &quot;Our entire lifestyle is based to a lesser or greater extent on credit, so itwas like a slight tremor of the earth.&quot;   More people than ever are feeling tremors from thebillion-dollar credit-reporting industry, an invisible butvital force in the life of every American consumer. Theindustry has become the No. 1 source of consumer complaintsin America, ahead of auto defects and debt collectors,according to the Federal Trade Commission, which sawcredit-reporting complaints shoot up 50% to 9,000 last year.Consumer groups are assailing the industry for litteringreports with errors, ignoring efforts to correct them andselling their sensitive data to junk-mailers. And 14 statesare suing TRW for a long list of alleged injuries toconsumers.   Next month, Congress expects to hold hearings on a packageof tough new provisions on accuracy and accessibility incredit-reporting-moves the industry is fiercely fighting.   Behind this uproar is a trio of information giants keepingdetailed records of every American consumer's bill-payinghabits. These records are more important than ever topeople's access to loans, credit cards and sometimes evenjobs. But the industry's inner workings are more chaotic --and more stacked against the consumer -- than most peopleknow.   In fact, credit-reporting companies have an economicincentive not to clean up their errors, because banks andstores like to buy the longest reports with the mostderogatory data.   The credit-reporting network has become so far-flung andautomated that sensitive data on consumers' private financeshas become easily available to anyone with a password and apersonal computer.   The three companies -- TRW, Equifax Inc., and Trans UnionCorp. -- often operate with minimal public accountability.This year a study found that consumers who complained aboutcredit reports to the FTC had spent an average of nearly 23weeks vainly trying to get their files corrected. The systemis so incomprehensible to most consumers that TRW runs a busyservice charging extra to explain how to obtain and read itsown credit reports.   In response, the industry argues that critics focus toomuch on its occasional errors and overlook the majority ofAmerican consumers who are well served. It also makes thepoint that credit-reporting performs an indispensable servicein the modern economy, giving Americans access to credit withunparalleled speed and convenience. &quot;Without this industry,the life style people enjoy today wouldn't be possible,&quot; saysD. Van Skilling, the TRW executive vice president whooversees its credit-reporting business.   The top executives of Equifax, Trans Union and TRW all sayin interviews they are determined to improve their accuracyand are investing heavily on state-of-the-art software to runtheir complex networks. Earlier this year, Equifax and TRWalso announced ambitious plans to improve theirconsumer-relations staffs.   Credit-reporting companies have been minding otherpeoples' business for nearly a century, and they have alwaysbeen a little furtive. Jim Chilton of Dallas created one ofAmerica's first credit bureaus in the 1890s by strollingdowntown with a little red notebook, chatting up store ownersand then asking, &quot;By the way, do you know anything about Mr.So-and-So?&quot;   As recently as 1971, a Washington, D.C., credit bureauhired &quot;hostesses&quot; to greet new arrivals to town with a&quot;Welcome Newcomer Service.&quot; After offering some gifts andfriendly gossip, the hostesses would gently steer theconversation to the new family's income and debts.   Today, technological and social changes have transformedthe industry. Now, hundreds of local credit &quot;bureaus&quot; havebeen electronically linked into the three national networks,each with files on 150 million consumers. A torrent of datafrom stores, banks and other creditors flows into thesefiles: two billion updates on individuals' activities everymonth.   In a credit-crazed society, demand for these reports hasexploded. The industry sells about 1.5 million reports a day,not just to banks and stores but also to employers, insurers,car dealers and landlords. In this information blizzard,errors are common. In 1989, the most recent year the systemwas studied, nine million consumers checked their creditfiles. About three million found information they thought waswrong or out-of-date.   Joseph Pazos of West New York, N.J., a typical example,says he checked his credit report in 1987 after he was turneddown for a credit card. He found the report was littered withnegative information about his father, Jose Pazos, who livesat the same address. The younger Mr. Pazos obtained lettersfrom more than a dozen of his father's old creditors, statingthat their dealings were with Jose, not Joseph. He evenchanged his mailing address to a post-office box in anothertown.   But four years later, he says his father's data is stillcluttering his reports. Meanwhile, he has been turned downfor two more credit cards and a student loan. The loan fellthrough just before he was going to start bachelors-degreenight courses, and he had to postpone them for a year.   The mayhem was even greater in Norwich, a comfortablecommunity of doctors and professors, with a town green sopicturesque it's featured in Disney theme parks as thequintessential vision of New England Americana.   When Karen Porter, a quilt maker who serves as town clerk,heard that so many people seemed to be having sudden creditproblems, she called TRW, leaving six urgent messages overthe course of a week. A week later, TRW called back, and themystery began to clear up. The trail led to an unlikelysource: a Vermont housewife named Margaret Herr.   Ms. Herr worked part-time for a little Georgia companythat looks up public records for TRW and others. It sent herinto the Norwich town office to look up the names ofdelinquent taxpayers. There, she got the list of tax receipts-- not tax delinquencies -- and carefully wrote down thenames of all 1,400 residents who had paid their taxes.   Ms. Porter thinks Norwich's family finances are back tonormal now, but she's not sure. A TRW spokesman told thelocal newspaper that &quot;no huge number, probably less than3,000 people,&quot; were affected by the error, small comfort tothe town of 3,100.   Ms. Herr confirms this account but declines furthercomment. TRW says the Norwich files were cleaned up five daysafter the company spoke to Ms. Porter, and calls the Norwichfoul-up &quot;a very isolated situation.&quot;   In fact, credit-reporting companies may actually getrewarded in the marketplace for including mistakes. Thereason: Banks and stores often want to buy credit reportsfrom the company that has the most negative information onany consumer. They don't want to miss any red flags that makethe consumer look like a bad risk, says Ralph Spurgin, thetop credit executive at the Limited clothing store chain.   &quot;If your report has more bad stuff than the other guy's, Ithink I like that,&quot; Mr. Spurgin says. A credit bureau thatinvests in keeping errors down, he says, only makes itsreports skimpier and thus less attractive to credit-reportbuyers.   Many of the errors originate from the banks and storesthemselves, which often drag their feet about correctingthem. Both industries are fighting a proposed federal law tomake them legally liable for errors they supply. Meanwhile,the credit-reporting industry is ill-inclined to put pressureon banks and stores, because that's who their customers are.   &quot;The credit bureaus are going to operate in a way that ismost convenient for themselves and their business customers,and too often the consumer is just in the way,&quot; says StephenGardner, the Texas assistant attorney general leading thestates' lawsuits against TRW. The suits, which are pending,charge TRW with systematically putting data into the wrongconsumers' files and reinserting errors even after consumerscorrect them, allegations the company denies.   Consumers who try to correct errors often run into a snarlof red tape. U.S. Public Interest Research Group, a consumerorganization, studied FTC complaints and found that nearlytwo-thirds of consumers who made them had contacted creditbureaus five times or more with no relief. Instead, theytypically get responses like the eight-line form letter E.J.Malone recently received from Trans Union. The Memphisbusinessman wrote after he was turned down for a Texacocredit card to point out a list of mistakes on his report.   &quot;Dear Consumer,&quot; Trans Union replied, &quot;It is our policy toonly add information to our files that comes from reportingmembers of our service who have certified to us the validityof their information. Unfortunately, the trade informationwhich you requested to have added to our files does not meetthat criteria.&quot;   Trans Union says it is currently revamping letters likethis one to make them &quot;more customer-friendly.&quot;   For decades, credit bureaus routinely refused to showconsumers the data in their files. The Fair Credit ReportingAct of 1971, the main federal law covering the industry,declared that consumers have a right to inspect their creditfiles. But the industry hasn't made it easy. The three bigcompanies normally accept requests for a file only by mail orin person, and usually charge $10 to $20 per disclosure. (Bylaw, anyone turned down for credit can get a free report.)   The reports themselves are forbidding printouts thick withconfusing column headings and impenetrable codes: &quot;ORIGL SECUNK+25200$33389 SCH MONTH PAY $261. . . .&quot; Buried in there isrevealing information about a mortgage's amount, terms,balance due and payment record over the past year.   TRW actually makes extra millions from the very fact thatits reports are so unfathomable. It sells a service to helpconsumers make sense of their TRW reports. Its aggressivepromotions for this service, marketed under the names Monitorand Credentials, brag about how murky credit reports are.&quot;Most people have never seen a copy of their TRW creditreport. Perhaps because it seemed too difficult to obtain,&quot;declares one brochure. &quot;We tell you how to decipher it -- soyou can understand precisely what it says,&quot; promises another.   TRW defends the services as a way to offer extra benefitsfor &quot;consumers who are very credit-active.&quot; It also says it'sspending a lot of money to make its entire system moreaccessible to all consumers, with extra staff and 800 phonenumbers.   If it's tough for consumers to see their own files, it'sall too easy for other people to see them. The industrydistributes most of its reports electronically, direct to acustomer's computer terminal. It says it takes pains to grantaccess only to people with legal rights to credit reports, agroup the 1971 federal regulation generally limits tocreditors, employers, insurers and just a few others. Buthaving set up a powerful broadcast network, industryexecutives admit it has become impossible to controlcompletely.   Philip Young, a Cherry Hill, N.J., businessman who spentfive years as a computer-industry &quot;headhunter,&quot; says hecommonly checked out credit reports of prospects he wastrying to lure to a new job. He didn't have his own computeraccount that gave him access to a credit reporting network,but a friend who worked a block away did. The report was fullof valuable data that helped Mr. Young hunt heads: home phonenumbers, spouses' names and, best of all, a list of everycompany that recently looked at the file. Since manycompanies do credit checks on prospective employees, Mr.Young could easily spot when the subject was being consideredfor a new job.   Mr. Young would call a target at home and say, &quot;I havebeen told by very reliable sources that you're looking atseveral good companies, for example IBM and Prime Computer. .. . Wouldn't it be common sense to listen to my client tooand see if they make a better offer?&quot;   Public criticism has put the industry's three big playerson the defensive. TRW, part of a Cleveland aerospace andautoparts giant, has argued that its errors are the result ofcredit granters and even consumers themselves. Asked aboutTRW's alleged errors, its executive Mr. Skilling talks abouthow difficult it is to sort data about people who move fromone address to another and don't always use the same name:&quot;We have to figure out whether Katherine who lived in LongBeach is the same as Kathy in Dallas, whose name might bespelled with a `K' sometimes and a `C' sometimes.&quot;   At Trans Union, a closely held firm so low-profile itsname appears nowhere on the outside or inside of its Chicagoheadquarters, executives suggest that many consumercomplaints are simply false. &quot;When you do the research andget into them, the teller of the story isn't always beingaccurate,&quot; says President Allen Flitcraft, a genial formerIBM manager.   Of the three, Equifax has responded with the mostsweeping, specific promises to improve its operations. The92-year-old Atlanta company says it's spending $9 million toset up a national toll-free number available 15 hours a dayfor ordering credit reports and handling disputes. It plansto redesign its reports to make them easier to understand.   Earlier this year, Equifax also agreed to get out of oneof the industry's most controversial practices: sellingnames, addresses and some limited financial data todirect-mailers. TRW and Trans Union are still active in thatsideline, which the states' lawsuits call an illegal use ofcredit data.   The proposed revisions of the 1971 federal law includesteps that would explicitly ban sales to junk-mailers, alongwith several other changes designed to help consumers. Onewould require credit reports to be offered free, or at a morereasonable price than the current $10 to $20. Another wouldnarrow language that allows the sale of credit reports toanyone with a &quot;legitimate business need.&quot;   Industry lobbyists argue that there are better ways toimprove the system, chiefly educating consumers and creditgranters to supply more complete and consistent data. Onechange they support: stiffer penalties for illicit users ofcredit reports. Overall, the industry trade group argues thatthe 1971 law &quot;has served the American people very well&quot; and&quot;fueled the expansion of the American economy.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>