<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910219-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>910219-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Getting Ready:   A Tank Commander   Hones His Battalion   As Ground War Nears   ---   Lt. Col. Dan Merritt Terms   Speed a Key Advantage;   His M1s Also Are Tough   ---   But U.S. Losses May Be High   ----   By Bob Davis   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   SPEARHEAD RANGE, Saudi Arabia -- Lt. Col. Dan Merrittsurveys the monstrous weapons of ground warfare arrayed inthe desert before him. To his right, Bradley armored vehiclespaste the hills with machine-gun fire. Closer by, M1A1 tanksunleash thunderous rounds. To his left, a ground rocketdetonates fiery explosions.   &quot;The Air Force has been using a kind of scalpel on theIraqis -- cutting here, cutting there, hoping they'll bleedto death,&quot; the Army officer says. &quot;What you see here are10-pound sledges. We'll beat their goddamn brains in.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   The massive ground war widely expected to begin this weekwill largely pit tank against tank, with men such as Lt. Col.Merritt leading the U.S. forces that will do much of thefighting. Lt. Col. Merritt, a Texan, commands the SecondBattalion, 67th Armored Regiment, a part of the Third ArmoredDivision. Everybody here expects his battalion of 58 M1-A1tanks and roughly 700 soldiers to be among the first tocharge across the Saudi border.   &quot;The down-and-dirty killing will be done by battalions,&quot;says Col. Robert Goff, the brigade commander to whom Lt. Col.Merritt reports. Battalions are especially important indesert warfare because they are powerful enough to deliverdevastating blows -- especially when coordinated with otherbattalions -- but small enough to sneak along ridges andvalleys to outmaneuver larger forces.   Lt. Col. Merritt and his battalion, nicknamed the IronDukes, provide hints of how the U.S. plans to fight and ofhow soldiers get ready for battle. A strapping sixfooter whowears thick glasses, the 43-year-old Lt. Col. Merritt iscalled &quot;Smoker Six&quot; by his troops because he chainsmokesMerit cigarettes and because of his fierce temper. (Six isthe Army's designation for commander.)   It's evident in this microcosm of the widely anticipatedground war that although this area may turn into a killingfield, America's enormous advantages in air power, technologyand military intelligence make front-line commanders such asLt. Col. Merritt confident of doing the job quickly. Thereadiness of such troops as these, in fact, is one reasonPresident Bush seems prepared to push ahead -- and also onereason Saddam Hussein may be at least thinking about givingup Kuwait.   Lt. Col. Merritt and his swarm of tanks enjoy otherenormous strengths. Iraq's air force is shot, making it easyfor the American officer to resupply his men in daylightconvoys stretching out for miles. Unthreatened from the air,field hospitals have been set up within short helicopterrides of likely battlefields. Meanwhile, before Iraqi tankscan punch back at the Iron Dukes or any other tankers, theymust somehow slip past tank-killing A-10 jets and Apachehelicopters and go through showers of artillery and barragesof TOW anti-tank missiles.   &quot;Our biggest advantage is speed. If we close in on them,they may get one round off, but we'll be all over them,&quot; Lt.Col. Merritt says.   The lieutenant colonel professes to be just a farm boyfrom Gladewater, Texas. The first airplane he ever rode tookhim to West Point, he says, where he graduated in 1968. Andhe would rather have tried his hand at minor-league baseball,he says -- at least until he faced a young Tom Seaver in anexhibition game. &quot;He threw me two curveballs and a fastballthat I haven't seen yet,&quot; the soldier says.   But after a few years in the Army, Lt. Col. Merritt fellin love with tanks. &quot;Iron pigs,&quot; he calls them -- or, moreaccurately, &quot;Arn Piyigs,&quot; in his East Texas drawl.   But wrapped inside that down-home charm is a student ofHeinz Guderian, the German World War II tank commander andone of the inventors of the &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; armored strike, andof Moshe Dayan, the Israeli general who conquered the Sinaiin fast order several times. U.S. war tactics, Lt. Col.Merritt says, are nothing more than &quot;blitzkrieg with a lot oftechnology thrown in.&quot;   And if it comes down to tank against tank, the Iraqiswould have to face the M1. The U.S. tank can move faster,shoot further and maneuver more quickly than Iraq's best, theSoviet-made T-72. Tank gunners at Spearhead Range andelsewhere in the desert say the M1 can hit half its targetsat 3,000 meters and nearly all of them at 2,000 meters. TheT-72, by contrast, can't hit anything until its target is1,500 meters away or less. So, the M1 should be able to killthe best Iraqi tanks -- the mainstay of the powerfulRepublican Guard -- before they get off a good shot.   Even worse for Iraqi gunners, Lt. Col. Merritt and othertankers say that even if they are hit by a T-72 shell, asingle round can't pierce an M1's front or sides, which aremade of a high-strength ceramic encased in steel. A T-72shell &quot;will bust your eardrums, bloody your nose and put youout of commission,&quot; he says, &quot;but it's not a catastrophickill.&quot;   Even so, U.S. war planners realize that Iraq possessesformidable weapons, including rockets, chemical andbiological mines and shells, long-range artillery that canspew mines in front of M1s, and thousands of tanks. If thingsgo wrong, all those could kill many thousands of Americans.   &quot;I don't see a way we can lose tactically,&quot; says Col.Goff, the brigade commander. &quot;But I can see a way we can takecasualties unacceptable to the American public.&quot;   To minimize losses and counter the Iraqi weapons, Lt. Col.Merritt drills his tankers again and again on the tactics ofspeed and maneuver. Artillery-propelled mines have fusesranging from 10 to 45 seconds, he tells them, so M1s, whichcan breeze through the desert at 40 miles an hour, must tryto outrun them. Similarly, chemical weapons take time tospread. So, he advises, look out for shells that don'texplode -- a sure sign of a chemical warhead -- and maneuveraround them.   Even tiny ridges and gullys in the desert can make alife-or-death difference. A smart tanker can use a ridge forcover, he says, but a smart Iraqi infantryman can use it tohide a shoulder-mounted anti-tank missile. Finding the rightmixture between aggressiveness and caution can be crucial.&quot;Medals are often won by people who screw things up at firstand then fight like hell to get out of it,&quot; he says.   Lt. Col. Merritt's own greatest weakness is probably hislack of combat experience. That weakness pervades the Army.Col. Merritt has been in the Army for 18 years, but neitherhe nor any of his top officers served in Vietnam.   In battle, he will work from an M1 with the words &quot;DesertDuke&quot; painted on the turret. He and his three-man crew planto follow his lead company of 14 tanks. He will take reportsby radio from all four of his companies, barking commandsforward while radioing back to the brigade commander for airand artillery support.   If he were killed in battle, his most senior officer, Maj.David Knack, would take over. Anytime the commander's radiogoes silent unexpectedly for some minutes, Maj. Knack says,he would assume the worst and press the battalion forwardhimself.   Lt. Col. Merritt has known for some time what his earlyobjectives in a ground war would be, and he has beenpreparing for them since his battalion started arriving inSaudi Arabia on Jan. 8. The Iron Dukes, along with rest ofthe Third Armored Division, are widely expected to attackthrough Iraq and sweep into Kuwait from the west whilehunting for the Republican Guards. Meanwhile, other U.S.units presumably would attack from the air, sea and locationsalong the Kuwaiti border. (U.S. officials and Lt. Col.Merritt won't comment on their war plans.)   For the Iron Dukes, the build-up has been long andfrustrating. Live-fire exercises have been limited to husbandexpensive and scarce high-tech equipment. Moreover, someground-assault weapons haven't worked very well in practice.   On a cloudless day last week, Lt. Col. Merritt dispatchedCapt. John Middleton, a senior aide, to oversee an exerciseusing the Army's advanced laser-guided artillery shell, theCopperhead. The mission: destroy a metal-frame target, whichis supposed to be an Iraqi artillery post 2,300 meters infront of the observers.   Six miles from the rear, a howitzer fired the Copperhead.The Iron Duke team scrambled to point a laser at the target,to guide the Copperhead to it. They waited 23 seconds,expecting a blast. But when the target should have been blownapart, all was quiet at the target site. &quot;Miss, miss,&quot; thecrew yelled in frustration as the Copperhead sailed so farpast the target that even Capt. Middleton, using high-poweredbinoculars, couldn't see where it landed.   Much of the Iron Dukes' preparation has involved gettingaccustomed to the desert and possible Iraqi tactics. When thefirst of his troops arrived in Saudi Arabia, Lt. Col. Merritthad them walk around in chemical-protection gear and gasmasks for four hours at a time to get them used to thecumbersome outfits. Then he organized basketball andvolleyball games for troops wearing the suits to make theoutfits seem like second nature -- and to take some of theterror out of a chemical attack.   Slowly, the battalion has grown to understand the desert.Tank crews now clean air filters of desert dirt at least oncea day instead of once a week, as they did in Germany. Theyhave stopped using their thermal sighting systems during theday, which sense heat and present eerie phosphorescent imagesof targets, because desert hot spots look like bunkers in thesights. They study pictures and thermal images of alliedcraft and tanks to make sure they don't shoot at them bymistake. And they mark their M1s with special insignias andcolors so that they don't become targets for coalitionwarplanes.   Understanding the Iraqis, though, is still difficult. Lt.Col. Merritt and his tankers were stunned when they heardthat during the fighting for the abandoned Saudi city ofKhafji, Iraqi tankers came into town with their gun turretspointed backward -- a universal signal for surrender amongtankers -- and then turned their cannons and fired on theSaudis.   Now Lt. Col. Merritt faces a dilemma. Should he let T-72ssignaling surrender come close -- knowing that they couldturn and shoot -- or should he fire at any T-72, assumingthat it will pull the Khafji stunt? Not only is firing onsoldiers intent on surrendering a war crime, but it wouldinspire the remaining Iraqi tankers to fight on. The colonelwon't discuss his plans, but he does have an ace-in-the-hole:At least one of his tankers speaks Arabic and couldpresumably talk to would-be defectors.   Back at Spearhead range late last week, the Iron Dukespracticed one last set of maneuvers. As the sun sets,throwing soft shadows on the Saudi desert, Lt. Col. Merrittordered Capt. Art DeGroat to stage an attack on distanttargets.   Alpha company divided into platoons of four tanks each andmoved in staggered steps to a ridge. The first platoon to getthere fired at the targets as the other units raced to catchup. Then, with an ear-splitting cannonade, they all bombardeddifferent spots in the desert, giving a fearsome preview ofthe shattering sounds of tank warfare. That done, they turnedon machines in their tanks that produced huge blue clouds ofsmoke to mask their positions, and they beat a quick retreat.   But the exercises took so long that Alpha company had tofind its way back to camp through the rolling hills at night.After several miles, the Humvee -- the new-age Jeep --carrying Capt. DeGroat got so mired in a dune that he figuredit was too dangerous to continue. He circled the tanks aroundhis Humvee and some other trucks, wagon-train style, andeveryone curled up in their vehicles until sunrise.   The next morning, when Lt. Col. Merritt learned of Alphacompany's problems, he broke out in a broad grin. The youngCapt. DeGroat has a reputation in the battalion forby-the-book conservatism. His decision to spend the nightencamped in the desert showed initiative, Lt. Col. Merrittsaid, a quality that's more and more prized as a ground wardraws closer.   &quot;We got to get people used to being in danger,&quot; thecommander says.</TEXT></DOC>