<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911230-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>911230-0085.</DOCID><HL>   AIDS Crisis Hits Asia, Grows Rapidly   ---   Continent Now Trails   Only Africa in Total Cases   ----   A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DATE>12/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5A</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)AUSTRALIA (ASA)KAMPUCHEA (CB)CHINA (CH)FAR EAST (FE)INDIA (II)INDONESIA (IO)JAPAN (JA)NORTH KOREA (KN)MALAYSIA (MY)NEW ZEALAND (NZ)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)PHILIPPINES (RP)SOUTH KOREA (SK)THAILAND (TH)TAIWAN (TW)VIETNAM (VM)</RE><LP>   The AIDS crisis has reached Asia.   Once the least afflicted part of the world, Asia now hasmore than a million carriers of the AIDS-causing humanimmunodeficiency virus, or HIV. The region currently trailsonly Africa, which has six million of the nine million to 11million HIV victims world-wide.</LP><TEXT>   But not for long. Because of its sheer size, &quot;the annualnumber of {new} HIV infections in Asia is expected to exceedthe annual number in Africa sometime during the mid to late1990s,&quot; says M.H. Merson, director of the World HealthOrganization's Global Program on AIDS.   In India, it's already too late to prevent an explosion ofthe disease that may kill more than a million people by theyear 2000. In Thailand, health officials talk of an epidemicthat could cripple a generation and dim one of SoutheastAsia's brightest economic successes. And some experts fearthat large poor nations such as China, Indonesia and thePhilippines may be incubating serious AIDS outbreaks.   Commercial sex and, in some cases, intravenous drug useare the major conduits for the spread of acquired immunedeficiency syndrome in much of Asia. In the 1990s,epidemiologists say, the dominant pattern of contagion inAsia will be heterosexual transmission in the localpopulation, often after initial infection from prostitutes orcontaminated hypodermic needles. The WHO predicts that by2000, 90% of all Asian HIV victims will have contracted thevirus through heterosexual contact.   Testing for HIV is spotty in much of Asia, and screeningresults aren't always sound predictors of infection patterns.But health experts warn that even in some countries with lowcurrent rates of infection, AIDS could proliferate. Theyworry that Asia's rapid population growth, the increasingmass migration of labor within the region, a large sex tradeand a growing intra-Asian tourist industry all promote thespread of the virus.   &quot;There's every reason to believe you will see a more rapidspread of AIDS in Asian countries,&quot; says Georg Petersen, aManila-based AIDS adviser for the WHO. &quot;You have hugepopulations, you have extensive migration, and you havehomosexual activity and drug use to a degree that doesn'toccur in Africa.&quot;   In Australia and New Zealand, where Western cultural normsdominate, AIDS and HIV patterns differ sharply from those ofAsia, with more than 80% of infections occurring among malehomosexuals or bisexuals.   Together with the human tragedy it causes, the AIDSepidemic will carry a huge economic cost for the countries ithits. For example, some economists say caring for AIDSvictims will cost Thailand at least $2 billion a year by2000, or as much as the country currently reaps in annualforeign investment. Fighting AIDS is expected to swallow 60%of Thailand's annual health budget during the next fiveyears, and that's merely a measure of the direct costs ofdetecting and treating HIV victims. The indirect costs interms of lost manpower and economic production figure to bemuch higher in severely affected countries.   The AIDS picture isn't uniformly bleak in Asia, however.Many countries still have comparatively low levels of HIVinfection, and health experts say it isn't too late to keepthe disease from gathering momentum. That's because Asiangovernments generally have reacted more quickly than those inother developing regions to the AIDS threat, with manyrushing to craft comprehensive programs to battle the diseasewhile HIV-infection rates were still low.   For one thing, the prospect of major economic setbacks hasgalvanized Asian governments to focus on the AIDS threat asmore than just a deadly health menace. &quot;In countries with alow incidence of infection, there are immense savings to begained by preventing the spread of this disease in thepopulation,&quot; says C.D. Cohen, a development economist atSussex University in England. He says some African studiesindicate that an AIDS epidemic can cut a country's annualeconomic growth rates by as much as 50%. Such estimates rivetthe attention of economic policy makers.   In addition, some Asian countries -- notablyindustrialized Japan and South Korea -- so far have provedfairly resistant to the spread of HIV infection. In Japan,with a population of 124 million, only 415 AIDS and 1,898 HIVcases have been detected, and more than 70% of these wereinfected with contaminated blood imported before screeningwas introduced. South Korea, with a population of 42 million,has reported only 162 AIDS or HIV-infected cases.   In both countries, long-accepted and widespread use ofcondoms for contraception and during paid sex may be helpingto block the disease, health experts speculate. Thisadvantage is reinforced by wealthy, well-organizedgovernments that may be able to throw up defenses thatprevent AIDS from reaching epidemic proportions.   There are also hopeful signs elsewhere. Most East andSoutheast Asian countries have developed or are creatingpre-emptive AIDS strategies. Malaysia has begun ahigh-profile campaign -- including plenty of television airtime and school lectures and films -- to educate the public.This month, the government brought several hundred top civilservants and representatives of private medical, service andreligious groups together for an unprecedented three-dayseminar on the AIDS threat. Taiwan recently launched asimilar publicity campaign, and Indonesia, China and Vietnamhave begun national AIDS efforts. Even Cambodia, where onlytwo HIV cases have been detected, and North Korea haveembryonic AIDS programs.   &quot;Theoretically, Asia is the only developing region wherewe are out in time to really be able to control AIDS,&quot; saysKarin Edstrom, the Geneva-based chief of the WHO's office ofcooperation with national AIDS programs. &quot;But whether we canreally change behavior sufficiently and rapidly enough isn'tyet proven. We have to start now and keep the pressure on.&quot;   Health professionals can't say for sure whether AIDS willspread to other countries in the same pattern and with thevirulence it has struck in India and Thailand. But they warnagainst complacency. The low infection rates reported in manyAsian countries are due in part to a combination of culturaltaboos that may delay disclosure of infection, widespreadignorance of the disease and erratic testing. Such factorsmay partly conceal the true dimensions of the problem.   Some experts fear that southern China and parts ofIndonesia and the Philippines may be harboring seriousincipient AIDS problems without realizing it. That's becausethese countries fit the profile that has characterized thespread of AIDS in the developing world, where generally lowstandards of education and health combine with poverty-drivenprostitution to start a deadly chain reaction ofheterosexually transmitted infection.   In southern China, high rates of infection from use ofinjected drugs have already been detected, reflecting apattern that has emerged clearly in Thailand and Malaysia.And in Indonesia, where there has been no systematic HIVtesting at the country's hundreds of cheap brothels, recentnews that two Surabaya prostitutes have contracted the viruscaused an uproar. That provoked Health Minister Adhyatma towarn that &quot;unless precautions are taken, Indonesia wouldequal Thailand&quot; in AIDS cases, according to the national newsagency, Antara.   Although many governments are giving higher priority tocombating AIDS, the huge task of identifying HIV victims andeducating the public is just beginning. Governments in poorercountries often lack the resources to take even basicpreventive measures. In China, only 1% of donated blood isscreened for the HIV. Disposable syringes aren't widely used,and it isn't uncommon to see hundreds of people lined up forblood testing by a nurse who pricks each person with aneedle, pausing only to wipe the needle with cotton betweenpatients. Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines also screenonly a portion of the blood used for transfusions.</TEXT></DOC>