<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910529-0127</DOCNO><DOCID>910529-0127.</DOCID><HL>   FDA Underestimates Food Shoppers   ----   By John E. Calfee</HL><DATE>05/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)</IN><GV>FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)</GV><LP>   Earlier this month, the staff of the Food and DrugAdministration embarked on a wide-ranging attempt to restraincompetitive forces in the marketing of foods. Central to thiseffort was a demand that manufacturers of vegetable oils suchas Mazola and HeartBeat rid their package labels of thephrase &quot;no cholesterol,&quot; along with heart symbols or brandnames involving &quot;heart.&quot; In the eyes of the FDA, thesereferences to cholesterol were inherently misleading.   The FDA staff has argued that the phrase &quot;no cholesterol&quot;could be taken to mean that vegetable oils (a form of fat)are low in fat, and that some consumers may think they canavoid heart disease simply by eating vegetable oils withoutpaying attention to weight loss or other dietary changes.Also, the staff argues that vegetable-oil labels areincomplete because they do not point out that a high-fat dietis associated with other diseases, such as cancer, and thelabels fail to mention that all vegetable oils lackcholesterol.</LP><TEXT>   The FDA apparently seeks to purge labels (and presumably,advertisements) of anything that could mislead anybody. Thiskind of thinking grossly underestimates consumer intelligenceand the dynamics of the marketplace. In fact, the latest FDAinitiative is a misguided throwback to a failed policy ofdecades ago, when fears of deception first prompted the FDAto keep consumers from learning about the cholesterol contentof foods.   In 1957, the American Heart Association pointed out thataccording to recent epidemiological studies, people whoconsumed less cholesterol and saturated fat had less heartdisease. Sellers of foods with lesser amounts of theseingredients immediately began to advertise their advantages-- and the FDA quickly stopped them, arguing that theconnection between heart disease and dietary fat andcholesterol had not been proved. Sellers were put on noticethat if their advertisements suggested that their foods couldhelp prevent an illness such as heart disease, the FDA wouldreclassify the food as a drug, and the food/drug would besubject to immediate seizure for lack of clinical trials,dosage instructions, and the like.   In 1961, the American Heart Association again pointed outthe potential advantages of reduced cholesterol, and askedfor more information from food sellers: &quot;It might be well forthe manufacturers of fats and oils to indicate for theconsumer by label declaration the approximate fatty acidcomposition of the final product in terms of the three maintypes of food fats -- saturated, mono-unsaturated, andpoly-unsaturated.&quot;   Again, the FDA ordered sellers not even to mention thewords &quot;cholesterol&quot; or &quot;poly-unsaturated fat,&quot; on the groundthat these words inevitably conveyed to consumers that eatingthe foods would by itself prevent heart disease. Even phrasessuch as &quot;ask your doctor&quot; were prohibited. Of course, such apolicy had no logical stopping point. Soon, the prohibitionon suggestive phrases extended to use of the terms &quot;lowcalorie&quot; on low-fat dairy products.   It was not until the 1970s, after years of jockeying withpublic health advocates and countering sellers' attempts toexplore loopholes in FDA law, that the FDA finally gave up onits campaign to keep manufacturers from telling consumers theextent to which the foods they ate met the recommendations oftheir doctors and nutritionists. The same kind of strugglehad occurred in the 1930s when sellers first attempted toadvertise the vitamin and mineral content of foods. As withcholesterol, it was decades before the FDA could be convincedthat a simple statement of food content was a reasonablemarketing tactic.   What is at stake here is not merely the issue of consumerdeception but the potency of marketplace dynamics. Healthclaims are by far the most effective way to transform thefood market from one dominated by taste and texture to onedominated by nutrition. The ability to focus on healthprovides manufacturers with the incentive to improve foods inways that nutritionists have advocated for years.   With all the hoopla about no-cholesterol fats, it is easyto forget that there was a time when cooking fat was mainlylard -- a high-cholesterol, highly saturated fat -- ratherthan the apparently healthier (but more expensive) vegetableoils. The vegetable-oil manufacturers were among the veryfirst to jump on the cholesterol bandwagon in the 1950s. Whencholesterol was finally permitted to play a role inpromotion, the end of lard's market dominance was at hand.And so we arrived at the remarkable situation where a &quot;nocholesterol&quot; label on cooking fat is a no-no because allcompeting cooking oils lack cholesterol]   The modern era of using health claims to promote foodsbegan in 1984 when labels and ads for Kellogg All-Branrecounted the National Cancer Institute's message on fiberand cancer. Health claims quickly spread from fiber to dealwith such ingredients as saturated fat, calcium and betacarotene, and such illnesses as heart disease, osteoporosisand even gum disease. The upshot was a stunning example ofthe benefits of competition. For example, advertising forhigh-fiber cereals (All-Bran and its competitors) quicklybrought unprecedented changes in the breakfast market. A 1989Federal Trade Commission study found that in comparison tothe cereal market before the 1984 All-Bran campaign, cerealslaunched during the three years after 1984 were much higherin fiber, yet lower in fat and salt.   Health claims in food marketing have brought nutritionalissues to the forefront of consumer attention rather thanleaving them to languish in medical journals and obscureadvice columns. The fiber craze increased consumer awarenessof the medical evidence on diet and cancer.   FDA consumer surveys have found that when asked how toprevent cancer, the proportion of consumers who spontaneouslymentioned fiber, bran or whole grains increased from 9% in1984 to 32% in 1986. Agriculture Department surveys foundthat the most rapid move toward high-fiber cereals came amongpeople who (unlike so-called consumer advocates who denouncehealth promotion for foods) get their information mainly fromtelevision, rather than from Consumer Reports.   In this new competitive climate, the big losers of marketshare were granola-type cereals. For years, public-healthexperts had deplored these high-fat, high-cholesterolproducts. But until disease prevention became a marketingtool in the 1980s, the granolas of the world had little tofear from advances in medical knowledge.   The new FDA policy misconceives both consumer behavior andthe nature of competition. Markets work best when sellerscompete in terms of information even as they compete in termsof physical products. But if the FDA has its way, theinformational component may be stultified by regulation. Oneof the easiest ways to eliminate informational competition isto require that sellers include all relevant healthinformation, or no health information at all.   When competition is efficient, by contrast, differentsellers and different ads provide little parts of the puzzle:Kellogg emphasizes fiber and cancer, Quaker Oats brings toplay soluble fiber and heart disease, and someone else moveson to sodium content. Of course, no single ad or labelprovides the whole story about nutrition and health (nor doconsumers expect complete and unbiased promotional messages).Yet the overall effect is that health claims, with all theirbiases, provide a force toward product improvement that noregulatory agency could ever bring about on its own. Whatgives McDonald's new &quot;McLean&quot; hamburger a chance in themarketplace is not the encouragement of regulators but theability of McDonald's ads to talk about fat and cholesterol.   As the FDA retreats toward policies of the past, perhapsthe most alarming event so far is this: The immediatereaction of Procter andamp; Gamble, that unsurpassed master ofmarketing technique, was to announce it would remove &quot;nocholesterol&quot; claims from all its labels. One hopes thissituation does not last long. If there is a &quot;cholesterol andsaturated fat lobby&quot; at work in this country, it could nothope for more than to make Pandamp;G's voluntary suppression ofhealth information a permanent policy for all food sellers.   ---   Mr. Calfee, an associate professor of marketing at BostonUniversity's business school, worked at the FTC, 1980-86,where he participated in formulating policy on health claims.</TEXT></DOC>