<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910612-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>910612-0099.</DOCID><HL>   If Moscow Would Only Honor Its Debts   ----   By Robert Barro</HL><DATE>06/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)POLAND (PL)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Some of my Harvard colleagues proposed recently that thedeveloped market economies engage in a &quot;grand bargain&quot; withthe Soviet Union whereby $150 billion in aid over five yearswould be linked to meaningful economic reforms. Many writers(such as Gary Kasparov on this page last Friday) haveexpressed skepticism about whether such linkage is feasible,whether Western aid will provide any stimulus to reforms, andwhether any kind of Soviet economic improvement is possiblein any event. But even if the prospects for economic changewere bright, it would remain unclear that the West ought topay for any of it.   Western economists believe, for good reason, that theenhancement of property rights and the move to a marketeconomy would raise productivity in the Soviet Union. It iseven plausible that moves to free the Soviet economy wouldraise output today and tomorrow; that is, there need not be atrade-off of fewer goods now for more later. If reform raisesproduction in all periods, then it is obvious that leaderswho represent the best interests of the Soviet people wouldimplement the reforms without a subsidy from the West. Afailure to reform indicates that the wrong people are incharge and, hence, that the provision of substantial funds tothese people would be counterproductive.</LP><TEXT>   It may be that the transition from socialistic tocapitalistic economic organization requires a reduction ofoutput for a while (as suggested by the recent experience ofeastern Germany). That is, the reform process could representa high-return investment project, but not a project thatentails giving up nothing in the short run. In this case, theSoviet Union could still proceed by financing investmentswith national saving, but the transition would be facilitatedby access to foreign loans and direct investments. (Ofcourse, with the zero interest rates applicable undercommunism, there should be no difficulty in any case inproviding domestic funding for investments with positiverates of return])   The problem with borrowing from abroad is that thepotential lenders and investors rationally fear that theSoviets would default on loans and expropriate foreign-ownedproperties. As with other developing countries these days,the Soviet Union has no access to nonsubsidized creditmarkets because governmental defaults have become virtually asure thing, not to mention being socially acceptable.Profit-oriented lending to governments of developingcountries is impossible now and only gifts can becontemplated.   One interpretation of the grand bargain is that the U.S.and the other industrialized countries should provide giftsto the Soviet Union because serious loans are no longer anoption. The past behavior of the U.S. and other governmentshas a lot to do with the removal of developing countries fromworld credit markets (more on this later) and the restorationof these markets would be a much better idea than theprovision of subsidies. But another idea in the grand bargainis that a quid pro quo for our &quot;gifts&quot; is the maintenance ofa peaceful Soviet Union, which allows for a reduction ofdefense expenditures in the West. Certainly a sufficientreduction in the external threat would allow a saving in theWest's defense budgets that would at least match the proposedpayments of $150 billion over five years.   But is it obvious that a more efficient Soviet economylessens the external threat? One reason that the threat hasdiminished in recent years is that the deterioration of theSoviet economy has reduced the resources available currentlyand prospectively for the military.   Looking ahead, a move to a productive market economy hastwo offsetting effects. First, the increase in resources (dueto higher production or to the aid provided by the West)raises the funds available to the Soviet military. Butsecond, the maintenance of a stable internal politicalsituation and the creation of a market system geared toprivate property and consumer products will, it is hoped,lead to a less belligerent stance. The second force mayeventually dominate, but it would be foolhardy for the Westto count on it. For instance, during World War II, Germanyand Japan were basically capitalistic economies; would wehave been better or worse off if those economies had beenmore efficient?   The question of gifts from the West to the Soviet Unionwould probably not arise if developing countries had accessto wellfunctioning credit markets. These markets have beendestroyed over the past two decades by the frequent defaultsof borrowers, often encouraged by the U.S. and othergovernments.   It is ironic that one of the architects of the grandbargain -- my colleague Jeffrey Sachs -- has been influentialin advocating effective defaults by several Latin Americanand Asian countries and, most recently, by Poland. (I was, infact, surprised that Mr. Sachs did not propose to fund the$150 billion transfer to the Soviet Union by having the U.S.or other governments default on a corresponding amount oftheir own debts outstanding.) Treasury Secretary NicholasBrady has also been an active participant in the rush totransfer resources from international creditors, typicallybanks and governments in rich countries, to debtorgovernments.   Instead of encouraging defaults and easy bankruptcies, thebest thing that the U.S. government could have done for worlddevelopment over the past 20 years would have been to use alllegal means, including seizures of foreign goods, to ensurethe repayment of legitimate international claims to thefullest extent possible. It is only this kind of toughenforcement policy by lenders that ensures access to creditby poor countries (or poor individuals). Although somecountries gained by defaulting on obligations, most of thesecountries would have been better off by maintaining access tocredit markets, an access that is so important during theprocess of economic development.   Take the case of Poland as an example. It seems unlikelythat the benefit from the reduction in international debts(accomplished partly by getting foreign governments toconvert loans to gifts) is worth the chilling effect onpotential foreign lenders and direct investors. Similarly,the Soviet Union's focus on reducing its existing debt burdenand arranging for foreign gifts makes it clear thatprofit-oriented lenders and investors should stay away.   Alexander Hamilton understood all this when he stressedthe importance of the U.S. federal government's honoring thevarious colonial debts incurred during the Revolution. Onlythis strong credit record would ensure that the new nationhad access to borrowing over its long period of economicdevelopment.   Imagine if the leaders of Poland or the Soviet Union wouldstand up and assert that their first priority would be tohonor all past debt obligations as a way to assure futurelenders and investors that expropriation will not occur.Unfortunately, however, these leaders have spent too muchtime contemplating the short-term joys of default, and notenough time reading Hamilton.   ---   Mr. Barro, a Journal contributing editor, is an economicsprofessor at Harvard University.</TEXT></DOC>