<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910208-0076</DOCNO><DOCID>910208-0076.</DOCID><HL>   There Is No Credit Crunch   ----   By Allan H. Meltzer</HL><DATE>02/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BANKS (BNK)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><GV>FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><LP>   Read any newspaper these days and you are certain to findan article on the &quot;credit crunch.&quot; Banks and other financialinstitutions are reluctant to lend, it is said, becauseregulators have become so careful about the quality of creditthat they force banks to write off good loans as well as bad.Fearing this response, the banks hesitate to make loans.Credit remains tight, almost unavailable.   The alleged result: Worthy borrowers cannot get access tobank loans, making the recession deeper and longer. Theproblem got the attention of President Bush. In his State ofthe Union address, he urged sound banks to make more soundloans now.</LP><TEXT>   The banking industry would be in even worse trouble thanit is if banks had to be coaxed by the president to do whatis in their interest. The arguments advanced to explain whybanks are refraining from making sound and profitable loansare specious. Japanese banks are supposed to have withdrawnfrom the U.S. market. Or, as one banker told The Wall StreetJournal, &quot;I don't think lower interest rates will inducebankers to lend more.&quot; (Of course the banker is right. But,lower rates would induce the customers to borrow more, sosome banks would find their loans increasing.) Or, as agovernor of the Federal Reserve was quoted as saying in thesame issue of the Journal: &quot;Some bankers have lost theirnerve and ordered a retreat from their basic business-lendingmoney.&quot;   All of this is nonsense -- plain old-fashioned nonsense.Repetition has not made the story about a credit crunch true,and it will not. Repetition simply spreads disinformation.   Banks are required to keep cash on hand and deposits atFederal Reserve banks, called &quot;reserves,&quot; to limit theirability to issue new loans and deposits. Since reserves donot bear interest, banks try to minimize the amount ofreserves they hold, so-called &quot;excess reserves.&quot; The onlylimit on the banks' earning assets is the supply of totalreserves. Suppose the Federal Reserve increased the amount ofreserves. The banks would not hold the addition to reservesas excess reserves. They would lend, invest and increasedeposits to the limit permitted by the larger amount ofreserves.   There's the rub. The Federal Reserve increased totalreserves by only 0.3% in the four quarters of 1990. TheFederal Reserve has been stingy with reserves. Since reservesare the raw material for growth of money and credit, thegrowth of money and credit has been slow also. The midpointof the Fed's announced target for M2 (cash and privatedeposits) growth is 4.5%. M2 grew only 3.7% in all of 1990;in the fourth quarter M2 growth slowed to 2.2%.   I believe the main reason for slow growth of reserves andmoney is an old one. Interest rates have declined. Thefinancial press, the markets and the Federal Reserve areinterpreting the decline in interest rates as evidence ofeasier money, forgetting that interest rates can declinebecause spending is falling and the demand to borrow is weak.   The Federal Reserve has been lagging behind the market, asit usually does at the start of a recession. Beguiled by thedecline in rates, it believes that it has been easing. Butquarter-point cut after quarter-point cut in short-term rateshas failed to raise growth of reserves and money, a sure signthat the Fed is following the market down, rather than boldlymoving to limit the depth and duration of the recession.True, the Fed reduced reserve requirement ratios, adding morethan $11 billion to available reserves. But most of thesereserves were withdrawn subsequently.   Some might argue that the banks may not be holding excessreserves, but they aren't lending either. They are playing itsafe by buying Treasury bills or selling their reserves toother banks. This earns any bank a small, safe return, butdoesn't increase lending.   That claim is just as wrong as the other versions of thecredit crunch argument. The bank or firm on the other side ofthe transaction does not hold the reserves idle. No bankerdeliberately sells an interest yielding asset to acquire anonearning asset like reserves. Somewhere in the system,someone uses the reserves to make loans and increasedeposits. If this were not so, some bank would be holdingidle excess reserves. The data tell us that's not so.   The Federal Reserve has been running a disinflationarypolicy for most of the past three years. I believe that manywill be surprised at the lower rates of price increase thatwill come later this year and in 1992, if the war endswithout disruption to oil supplies and the Fed stays thecourse. The Fed was wise to choose to lower inflation andcourageous in announcing that its aim was effective pricestability. It would be mistaken if it now abandoned thatobjective. A highly expansive monetary policy would beunwelcome.   The Fed has announced its targets. Now, let it achievethem. If M2 grows at 4.5% in 1991, credit will grow too. Theclaim that the credit squeeze has been caused by overzealousregulators and timorous bankers will be shown to be thebunkum that it is.   To the property developer, real estate salesman, buildersand others, my denial of the existence of a credit crunchwill make no sense. They know that loans that once werewillingly offered are no longer available. This is all theevidence they need to conclude that credit is not available.   In a sense, they are right. To be fully correct, borrowersshould say credit is not available on the old terms. Lowerinflation -- or even the anticipation of lower inflation --lowers asset prices, particularly the prices of those assetsthat are good hedges against inflation, such as gold andland. Land prices are falling, so a 90% loan on a property isa more risky loan than it was before the disinflationstarted. Adding to the woes of property developers are thespecial effects of the 1981 and 1986 tax laws that firstencouraged and then discouraged commercial building. But,even with these problems, if builders put in more equity tocover the risk of disinflation, they would find lenderswilling to lend. Or, if the Fed makes the mistake ofinflating again, real estate credit will become availableagain on close to the old terms.   Yes, some banks are shrinking their assets to meet capitalrequirements. Yes, the low return on bank capital in recentyears is a signal that the banking and financial system doesnot earn enough to attract new capital. Yes, the Japanesebanks have reduced their lending in the U.S. market. Yes, theregulators may want to avoid another taxpayer financedfinancial bailout.   All true, and all irrelevant to the worries of a creditcrunch. If the Fed supplied more reserves, none of thereserves would be held idle. Interest rates would be lower,so borrowing would be higher. The banks would supply morecredit, and the empty talk of a credit crunch woulddisappear.   ---   Mr. Meltzer is professor of economics at Carnegie MellonUniversity in Pittsburgh.</TEXT></DOC>