<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900723-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>900723-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Out of Stock:   Soviet Retail System   Gets Strikingly Worse   In Era of Perestroika   ---   More Stores Sell by Invitation   Only, Creating a Market   In Options to Buy Goods   ---   One Ruse: Fake Engagements   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   MOSCOW -- A consignment of clothes from Eastern Europe hasjust arrived at Moscow's Belgrade department store. Anexpectant crowd soon gathers on the sidewalk outside, only tobe shooed away by seven beefy policemen with truncheons.   The police point to a handwritten sign in the window:&quot;Closed to the public.&quot; The only people they let in, a few ata time, are those with special printed invitations to shop atthe store.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;It's outrageous,&quot; an elderly woman shouts at the police.&quot;Even when there's something to buy, it's not for sale.&quot;   In an office high above the crowd, meanwhile, storedirector Nina Moskaleva entertains four visitors. As they sipcoffee, smiling store assistants bring in an array of men'ssuits from East Germany, leather shoes from Italy and winterboots from Yugoslavia. The visitors are impressed. &quot;Youreally can't purchase these anywhere,&quot; confides one, amiddle-aged Georgian, packing three pair of dapper woolentrousers and some boots into his bag.   The Soviet state-run retail system has never been a modelof efficiency. But over the past few months, as shortages ofmost goods have become the norm, it has all but broken down.Across the nation, consumers now need more than just money tobuy anything worth having, particularly imported goods. Theyeither must have a special invitation to shop, be unusuallyingenious, or know people who will sell them goods under thecounter.   The breakdown in retailing is one of the worst failings ofperestroika, Mikhail Gorbachev's attempt to overhaul theeconomy. It has enraged consumers and fed the burgeoningblack market. It also puts a question mark over theeffectiveness of any big aid program for the Soviets of thesort being considered by the U.S. and Western Europe. Evenwhen imports arrive, the murky distribution system means theyrarely reach most ordinary people, except through the backdoor.   &quot;Ugly forms of commodity distribution have emerged,&quot; PrimeMinister Nikolai Ryzhkov told parliament recently, explainingwhy shopping has become so difficult. Otto Latsis, a leadingeconomist, is more blunt. &quot;Trade has actually ceased toexist,&quot; he told the Izvestia daily. &quot;For people this is notabstract statistics, but a fact of life they have to faceeach time they go shopping.&quot;   At the top of the list of government and consumercomplaints is shopping by invitation, a fast-growing form ofspecial distribution. It involves big factories cutting dealswith department stores such as the Belgrade to enable theirworkers to buy hard-to-find goods.   For example, people wanting a refrigerator or a televisionset apply to union officials at their workplace. When aconsignment arrives at the store, the officials hand outcoupons entitling workers to buy the items. In Moscow alone,invitation shopping has soared 20-fold since 1986, accountingfor sales last year of $2.5 billion.   The procedure is fraught with so many difficulties thatauthorities in Moscow are now trying to ban it. One drawbackis that people who don't work for enterprises big enough toorganize such activities lose out. So do pensioners andothers who don't work at all.   Moreover, with demand far outstripping supply, corruptionis rampant. In theory, union officials give invitations topeople who work well. In practice, they often keep them forthemselves.   &quot;No social justice is achieved this way,&quot; complains VasilyBuslakov, a senior official in the Ministry of Trade. &quot;It'saccompanied by all sorts of abuse of power that are verydifficult to control.&quot;   Sometimes the abuse of power is so blatant it backfires.Workers at a rubber factory in Yaroslavl almost went onstrike recently when 90 out of 108 video recorders ended upbeing taken by union and factory officials instead of handedout to the workforce, according to Alexander Tsvetkov, alocal journalist who exposed the incident.   &quot;In times of shortages, you can't eliminate certainsubjective approaches to questions of distribution,&quot;acknowledges Pyotr Fyodorov, a senior official at labor unionheadquarters in Moscow. &quot;Only Jesus Christ could distributefive loaves and two fishes to thousands of people fairly.&quot;   Mr. Fyodorov says union bosses are opposed to theirofficials' organizing such activities, fearing that it harmslabor's already poor reputation. But many factories ignoresuch objections. They argue that shopping by invitation isstill better for workers than having to shop at depletedstores or on the black market.   In fact, the practice has added a new twist to the shadoweconomy: the rise of a new, semi-legal options market. Aninvitation to buy a color TV set costing 600 rubles may tradefor 200 rubles and upward. The right to buy furniture worth10,000 rubles goes for about 2,000 rubles.   &quot;Strictly speaking, it's not a crime,&quot; frowns Col. MikhailShestopalov. &quot;It's sale of a right, not a good.&quot;   Col. Shestopalov is the Elliot Ness of Soviet shopping. Abeefy plain-clothes cop with thick glasses and slicked-backhair, he runs the Moscow Administration for Combating Theftof Socialist Property, with the mission of fighting the blackmarket. He has his work cut out for him.   &quot;Speculators&quot; are the main target -- people who aim to buylow and sell high. Such an ambition may be close to the heartof capitalism, but in the Soviet Union it is illegal.Authorities hate it because it involves people siphoning offgoods from the state sector, where prices are fixed, andreselling them for a big markup on street corners. As thenumber of products in short supply has soared, speculatinghas become big business.   &quot;In principle there's speculation with everything --everything except for bread,&quot; Col. Shestopalov growls. &quot;Inthe U.S. you had it during Prohibition. Now we're in a toughsituation.&quot;   Well-organized groups of black marketeers are workinghand-in-hand with corrupt retail officials, he says,diverting truckloads of goods ranging from shoes to minkcoats. In the first three months of this year, Col.Shestopalov and his men caught more than twice as manybig-time speculators and store directors taking bribes as inthe whole of 1989. And that's just scratching the surface.   &quot;There are entire underground department stores,&quot; saysRimma Kogay, a retail specialist at Moscow's All-UnionInstitute for Market Research. &quot;Some speculators have goodsworth 20,000 to 30,000 rubles, the same amount a normal shophas.&quot;   The black market has long played an important role inSoviet society, enabling people to overcome the inadequaciesof the creaky state-controlled economy. For every big fish,there are a multitude of nimble minnows. They are quick tospot holes in the special distribution nets. Just ask LudmilaKurakina.   Mrs. Kurakina is the cheery director of the DepartmentStore for Newlyweds, a squat, two-story building in the northof Moscow. It is the nearest thing to a Soviet shopper'sparadise. The shelves are laden with piles of cotton shirtsfrom India, woolen suits from East Germany and mountains ofsocks -- an item in woefully short supply nationwide. Best ofall, behind a metal grille are rows of dainty shoes importedfrom Yugoslavia and Finland.   As its name suggests, the Store for Newlyweds isn't opento all. To shop here, consumers must produce documents from aregistry office showing they are to be married. Along withthe papers comes an invitation enabling the couple to shop.   That's where the fiddling starts.   &quot;Unfortunately, many young couples apply to be married inthree or four different registry offices,&quot; Mrs. Kurakinasays. That means they can buy three or four times as much.&quot;In fact, it's possible to get six invitations,&quot; she says:two from the place of residence of the bride and the groom,and one from each of four Moscow wedding palaces where peoplecan also go to register.   &quot;They don't care about the wedding dresses,&quot; she says.&quot;It's the shoes they're after.&quot;   In the past, such abuses were impossible because theregistry offices would mark a small dot in the passports ofprospective couples. But Mr. Gorbachev inadvertently loosenedthe system by ordering local bureaucracies to cover theircosts. Offices in Moscow immediately raised the price ofregistering marriages from 1.5 rubles to 15 rubles andstopped putting dots in passports. That made it lucrative forthe bureaucrats to register people as often as possible.   In fact, thousands of people just get engaged to goshopping, and never get married at all. Last year, 31,500couples didn't show up at their weddings in Moscow,one-quarter of those who registered. &quot;People are prettyenterprising,&quot; Mrs. Kurakina shrugs.   Soviet officials say that similar scams regularly occur atother special stores, which include shops for invalids andwar veterans. At the same time, they are trying to fight analarming increase in the longstanding Soviet practice ofselling scarce goods under the counter. The Russians evenhave a word for it: &quot;nalevo&quot;, or &quot;on the left.&quot;   Last year the government issued instructions to allretailers to be more vigilant. Stores now must keep a booklisting delivery and sale date of all hard-to-find andimported goods in an effort to prevent shop assistants fromsiphoning the stuff off and selling it to their friends.Inspectors from a union-run organization called Workers'Control drop by from time to time to take a look at the book.   The measure hasn't been too effective. Last year, Workers'Control uncovered just 85 million rubles worth of goods thathad been put to one side, a drop in the bucket. Forspeculators, says Col. Shestopalov, the book &quot;isn't a bigobstacle, just an additional one.&quot;   His organization has had a little more success fightingthe organized crooks. In one provincial town recently,investigators caught a couple selling invitations to buyliquor. They had been printed and distributed by the localtown council, where the wife worked. According to Soviet newsmedia, the woman obtained more than 70,000 invitationsenabling the holder to buy vodka at less than half theregular price. The scam was uncovered when police filmed oneof the couple's friends trying to buy 80 bottles at once.   Despite such successes, Col. Shestopalov isn't a happyman. The only way to uncover such scams is by catching thepeople red-handed, he complains. He dreams of the day whenthe Soviet Union will allow police to use stings,plea-bargaining and other techniques. &quot;If we could use themethods of our U.S. colleagues, it would be easier,&quot; he says.&quot;We would uncover much more.&quot;   Mr. Buslakov, the trade ministry official, isn't so surethat giving police extra powers would help solve the problemsof the state retail industry. &quot;We've always had speculationand corruption,&quot; he says sadly, blaming the specialdistribution networks for much of the present shortages. &quot;Ithink only a market economy can help solve the problem.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>