<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910717-0154</DOCNO><DOCID>910717-0154.</DOCID><HL>   Role Reversal:   U.S. Computer Firms   Attempt to Invade   Japanese PC Market   ---   Success Would Keep Rivals   From Using Home Turf   As Global Springboard   ---   The Secrets of the Akihabara   ----   By Jacob M. Schlesinger   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AAPL CPQ IBM J.FUT J.MBE J.TOS MSFT NIPNY</CO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY andamp; PRODUCTION, QUALITY CONTROL (ITC)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   TOKYO -- Monday through Friday, Kentaro Hattori doesfinancial planning for International Business MachinesCorp.'s Japan operations. But every other Saturday, he dons ayellow IBM windbreaker and fights his way through the crowdedstreets of Tokyo's Akihabara electronics district to theT-Zone store, where he spends nine hours on his feet peddlingIBM personal computers.   &quot;We have to know what the customers think,&quot; the nine-yearcompany veteran says during a recent sales stint, raising hisvoice over the showroom's din.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Hattori, along with 170 other IBMers doing regularweekend duty from Sapporo to Kyushu, is a foot soldier in thecomputer giant's first major campaign to reach the ordinaryJapanese consumer. Meanwhile, Apple Computer Inc. has inrecent months cut average prices in Japan in half and starteda nightly half-hour music show on one of Tokyo's hippestradio stations -- featuring tunes composed on Macintoshes.Compaq Computer Corp. is scheduled to announce tomorrow plansto start Tokyo sales by early next year. AST Research Inc.last year started selling machines in Japan.   Together, the leading American PC makers are waging one ofthe most crucial battles for the U.S. computer industry:cracking Japan's PC market.   The urgency of the mission is clear. Their situation lookshauntingly like the car and consumer-electronics industries adecade or two ago. American companies sell about half of allPCs in the world but only one-tenth of those bought in Japan.And, as with those other industries, the Japanese are usingthat lock on their lucrative home market as a springboard tobecome major competitors world-wide. Six years ago, Japanesecompanies had virtually no presence in the U.S. Today theyhave nearly 10% of the total PC market, says marketresearcher Dataquest Inc., and about half of the rapidlygrowing portable PC market.   American PC makers want to go on the offensive before theyend up like the Big Three U.S. auto makers, who for yearschose not to fight back in Japan. &quot;Our most importantcompetitors are in Japan, and we have to fight them on theirterritory,&quot; says Ned C. Lautenbach, head of IBM's operationsin Asia. &quot;They implement their technology first here, andit's important to compete against it first here. We can'tjust wait for them to come to the U.S.&quot;   Whether IBM and its compatriots can succeed is a differentmatter. Many say it will be tough, primarily because NECCorp., which sells half the consumer PCs in Japan, has a lockon distribution, software and public perception. &quot;Two tothree years ago, they could have been successful,&quot; saysSaburo Kikuchi, president of the Japan office of LotusDevelopment Corp., the U.S. PC software company. &quot;Now it's avery difficult situation.&quot;   The scant U.S. share to date in Japan's PC market haslittle to do with trade barriers, and more with Americanincompetence and indifference. IBM's only previous attempt atpenetrating the Japanese consumer market was in 1984, when itthrew a portable computer on the market that one executivesays was a &quot;lapcrusher.&quot; IBM backed off after a year ofdisappointing sales, creating havoc for buyers and suppliers.Apple's Japan unit drew attention mainly for going throughfour presidents in six years and offering English-onlymanuals.   &quot;With our uniqueness, we thought we could sell in theJapanese marketplace without the Japanese language,&quot; saysShigechika Takeuchi, president of Apple Japan.   Those stumbles didn't set off alarm bells at the homeoffice because the Japanese market just didn't seem worth it.The complexities of putting a language of 2,000-plus Chinesecharacters on a personal computer had for years stunteddevelopment of the Japanese PC market. IBM sold PCs in Japanmainly as appendages to its mainframes. Apple and Compaqfocused their limited resources on Europe.   But the economics now are changing. The technology hasimproved and consumer acceptance has grown so much that somestudies say Japan is the second-largest market, behind theU.S., and generates more than $5 billion a year in revenue.While PC sales in the U.S. and Europe are relatively slowthis year, Japan's market is growing more than 10%.   Furthermore, the balance of power in the world PC businessis shifting from the U.S. toward Japan. Until recently, newtrends and ideas came from the U.S. while the Japanese simplysupplied the parts. But the revolution in laptops (weighingabout 10 to 13 pounds) and notebook-sized computers (perhapsfive to seven pounds) took hold fastest with Japanese makersand consumers. The Americans got caught flat-footed. Sixyears after Toshiba Corp.'s laptop and two years after itsfirst notebook hit the U.S., IBM came out with its firstdecent laptop PC in March. Apple is still hoping to developsomething credible this year.   That shift in power is likely to accelerate as computersblend more with consumer electronics, a field the Japanesealready control, and as Japanese strengthen their grip on keyPC technologies such as the flat screens used in portables.American suppliers are already scrambling to reduce theirdependence on U.S. PC makers and foster ties in Japan. Twicein the past year, Intel Corp. has departed with past practiceand unveiled semiconductor products in Japan first.   IBM has acknowledged the superiority of certaintechnologies in Japan and last year shifted all its low-endPC development to its Yamato laboratories near Tokyo. Appleis seeking a Japanese partner to help develop low-endmachines and multimedia computers, meaning systems can handletext, sound and video.   &quot;The handwriting is on the wall,&quot; Intel Chief ExecutiveAndrew Grove said while visiting Tokyo last fall. &quot;Theworld-wide market share of U.S.-based companies andJapanese-based companies in data processing will cross,&quot; asthe Japanese continue to cut into U.S. firms' sales.   Thus the sudden rush by U.S. PC makers to learn theintricacies of Japan's consumer market. The best classroom isAkihabara, one of the world's largest electronics bazaars.The discount district of blaring loudspeakers and glaringneon does about 500 billion yen ($3.7 billion) a year inbusiness, and, according to rough estimates, handles morethan a third of all consumer PC purchases in Japan.   IBM long shunned the area. &quot;Two years ago, we wanted tohave ties with IBM, but when we visited them they said theydidn't have any consumer business,&quot; says Toshio Sugiura, aburly, blunt-speaking 18-year veteran of Akihabara who isgeneral manager of a six-story computer store. Now, IBM has alarge window display in Mr. Sugiura's store. And for twohours every Monday afternoon, 10 IBM executives sit around atable absorbing every word of reports filed by the employeeswho, like Mr. Hattori, spent the weekend at Akihabara stores.   Kazafu Hotta is a leader of those sessions as IBM'sdirector of low-end PC marketing. Cradling an empty computerbox, he talks enthusiastically to a visitor about theimportance of package design, cleanliness and the optimalspot for an inventory sticker. &quot;Every week we find somethingwe have to change,&quot; he says, sounding like a veteran Sovieteconomist discovering capitalism. &quot;It's very interesting thisconsumer market -- this is a first experience for us.&quot;   Both IBM and Apple have stepped up campaigns to create, orre-create, their images. Apple Japan has more than doubledits ad budget and recorded a 30% jump in name recognitionafter sponsoring two Janet Jackson concerts last fall. Italso hired its first Japanese president, in Mr. Takeuchi, anddoubled the number of Japanese employees. IBM, trying toshake off its stodgy office reputation, developed a gamemachine with Sega Enterprises Ltd., Japan's largestvideo-arcade supplier.   IBM and Apple are also working to raise the number ofsoftware packages that can run on their PCs, with IBM takingthe unusual step of guaranteeing certain sales levels forsome software houses. IBM hopes to have 1,000 softwarepackages available for its machines by the end of the year,up from 450 now. Apple wants 200, up from 170. Increasingthose numbers is crucial because consumers seldom buy PCsunless they have a wide range of software options, and the11,500 packages designed for NEC's PCs won't run on IBM orApple equipment.   Both companies are slashing prices, introducing PCs sincelast fall at about half the price of their previous low-endmachines. They are also being more aggressive on technology,with IBM bringing a notebook computer out in Japan in Marcheven though it's not available elsewhere, and Apple planningto introduce a system based on handwriting recognition beforemaking it available in the U.S. Both companies also plan tofollow the Japanese practice of churning out new versionsevery two to three months. &quot;We might have to do that,especially at the low end, to keep competitive,&quot; Mr. Takeuchisays. &quot;Japanese consumers are very sensitive about hightechnology.&quot;   Apple's strategy is paying off, at least in volume. Salesare running 60% over last year (although almost completelyfrom the low-margin Macintosh Classics), pushing market shareup to about 5%. Apple's goal: 10% of the Japanese market, orabout $1 billion in revenue, by 1995.   But while observers have long argued that Macintoshes,with their emphasis on graphics and de-emphasis of keyboards,were a natural for Japan, there are limits to Apple's growth.The biggest threat appears to be the arrival of MicrosoftCorp.'s Windows -- enthusiastically embraced by NEC -- whichessentially can give all PCs the sophisticated graphicsabilities that once were Apple's domain. Windows may be moredamaging in Japan than in the U.S., where Apple already hasan established name and a large base of users.   IBM's strategy faces difficulties because it rests on anapparent paradox: Despite all the promotion, products andprice cuts, IBM's success hinges on persuading competitors tobecome allies. Since December, IBM has been inviting allJapanese manufacturers to abandon their own systems and unitearound IBM's architecture -- meaning that software done forone manufacturer's system would run on any ally's hardware.That would let the group as a whole launch a frontal assaulton NEC's franchise. In effect, IBM is encouraging the cloningthat made its systems the standard elsewhere in the world.   &quot;If this {architecture} is supported only by IBM, we don'thave enough power,&quot; says Tsutomu Maruyama, IBM Japan's top PCexecutive.   So far, IBM has attracted full support from only a handfulof weak PC makers, such as Mitsubishi Electric Corp., whichsells only 40,000 units a year. Support from Toshiba orFujitsu Ltd. is considered crucial, but neither company hascommitted itself yet. (IBM's effort is unrelated to its newalliance with Apple in the U.S. and Europe.)   One major ally will be Compaq. The Houston-based companygrew into the world's third-largest PC maker by selling IBMclones in the U.S. and Europe. Compaq officials say theyhaven't decided whether they'll officially join the IBM groupbut do say they will sell IBM-compatible Japanese machines.   IBM says it and its clones, including Compaqs, could takemore than half the Japan market by the mid-1990s, and someanalysts agree. IBM's machines &quot;are technically superior toNEC,&quot; says Takefumi Kanoya, general manager of the JapanPersonal Computer Software Technical Laboratory. His grouprecently surveyed software writers, and the majority feltthat &quot;in the long run, {IBM's standard} will get the sameshare as NEC.&quot;   But others argue that both IBM's and Compaq's machines,unlike Apple's, aren't different enough to convert Japan'sloyal consumers. Katsuichi Tomita, general manager of NEC'spersonal computer sales promotion division, says he thinksNEC's share can actually grow one or two percentage points by1995.   &quot;We have control,&quot; he says. &quot;We are not at all worried.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>