<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900904-0025</DOCNO><DOCID>900904-0025.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   College Rules to Curb Bias Draw   Challenge on Constitutional Basis   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Beatrice E. Garcia   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   AMB AAL BN J.MMP</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)INSURANCE (INS)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)</IN><LP>   As an increasing number of colleges adopt regulations todeal with incidents of ethnic, racial and homosexualharassment, controversy is brewing over whether the new rulesviolate students' First Amendment rights to free speech.   Efforts to stem discriminatory behavior and speech oncampus are coming under fire by legal groups, students andprofessors as violating free expression guaranteed by theConstitution, says David S. Tatel of the Washington law firmHogan andamp; Hartson.</LP><TEXT>   Last year, a federal court struck down as unconstitutionalan anti-harassment rule adopted by the University ofMichigan. The university has since worked with the AmericanCivil Liberties Union affiliate that represented theplaintiffs in drafting a new interim policy that is morenarrow, said Walter Harrison, executive director ofuniversity relations at the University of Michigan.   &quot;We're really mapping out new ground in trying to protectthe free expression essential to higher education and at thesame time providing a hospitable environment for a studentbody that's increasingly diverse,&quot; said Mr. Harrison.   Since 1987, incidents of racial, ethnic and homosexualharassment have occurred on more than 300 college campuses,according to the National Institute Against Prejudice andViolence, a Baltimore-based research organization. Theorganization said that between 800,000 and one millionminority students are involved in such incidents every schoolyear.   &quot;The First Amendment issue has to be seen in the largerframework of those figures,&quot; said Robert Purvis, legaldirector of the National Institute. &quot;Some of the FirstAmendment values are operating at the expense of minorities.&quot;   Exceptions to First Amendment protections are very limitedand include some defamatory speech and obscenity. Manyschools have based their anti-harassment policies on a 1942U.S. Supreme Court decision that found that &quot;fighting words&quot;that inflict injury or tend to incite immediate violencearen't protected by the First Amendment.   But Nadine Strossen, general counsel for the ACLU, saidthat in order to be held constitutional the rules &quot;would haveto be so narrow that they wouldn't apply to any of theunderlying incidents that gave rise to the desire forregulations in the first place.&quot; And Ms. Strossen worriesthat the rules will ultimately be used to silence the verystudents they were designed to protect.   Nonetheless, proponents say the regulations have made adifference on campus. &quot;We still have ugly things happen. Butbecause of the rule people are less inclined to do outrageousthings,&quot; said James Sulton, special assistant to thepresident for minority affairs at the University ofWisconsin, which adopted an anti-harassment policy last year.   Mr. Sulton said the university worked with three lawprofessors in order to craft a policy that could withstandcourt challenges. The results of those efforts are now beingtested. In March, a group of students, an instructor and astudent newspaper represented by the Wisconsin affiliate ofthe ACLU filed suit against the school's board of regents,alleging that the policy restricts free speech and violatesconstitutional protections. The case is pending.   ---   SMOKING LIABILITY case is set to make its third appearancein court.   The closely watched case, Horton vs. American Tobacco Co.,is scheduled to begin today in Lafayette County Circuit Courtin Oxford, Miss. The case originally went to trial in January1988 in Lexington, Miss.   Nathan H. Horton, a housing contractor, died of lungcancer in 1987. His family charged American Tobacco with&quot;marketing a defective and unreasonably dangerous product.&quot;   American Tobacco, a unit of American Brands Inc., deniedany responsibility for Mr. Horton's death, but the case hasraised hopes among anti-smoking forces. Mississippi state lawis more favorable to plaintiffs than most other states. Underits so-called comparative-negligence law, the jury could haveawarded damages to the Horton family even if it had found thetobacco company bore only 1% of the responsibility for Mr.Horton's death.   The first trial, however, ended in a hung jury amidcharges of jury tampering. A second trial began last April,but complaints made by American Tobacco prompted CircuitCourt Judge Eugene Bogen to halt the proceedings. Before thetrial began, newspapers, broadcasters and local civic andpolitical leaders had received a packet of information fromthe plaintiffs' attorneys that included statements thattobacco companies were targeting blacks and other minoritiesin their marketing efforts.   Judge Bogen, in approving a motion by American Tobacco fora delay in the case and a change of venue, characterized thestatements as a &quot;blatant attempt to make an appeal on thebasis of race to the persons in Holmes County, and thusindirectly on the jury pool.&quot;   The judge also placed a gag order on all parties. &quot;He maynot change his order until the jury comes back,&quot; said MikeDavis, an attorney in the Austin, Texas, firm of Byrd, Davisandamp; Eisenberg, which is helping to represent the Horton family.&quot;But we'll have a lot to say about this case then.&quot;   An American Brands spokesman said the company doesn'tcomment on litigation.   ---   A JUDGE CUT an award against Alexander andamp; AlexanderServices Inc.   The punitive damage award was reduced from $40 million to$12.5 million. It had been granted by a jury in BaltimoreCity Circuit Court to a local broker who had accused the bigNew York-based insurance brokerage firm of conspiring toreplace it as the insurance representative for a localhospital. The award, granted in May, was believed to be oneof the largest ever in a dispute between insurance brokeragefirms over a client relationship.   At a hearing early last week, Judge Meyer Cardin let theverdict against Alexander andamp; Alexander Services stand, butindicated that the award was too high, according to anattorney who attended the hearing. Judge Cardin signed theorder Friday.   B. Dixon Evander andamp; Associates, the Baltimore broker, alsoalleged that Alexander had conspired to refuse to pay DixonEvander commissions due on a policy for the University ofMaryland Hospital that Dixon Evander had arranged. Alexanderand two other defendants in the case also were ordered to paycompensatory damages totaling $644,016.   The judge didn't grant Alexander's request for a newtrial. William W. Cahill, Alexander's trial attorney, saidthe brokerage firm will appeal the judgment.   ---   $100.3 MILLION JUDGMENT in Texas prison overcrowding caseto be appealed.   A state judge in Austin concluded that the state of Texasowes the money to 12 counties that held prisoners whocouldn't be housed in already-jammed state facilities. Thetotal is based on Judge Joseph Hart's decision that the statemust pay $40 a day for the care of each prisoner the countyholds more than seven days. The ruling covers a period fromSept. 28, 1987 through Feb. 28 of this year.   Litigation involving cramped state prisons isn't uncommon,but the size of the judgment in the Texas case is unusual,says Ann Clarke Snell, an attorney with the Austin firmBickerstaff, Heath andamp; Smiley, counsel for 11 of the counties.But Robert Ozer, an assistant attorney general in Texas,argues there isn't any statutory authority for the judge'sruling, and that it undermines legislation aimed at divertinginmates from overcrowded state prisons.   &quot;Now counties will be able to crowd local jails and getpaid $40 a day for doing it,&quot; says Mr. Ozer.   ---   BORDEN ACCUSES Japanese dairy company of trademarkinfringement.   For seven years, Borden Inc. and Meiji Milk Products Co.of Tokyo have been partners in a venture to make and sellmargarine products in Japan under Borden trademarks. Now, asthe licensing agreement is about to expire, Borden has fileda lawsuit accusing Meiji of proposing its own products usingpackaging confusingly similar to Borden's.   In the suit, filed in federal court in Manhattan, Bordensaid the Meiji packaging will mislead Japanese consumers. Thesuit said the packaging is nearly identical to that of theBorden-licensed product, except that the Borden logo isreplaced.   &quot;Meiji is proposing identical packaging and trade dressfor margarine products in direct competition with otherBorden margarine products,&quot; the suit said. &quot;Meiji isintending to substitute its margarine products for the Bordenmargarine products on the shelves of the retail outletsthroughout Japan.&quot;   The suit asks the court to prohibit Meiji fromdistributing or marketing the products. It was filed inManhattan because the licensing agreement is governed by NewYork and U.S. law.   Meiji officials couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   Glenn Ruffenach and Wayne E. Green contributed to thiscolumn.</TEXT></DOC>