<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910916-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>910916-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Veiled Capitalists:   The New Revolution   In Iran Is Taking Place   On an Economic Front   ---   Moves Toward Free Market   Pit Rafsanjani Against   Religious Hard-Liners   ---   A Spate of Suspicious Fires   ----   By Geraldine Brooks   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>IRAN (IR)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   TEHRAN, Iran -- Political graffiti is nothing new in thisrevolutionary city, long-adorned with spaghetti-swirls ofFarsi promising death to America.   But in recent weeks, the dawn light has broken on somehastily scrawled new messages aimed at Iran's president,Hashemi Rafsanjani. &quot;Death to the anti-people regime ofRafsanjani,&quot; says one. Another, more succinct, reads simply:&quot;Hashemi Shah.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Suddenly, scattered signs of dissent are everywhere.Mysterious fires flare in the bazaars; demonstrators marchwith pockets turned out to protest high prices; religiouspolice, about to arrest women for improper Islamic dress, aresurrounded by an angry mob; municipal workers demolishingillegal housing have their vehicles burned by the irate poor.   &quot;Ruling Iran is like weaving a Persian carpet,&quot; says aWestern aid official in Tehran. &quot;You have to keep your eye onthe grand design, but also pay attention to every tiny knot.&quot;Two years into Mr. Rafsanjani's presidency, his grand designstill looks sound, but some of the knots seem to be workingloose.   Up till now, the white-turbaned cleric has managed to melda remarkable consensus, hauling Iran toward moderationwithout alienating large numbers of revolutionary radicals.Swiftly taking control of power centers in the country'scomplex government, Mr. Rafsanjani stacked decision-makingbodies with those who supported freeing the economy andending Iran's international isolation.   But like his reforming neighbor, Mikhail Gorbachev, Mr.Rafsanjani always risks a backlash, in his case fromhard-line fundamentalists. The Majlis, the 270-seat electedparliament, still has a hard-line majority. And withelections due early next year, these radicals already havebegun a bitter campaign. &quot;They'll fight like cats and stop atnothing to stay in power,&quot; says a Western ambassador inTehran.   Mr. Rafsanjani's moderate tilt has never mattered more toU.S. interests in the Gulf. War-battered andrevolution-ravaged, this nation of 55 million is neverthelessthe leading power in the region, particularly since Iraq wasdemolished in the Gulf War. Under Mr. Rafsanjani, Iran has sofar played a stabilizing role in the postwar period. It haspressured radical Shiite groups to release U.S. hostages inLebanon, dispatched diplomats to mend relations with SaudiArabia and other U.S. allies, and even sent firefighters tothe oil fields of Kuwait, the royal family of which wasreviled by Ayatollah Khomeini as &quot;puppets of the GreatSatan.&quot; None of this would be likely to withstand a radicalresurgence.   Yet the U.S. continues to oppose the economic aid andforeign investment that would make Mr. Rafsanjani's pathsmoother. Iran's finance minister, Mosen Nourbakhsh, says hisoffice is deluged with inquiries from U.S. companies onceactive in Iran and eager to return. Among them are firms inoil production and construction of railways, dams andhousing; all of them are looking for a share of the $60billion Iran has earmarked for such projects. &quot;I tell themthe main obstacle is the attitude of the U.S. government,&quot;says the minister. Washington has severely restricted U.S.trade with Iran and tried to block other countries frominvesting as well.   &quot;The U.S. isn't directly saying stop, but it's putting onpressure,&quot; says an Asian diplomat. The U.S., he says, arguesthat Iran shouldn't be helped in its reconstruction effortbecause it still supports terrorism and is rearming. &quot;Even ifthat's partly true, does financial assistance really do harm,or does it provide a more stable Iran?&quot; the diplomat asks.   The difficulty for Mr. Rafsanjani is that theparliamentary election campaign is cranking up just as hiseconomic reforms are beginning to bite Iran's poor. The rich,by contrast, already are beginning to feel benefits. Iran'sgross domestic product surged more than 10% last year, wheatproduction almost doubled and light-industrial outputtrebled. But for the poor, reforms so far have broughtnothing but pain. Elimination of price controls and foodsubsidies has left some families struggling to buy staplessuch as rice and bread.   Unlike in most Middle Eastern countries, Iran's electionsare fiercely fought. While there aren't any political partiesand all candidates except four minority representatives mustdemonstrate adherence to revolutionary Islamic ideology, hugedifferences divide candidates on foreign policy, socialissues and economic management.   Like Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Rafsanjani liberalized the press.His opponents now run their own, often harshly criticalpublications. Much recent criticism centers on whether Mr.Rafsanjani, himself from a wealthy pistachio-growing family,is favoring those whom the Shah also favored: the foreigninvestors and wealthy merchants who ran Iran's economy in theyears before revolution brought nationalization and statecontrol.   A visit to two different kinds of markets illustrates thecontrast in the effects of his reforms. Amid the potted palmson the trading floor of Tehran's newly revived stockexchange, brokers yell their bids as a portrait of AyatollahKhomeini gazes inscrutably upon the re-privatization ofIran's economy.   In the crowded public gallery, Shiva Harirfroosh'sexpression is anything but inscrutable. The 24-year-oldstudent watches gleefully as her 15 shares in Pars Minoo, afood and chemical concern, continue the climb that has pushedtheir price up 80% in four months. &quot;I know other stockmarkets sometimes go down, but Iran's only goes up]&quot; sheexults.   Across town, at the Gazal Galeh food market, soaringprices create only despair. Here, the cost of a can ofcooking oil rises 15% in just two minutes. No sooner has agovernment vendor sold the last can for $4.80 than a stooped,toothless old man is reselling his purchase for $5.50 to afellow shopper who fears he'll have to pay $6 if he waits forthe next shipment. In a population where 30% of the workforce has government jobs with an average salary of $60 to$100 a month, such prices are crippling. Jostling through thethrong of anxious shoppers, a woman struggles to keep hergrip on both her oil can and her black &quot;chador&quot; veil. &quot;Yousee how miserably we are living?&quot; she sighs.   It is in a third market -- Tehran's Grand Bazaar -- thatthe tension between rich and poor has erupted. This dustywarren of ancient covered alleys is an unlikely power center.But in 1978, the traders who operate here switched allegiancefrom the shah to Ayatollah Khomeini and, by shutting downtheir businesses in protest, helped drive the shah intoexile.   Inside this sprawling enclave, the revolution has changedlittle. Porters staggering under stacks of fine silk rugsfight for the right of way against motorbikes laden withboxes of Philippine bananas or towers of plastic kitchenware.But the most lucrative trading is done in empty stores abovethe alleys, where money-changers deal the dollars anddeutschemarks that keep Iran's war-ravaged private sectorproducing. From a store plunged into darkness by one of thecity's frequent summer power shortages, Mohamed Mahmoudzadehwaves a hand at the bustle beneath him. &quot;This is our WallStreet,&quot; he says. &quot;The heart of the economy.&quot;   Lately, mysterious forces have struck at that heart. Atleast six fires have flared there in the past month. One, inthe carpet and fabrics market, burned so fiercely it had tobe extinguished by helicopter.   &quot;Some of the fires happened because fires happen,&quot; saysJavad Islami, a carpet dealer. &quot;But some surely were lit toembarrass the government.&quot; Mr. Islami, whose business relieson export, has thrived because of the president's economicpolicies. Reforms introduced six months ago cut to half a daythe export paper work that used to take up to a month. Heconcedes it is easy enough to whip up resentment against suchcenters of prosperity when so much of the country isexperiencing hard times. But he doubts the hard-liners canproduce any convincing alternative. &quot;They are like a drum --a lot of noise, but nothing inside,&quot; he says.   Still, the noise can sound alarming to foreign investorsfrom Asian and European nations who are flooding back to Iranto take part in postwar rebuilding. Iran's needs are huge:Some 10,000 Iranian towns were damaged in the eight-year warwith Iraq, including crucial oil installations. Powerstations, agriculture and roads all need huge infusions ofinvestment. But while competition is stiff for short-termcontracts, worries about stability still put investors offlong-term projects, depriving Iran of hard currency.   Mohammad Hossein Adeli, Iran's Central Bank governor, saysIran is in the process of demilitarizing its economy,shifting crucial funds from the armed forces to broadersocial needs. &quot;Fortunately,&quot; he says, &quot;we don't have anyserious military threat. The threat we do have is economic.If you don't have enough food, even if you have the mostsophisticated tank, how are you going to use it?&quot;   Mr. Adeli, who has a Ph.D. from the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley, is typical of the young pragmatistswhom Mr. Rafsanjani has chosen for key policy jobs. Mr.Nourbakhsh, the finance minister, also is young andU.S.-educated. In New York last April, he met with some 800Iranians who had left the country and invited them to takepart in Iran's reconstruction. Mr. Nourbakhsh waves aside theideological differences that drove many of those in hisaudience from Iran. &quot;These Iranians are one of our resourcesand we have to use them,&quot; he says. One man at the meetingalready has embarked on a project to build a new hotel inTehran, while others have returned to investigateopportunities.   But not all Iranians are welcoming them home. A few weeksago, a liberal-leaning magazine named Gardoon featured adiscussion of the issue, with a cover illustration showing aman wearing a necktie (discouraged here as too Western)flying into Iran over the dead body of a chador-clad woman.Hard-liners, interpreting the illustration to mean thetriumph of Western values over Islam, demonstrated at themagazine office, seizing pictures of Ayatollah Khomeini fromthe walls of what they considered unfit premises for theirdisplay. When the Islamic Guidance Ministry issued astatement supporting the magazine's right to free comment,hard-liners were even more outraged.   Fortunately for Mr. Rafsanjani, hardliners aren't unifiedin their opposition to him. He continues to enjoy the supportof Ahmed Khomeini and Zahra Mostafavi, the late ayatollah'sson and daughter. Both have recently spoken out againstcritics who claim the president isn't holding strictly totheir father's line.   Yet it was their father who surged to power on the supportof the impoverished masses he often called &quot;the shoelessones.&quot; His insistence that they should benefit from therevolution led to the tangle of economic distortions that Mr.Rafsanjani now is unraveling.   &quot;People here just don't understand -- they say `we've gota lot of oil -- why should we be so poor?'&quot; says JamsheedSalmanian. The 25-year-old translator recently scrapped hisplans to marry, partly because he can't afford to rent anapartment. As a &quot;baseej&quot;, or war volunteer, he once wouldhave received preferred treatment in everything fromeducation to housing. Now those subsidies are evaporating.   Despite the worsening hardships, though, the young veteranhas come to support Mr. Rafsanjani's reforms. &quot;I don'tcomplain, because I believe what Rafsanjani is doing is likea surgeon,&quot; he says. &quot;There is pain, but after comescomfort.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>