<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910226-0015</DOCNO><DOCID>910226-0015.</DOCID><HL>   End Game:   Baghdad Radio Calls   For Iraqi Retreat,   But U.S. Spurns Move   ---   Coalition Advance Continues   As 25,000 of Foe Give Up;   Scud Kills 27 Americans   ---   U.N. Takes Up Soviet Plan   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST EUROP</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Baghdad Radio said Iraqi President SaddamHussein has ordered his troops to leave Kuwait in whatappears to be an attempt to end the Persian Gulf war beforehe loses the cream of his army.   But the Bush administration brushed off the Iraqideclaration and showed little interest in calling off thebattle just when the American-led coalition appears on theverge of breaking the back of the Iraqi military in andaround Kuwait. Senior Bush administration officials said lastnight that U.S. forces have virtually cut off the mainavenues of retreat for the elite Iraqi Republican Guard.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;We continue to prosecute the war,&quot; declared White Housespokesman Marlin Fitzwater late last night. &quot;We have heard noreason to change that.&quot; Moreover, while declaring that alliedtroops won't fire on unarmed Iraqi soldiers who areretreating, he indicated they may hit retreating armed combatunits.   He added that, &quot;We don't know whether this most recentclaim about Iraqi withdrawal is genuine.&quot; To end the war, Mr.Fitzwater insisted, Saddam Hussein must &quot;personally andpublicly&quot; announce that he agrees to withdrawal terms setforth last week by the U.S. and accepts all U.N. resolutionson the conflict, including those requiring Iraq to compensateKuwait and renounce its annexation of the country.   The Soviets late last night conveyed to the U.N. SecurityCouncil a letter they said was from Saddam Hussein to MikhailGorbachev reiterating the withdrawal offer, diplomats said.But the letter didn't meet the White House's demands for apersonal statement by Saddam Hussein and for full compliancewith all U.N. resolutions.   Pentagon officials said the U.S. wasn't feeling receptiveto a peace announcement that came just after an Iraqi Scudmissile struck a building housing American soldiers in SaudiArabia, killing at least 27 people.   Perhaps as important, the U.S. suspects that SaddamHussein is merely angling to prevent destruction of theRepublican Guard forces, which are deployed along theIraq-Kuwait border in defensive positions. So far thosetroops have refused to come out of their fortifications tofight.   But U.S. forces are getting tantalizingly close tosurrounding and cutting them off. Pentagon officials said anunspecified force of American troops now controls territoryaround the Euphrates River to the rear of the Guard. One topofficial said &quot;their only exit is to the east&quot; -- that is,across marshes and rivers that would prevent them from takingtheir heavy weapons.   As of last night, there hadn't been any significant moveof Iraqi troops north out of Kuwait, U.S. officials asserted.They said some small movements on the battlefield could beinterpreted as efforts to retreat, but the movements were tooambiguous to read.   Despite the quick White House brushoff, the Iraqi radioannouncement posed a touchy problem for President Bush. IfIraqi units in Kuwait actually started moving north it wouldbe politically difficult for the U.S. and its allies to fireon them as they retreated. The U.S. also might raise hacklesin the Arab world if it continued to pursue a withdrawingRepublican Guard; while the force is along the border, nearlythe entire Guard is on the Iraqi side. In an indication thatthe Iraqi withdrawal announcement posed tricky problems forthe Bush administration, President Bush met late last nightwith his top national-security advisers at the White House.   On Capitol Hill, House Speaker Thomas Foley said, &quot;It'stoo late probably for diplomacy.&quot; But he quickly added: &quot;Ifthey don't take heavy equipment with them, I doubt that wewill use air power against a retreating army.&quot;   Baghdad Radio's surprise announcement said Saddam Husseinhad ordered his soldiers to leave Kuwait in an organizedmanner under a Soviet peace plan crafted before the alliedground offensive was launched last weekend -- a peace planalready rejected by President Bush and the allies. Theannouncement coincided with a new Soviet attempt at the U.N.to kindle interest in setting a timetable for a peacefulIraqi withdrawal, an indication that Iraq and the Sovietswere continuing to work on peace initiatives.   The U.N. Security Council met last night at the request ofthe Soviet Union, which was pressing the Council to work outa peaceful Iraqi withdrawal. Just before the Baghdad Radioannouncement, the Soviets suggested that the Security Councilfix a date for an Iraqi withdrawal in the &quot;shortest period oftime.&quot; Under the Soviet plan, once Iraq accepted a withdrawaldate, the Security Council would work out the details of howto end all combat, supervise a cease-fire and withdrawtroops.   The new Iraqi initiative came after two days ofunexpectedly easy ground combat for the U.S. and its allies.Coalition forces have swept north to the outskirts of KuwaitCity and are charging across southern Iraq in a broadflanking maneuver. Iraq has offered virtually no resistance-- perhaps an indication that it hasn't ever intended toengage American forces.   The wording of the Baghdad Radio announcement suggestedSaddam Hussein is trying to leave Kuwait now because hethinks he can save face by claiming he endured the groundassault. Declaring that &quot;the jihad&quot; -- or holy war -- hadended, the broadcast went on to say that &quot;our armed forces,which have proven their ability to fight and stand fast,&quot;will fight any allied forces trying to harm them &quot;while theyare carrying out the withdrawal order.&quot;   Baghdad Radio said that Iraq's troops would withdraw tothe positions they occupied before Aug. 1, 1990, which is theprecise requirement laid down in the initial U.N. resolution.Iraq also said word of the decision was relayed to the SovietUnion, another indication that Saddam Hussein might beattempting to leave under Soviet-inspired terms. The Sovietplan floated last week was unacceptable to the U.S. in largepart because it would have lifted the U.N. economic sanctionsand the arms embargo against Iraq, and given Saddam Husseinup to three weeks to leave Kuwait. That would have allowedIraq enough time to remove the bulk of its equipment andsupplies.   The Iraqi announcement could lead to attempts by masses ofIraqi soldiers to withdraw from the combat area in the nextfew days. Already, U.S. officials say allied troops havetaken 25,000 prisoners of war and are overwhelmed withprocessing them.   U.S. officials said Iraqi forces moving north in buses andtrucks without their tanks and artillery wouldn't beattacked. But one official said, &quot;If organized units aremoving in any direction with their weapons, we have toconsider it as a combat movement.&quot;   This official added: &quot;There's obviously no difficulty inIraqis surrendering. If they want to secure their personalsafety, they can.&quot; He said the U.S. is now in a commandingposition to deny Saddam Hussein the return of his majorweapons. &quot;We're very close to where we have nothing to offerhim. We have plenty to offer his troops, but nothing forSaddam.&quot;   Even before the Baghdad Radio announcement, there wasgrowing evidence that Iraq was either unwilling or unable toengage allied forces seriously. As a result, thethree-day-old ground war was already reaching a turningpoint.   An allied strike force, including more than 1,300 tanksand at least 100,000 U.S., French and British troops, is inthe final stages of a headlong drive through southern Iraqwith orders to pin down the 90,000-man Republican Guard inits bunkers or blast it if it comes into the open. Leadelements of this huge armored corps already have movednorthward in a large loop and outflanked the Guard from thewest. They are near to closing the noose, according to U.S.officials. It is still expected to take a day or more for thebulk of the allied tanks to arrive.   Though the Pentagon has restricted information about thearmored flanking movements, one U.S. official said that atmidday yesterday ground forces had begun to hook up withairborne units which, using hundreds of helicopters, hadestablished a forward staging area inside Iraq west ofKuwait. A second official last night said that air cavalryforces extended the reach of the armor to the Euphrates Riverarea and gave the allies effective control over escape routesfor the Guard.   &quot;Nobody's saying the Republican Guard is going to run upthe flag,&quot; this official said. But, he continued, the currentmilitary situation gives the allies immense leverage overSaddam Hussein. &quot;He's pinned,&quot; the official said. &quot;He's onhis tail. It's over.&quot;   It wasn't clear the Baghdad Radio message to pull backwould reach Iraqi troops. Iraqi military communications havebeen severely disrupted, and Iraqi officers regularlyconfiscate from their troops shortwave radios that might havepicked up the announcement.   One low-level confrontation with the Guard was reportedyesterday. Military commanders said the U.S. knocked out 35of the Guard's T-72 tanks, but added that the encounterdidn't represent a big Guard &quot;breakout&quot; from dug-inpositions. Such a move would likely result in huge,fast-moving tank battles harking back to the epic clashes ofWorld War II, which is exactly what U.S. planners would liketo see.   In all, U.S. officials said that allied forces havedestroyed 270 Iraqi tanks since the ground war began.   The White House has said that more than half of Kuwait'sroughly 1,000 oil wells now are on fire. Most were torched byIraqi troops, the U.S. says, though the military alsoacknowledges that some fires may have been started by alliedbombing raids. Yesterday, huge clouds of black smoke from theburning wells continued to drift over the battlefield.   The other battle facing allied forces is the fight toliberate Kuwait City from an estimated 15,000 or more Iraqitroops. In that action, which could begin as early as today,U.S. forces are chary of using their overwhelming firepowerand fearful of getting pinned down in street fighting.   U.S. Marines, accompanied by Kuwaiti, Saudi and other Arabtroops, have driven north to the outskirts of the city, anegg-shaped metropolis that occupies the tip of a peninsulajutting into Kuwait Bay. Other American forces, includingheavier army units, are said to be converging on the capitalfrom the west.   American officials see little question about the outcomeof the overall war. Pentagon officials are convinced that theIraqi troops, rocked by swarms of B-52 raids and weeks ofother aerial attacks, are badly hurt. They say that bombinghas destroyed hundreds of tanks, and that thousands of theGuard's troops were killed when their bunkers collapsed.   Some understanding of what the Guard has gone through overthe last month can be gleaned from Trong Nhu Tang's accountin &quot;A Viet Cong Memoir&quot; of the effect of a single Vietnam-erabombing raid. &quot;From a kilometer away, the sonic roar of theB-52 explosions tore eardrums, leaving many of the jungledwellers permanently deaf,&quot; he wrote. &quot;From a kilometer, theshock waves knocked their victims senseless. Any hit withinhalf a kilometer would collapse the walls of an unreinforcedbunker, burying alive the people cowering in side.&quot;   But U.S. commanders have carefully shied away from makingsweeping statements about the overall extent of the damage tothe Republican Guard. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney over theweekend indicated that Iraqi forces remained well equippedand &quot;well fortified&quot; to continue fighting.   In the long run, Pentagon planners confidently predictthat the Republican Guard -- long considered the jewel inSaddam Hussein's offensive military machine and his defenseat home against insurrection -- is doomed no matter whatcourse it pursues.   Says military historian Harry Summers: &quot;Either they leavetheir positions to fight us, in which case they'll getpounded from the air; or they stay in their holes and stillget pounded from the air, and they starve as well.&quot;   But how the drama plays out will help shape Americanpublic opinion about the Gulf war and the postwar peace inthe region.   The worst case for the U.S. would be for the Guard to sittight, forcing possibly weeks of allied air raids andskirmishes that would drag out the war, increase U.S.casualties, and highlight the Bush administration'sdetermination to wreck the Iraqi military even after Kuwaitis liberated.   More damaging from a coalition standpoint, much of thatfighting would take place on Iraqi territory, without Arabtroops playing a significant role. The coalition's Araballies who are participating in the offensive -- Egypt, SaudiArabia, Syria and several Gulf states -- are, for politicaland military reasons, fighting inside Kuwait.   ---   David Rogers and Walter S. Mossberg contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>