<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900611-0042</DOCNO><DOCID>900611-0042.</DOCID><HL>   Swing Vote:   Sandra Day O'Connor   Emerges as Key Player   In High Court Rulings   ---   Conservative but Cautious,   She Is Target of Appeals,   Particularly on Abortion   ---   Tough on a Tennis Court, Too   ----   By Stephen Wermiel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- For most of the nine years since PresidentReagan appointed Sandra Day O'Connor the first woman SupremeCourt justice, her importance on the court has been moresymbolic than substantive. But now, as the court heads intothe home stretch of its 1989-1990 term, Justice O'Connor hasemerged in a new and quite powerful role as the critical&quot;swing&quot; vote, determining just how far the court will go inits most closely watched and divisive cases.   In the past 18 months, she has cast the deciding vote tostop the court from overruling the constitutional right toabortion; to restrict state and local governmentaffirmative-action programs aimed at helping minoritybusinesses; to allow states to execute murderers who areretarded or who were juveniles when their crimes werecommitted; and to brake attempts by conservative justices topare down much of the wall between church and state in suchareas as prayer in the schools.</LP><TEXT>   Her pivotal role is indicative of how conservative thecourt has become. Until he retired in 1987, Justice LewisPowell occupied the court's middle, often casting thedeciding vote in close cases. His replacement by JusticeAnthony Kennedy coalesced the conservatives, including ChiefJustice William Rehnquist and Justices Byron White andAntonin Scalia.   &quot;As justices more conservative than her have beenappointed, her position has moved to the controlling middleof the court,&quot; says Robert Glennon, a professor at theUniversity of Arizona Law School. &quot;On a range of issues,lawyers must pay special heed to making arguments that shewill find persuasive.&quot;   Often, what Justice O'Connor finds persuasive is acautious, almost hesitant approach. &quot;Although she isconservative, she resists doctrinaire and rigidformulations,&quot; says Harvard Law School Prof. Laurence Tribe.&quot;She's not nearly as tempted as some justices to search forbright lines. She tries to find manageable, intermediateprinciples.&quot;   That sometimes frustrates her more intellectuallyventuresome colleagues -- most notably in last year'shistoric Webster case. Justice O'Connor voted with the 5-4majority to uphold Missouri's restrictions on abortion, butrefused to join with the other conservatives to overrule Roevs. Wade, the 1973 decision recognizing a right to abortion.   Court insiders say that Chief Justice Rehnquist, trying toassemble a majority to scrap the so-called trimester systemof abortion regulation established by Roe (which found aright to abortion within the first three months ofpregnancy), had written a draft opinion specifically aimed atsecuring Justice O'Connor's vote. She, though, remainedsecretive and didn't respond for weeks. Her conservativecolleagues, left in the dark, nonetheless hoped she was withthem. Then, just days before the decision was released, shecirculated her own opinion, rebuffing the chief justice'sapproach.   Her opinion prompted a vituperative attack on her byJustice Scalia. Her position, he wrote in his own opinion,was irresponsible, &quot;irrational,&quot; and not to be &quot;takenseriously.&quot; Court sources say Justice O'Connor was both&quot;hurt&quot; and &quot;peeved&quot; by Justice Scalia's attack, which wentwell beyond the usual bounds of public disagreement among thejustices.   Today, there doesn't seem to be any lasting chill betweenthe two conservatives. But one justice observes that, in whatmay be an ironic response to the flap, Justice O'Connor thisyear has seemed if anything even more cautious about joiningparticularly strongly worded opinions.   Nor is she generally comfortable with opinions that seekto sow seeds of future legal principles, as opposed todeciding the issue at hand on more narrow terms. Formerclerks say this is one factor that has made her leery ofopinions written by Justice William Brennan, leader of thecourt's liberal wing.   As the only member of the court to have served as a statelegislator -- she was majority leader of the Arizona Senate-- Justice O'Connor is more consistently willing to defer tostate laws than are any of her colleagues. &quot;She trusts statelegislatures in a way that I doubt any of the other justicesdo,&quot; says Arizona's Prof. Glennon. Yet she wrote the majorityopinion last year striking down a Richmond, Va., plan to setaside a percentage of city contracts for minority businesses,in the process forcing 36 states and some 200 cities andcounties to revamp or abandon similar efforts.   She has also joined many of the court's opinions aimed atrestricting the rights of accused criminals and at limitingthe number and duration of death penalty appeals.   It is on issues of religious freedom that she has donemost to stake out her own ground, urging the court to abandona rigid three-part test adopted in 1971 to decide whethervarious government activities breach the wall of separationbetween church and state. She has argued that the three-parttest, which is still technically in effect although losingsupport, promotes government hostility to religion, when thegoal of the First Amendment is neutrality.   Justice O'Connor's view is that as long as governmentbodies aren't seen as endorsing religious activities, theiractions ought to be constitutional. On the other hand, shedoesn't go nearly as far as some of the court's otherconservatives, who would give religious practices even moreleeway.   &quot;Her religion test is the best effort around,&quot; saysHarvard's Prof. Tribe. Last week she gained a majority forher approach for the first time when the court upheld a 1984federal law requiring public schools to allow religious clubsto meet on the same terms as other extracurricularactivities.   Justice O'Connor has generally been part of a majority tomake it tougher for workers to prove claims of employmentdiscrimination, and to make it more difficult for employersto justify affirmative-action plans. But she demonstrates abit more flexibility when the issue is sex discrimination.   Such cases inevitably focus more attention on her becauseof her symbolic role. For instance, after a federal appealscourt in Chicago last September upheld corporatefetal-protection policies barring women of childbearing agefrom certain hazardous jobs, Judge Richard Cudahy crafted hisdissent as if speaking directly to Justice O'Connor. &quot;Of the12 federal judges to have considered this case to date, nonehas been female,&quot; he wrote. The case, he said, &quot;demands&quot; awoman's &quot;insight into social reality.&quot; The Supreme Court hasagreed to rule on the issue in the term beginning in October.   Justice O'Connor doesn't talk much about how or whetherbeing a woman affects her court rulings. But on othermatters, she leaves little doubt that she feels keenly theimportance of being the court's first woman.   When she addressed a recent centennial celebration of theLos Angeles-based law firm of Gibson, Dunn andamp; Crutcher, sherecalled having been offered a job there after her 1952graduation from Stanford Law School -- as a secretary. Shefound it ironic that nearly three decades later, a seniormember of the firm, former Attorney General William FrenchSmith, was instrumental in picking her for the Supreme Court.   &quot;I can remember when he telephoned to ask me if I couldcome to Washington to talk about a position there,&quot; she toldthe lawyers at the centennial. &quot;I immediately guessed he wasplanning to offer me a secretarial position -- but would itbe as secretary of labor or secretary of commerce?&quot;   She accepts her symbolic role enthusiastically, meetingwith visiting women judges from other countries andaddressing professional women's groups. She encourages thehandful of women law clerks at the court to join the exerciseclass she organized, and every year attends an informal,private dinner with them. &quot;She was very warm, and huggedpeople,&quot; said one participant last year.   Last year, Laura Miller, who clerked for Justice White,met with Justice O'Connor for some career advice. A shorttime later, Ms. Miller's phone rang: It was the justice,saying that if you're going to be a lawyer, you need to dresslike one. Justice O'Connor collected Ms. Miller, drove her tothe store and helped assemble a wardrobe.   For her own four clerks, she occasionally organizesoutings to see the cherry blossoms, or for achampagne-and-chocolate picnic at the National Arboretum. Shedrops into the clerks' offices to play &quot;Nerf&quot; basketball oroffer late afternoon popcorn. And those who remained inWashington last Thanksgiving were invited to her house insuburban Chevy Chase.   The clash with Justice Scalia notwithstanding, herpersonal relationships with the other eight justices are alsowarm. On her 60th birthday in March, for instance, they allsported large buttons bearing her picture that her law clerkshanded out.   Off the bench, friends and former law clerks say, thejustice is a study in determination. &quot;Whatever it is, shewill enter into it completely,&quot; says Nancy Ignatius, a closefriend and frequent tennis companion. This is the casewhether the activity is dancing with her husband, John, alawyer who divides his time between Washington and their homein Phoenix, or whether it is her twice-weekly tennis games,where the object is to play and win, not spend a lot of timewarming up or talking. She is that way about friendships, too-- loyal and determined to remember birthdays, kids' namesand other details.   Determination is also the byword on the job. Early in1988, when she had an emergency appendectomy, her law clerkssent work to the hospital. &quot;She'd call and say send more,&quot; aformer clerk says. The day before she underwent breast-cancersurgery later that year, she was driven some 400 milesround-trip to Washington andamp; Lee University in Lexington, Va.,to keep a speaking engagement. Ten days after the surgery shewas back on the bench.   Now, apparently recovered, she puts in 10-hour days, ofteneats lunch at her desk, and takes reading home most nights.She works most Saturdays as well, often cooking lunch for herclerks (usually tacos or Southwestern fare). She preparesintensely for the court's 130 oral arguments each term, andtakes an active role in questioning lawyers from the bench.   Yet in public, particularly when reporters are present,she is very reserved, almost painfully so. Although she givesabout a dozen speeches a year, she never announces theoccasions to the media or releases texts. &quot;My first year onthe court made me long at times for obscurity,&quot; she said in aspeech a few years ago.   If obscurity is ever possible for a Supreme Court justice,though, it is impossible for her now. Particularly onabortion, her every writing and utterance is examined andparsed by observers on all sides.   In the cases she has heard thus far, she has suggested anew, more lenient way of looking at state and federalregulations, one that would recognize legitimate governmentinterests in an unborn fetus while deciding whether the rulesimpose an &quot;undue burden&quot; on a pregnant woman.   So far, she hasn't encountered a law that she felt imposedan undue burden on pregnant women, although she also hasn'twanted to go so far as to say there isn't a constitutionalright to abortion. Some legislators, like anti-abortionleaders in Idaho, are trying to pass a statute aimedexpressly at her &quot;undue burden&quot; test. If and when such a lawreaches her, she will finally be put to the test: strike downthe law, or overturn the right to abortion.   Meanwhile, the court is due to rule any day on whetherstates may require that parents be notified before a minorhas an abortion. And next fall, it will hear arguments on thevalidity of Reagan-era rules forbidding federally fundedfamily-planning clinics to counsel women about abortion. Noneof the cases are obvious vehicles for overruling Roe, butthey will provide further clues to her thinking.   So far, says Bruce Fein, a conservative legal columnist,&quot;she has been disappointing in the abortion area, not onlybecause of her clear reluctance to overrule Roe, but becauseof a certain timidity in her opinions. She hasn't beenwilling to take on the core question of whether there is aconstitutional right to privacy.&quot; Nonetheless, he and otherconservatives hope &quot;she'll still get to overruling Roe in agradual, sequential progression of cases.&quot;   Abortion-rights advocates, meanwhile, find their hopespinned to this most unlikely figure. &quot;My assumption is thatshe doesn't want to be the fifth vote to overrule Roe,&quot; saysSusan Estrich, a law professor at the University of SouthernCalifornia and former Michael Dukakis campaign manager. Ms.Estrich and Harvard Law School Prof. Kathleen Sullivanrecently wrote a law review article on abortion that put thesituation bluntly. &quot;Eight men may read our briefs,&quot; theywrote, &quot;but the real audience is one woman.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>