<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900612-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>900612-0049.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Energy Agency Told to Pay Fine to Ohio   ----   By Gregory Stricharchuk and Rhonda L. Rundle   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   SIE S MVL DAL</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)AIRLINES (AIR)AEROSPACE (ARO)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)</IN><GV>ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal appeals court ruled that the Energy Departmentmust pay $250,000 in civil penalties to the state of Ohiostemming from environmental problems at the nuclear weaponsfacility in Fernald, Ohio.   The decision by the 6th U.S. Circuit Appeals Court inCincinnati, which could have an impact nationwide,essentially bars the federal government from claiming that itis immune from suits under state and federal pollution laws.The decision is believed to be the first by a federal appealscourt to deal with the question.</LP><TEXT>   Ohio Attorney General Anthony J. Celebrezze Jr. said:&quot;This is an issue that's been a thorn in the side of statesand environmentalists for quite some time.&quot; Twenty-four otherstates filed friend-of-the-court briefs backing Ohio.   The Energy Department had claimed that it had sovereignimmunity against paying civil damages under the federalResource Conservation and Recovery Act and the Clean WaterAct. In Washington, a spokeswoman said the department hadn'tseen the ruling and would have no comment until it wasreviewed by Energy and Justice Department attorneys.   The federal government's 1,050-acre facility at Fernaldprocesses uranium for nuclear weapons production. Ohio andthe Energy Department have been battling over pollutionproblems at the facility since 1984, when the stateEnvironmental Protection Agency first inspected the facility.   In 1986, Ohio sued the Energy Department and privatecontractors who had operated the Fernald facility, allegingthat they improperly disposed of hazardous wastes andreleased radioactive materials into the environment andpolluted surface and ground water.   In 1988, Energy Department officials acknowledged that thegovernment had ordered a previous operator of the Fernaldfacility to continue dumping radioactive and hazardous wastesat the site over a period of years. Late that year, thedepartment agreed to pay Ohio more than $1 million to settletwo suits. The department also agreed to allow Ohio toinspect the facility and to oversee its cleanup. Thedepartment has said it expects to spend $500 million toimprove Fernald and to bring it into compliance with Ohiolaw.   ---   SHAREHOLDER GROUP wins $6.5 million in suit against healthcompany.   A U.S. District Court jury in Las Vegas made the award tocertain shareholders of Sierra Health Services Inc. who hadcharged the company with securities-laws violations relatedto its 1985 initial public offering.   The jury ruled Friday that Sierra Health and two of itsofficers -- Anthony M. Marlon, chairman, president and chiefexecutive officer, and David B. Willis, a former director,senior vice president and chief financial officer -- mademisrepresentations and omissions about a computer-informationsystem described in the offering prospectus. Mr. Willis leftthe company in 1986.   &quot;The case isn't over yet,&quot; said a spokeswoman for the LasVegas company, which operates six subsidiaries including ahealth maintenance organization and an insurance company. Shesaid the defendants &quot;disagree&quot; with the verdict and plan toask the court to set it aside. If the motion fails, thedefendants will appeal the decision, she said.   Mr. Marlon said in a brief statement that the company hasthe financial resources to pay the award if it is ultimatelyupheld. The verdict &quot;should have no impact on the company'scurrent and ongoing day-to-day activities,&quot; he said.   Last year, Sierra Health had net income of $3.2 million,or 56 cents a share, on revenue of $136.7 million. Onesecurities analyst has estimated that the company will earn$5.3 million, or 90 cents a share, this year. In AmericanStock Exchange composite trading, Sierra Health shares fell75 cents to $6.625.   The lawsuit, certified as a class action, was filed bystockholder David Gould in Oct. 1986. The class includes allholders who purchased Sierra Health's common stock during theperiod from April 11, 1985 through Aug. 5, 1986.   The jury exonerated Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. and SanfordC. Bernstein andamp; Co., which underwrote the offering and werenamed as defendants in the suit.   ---   MANVILLE TRUST says it's considering ways to ease currentcash shortfall.   The trust, whose funding has come under criticism from afederal judge in New York and a New York state justice, alsofiled a court motion informing the judges that it has metwith Manville Corp. to discuss the problem. The trust, whichis independent of the Denver company, was set up as part ofManville's bankruptcy-court reorganization plan in 1986 topay asbestos-personal injury claimants.   In a statement, the trust's chairman, John C. Sawhill,defended the trust's handling of the 152,000 claims that havebeen filed so far. The trust has said the current shortfall-- which means new claimants won't be paid for about 20 years-- was expected. The judges, however, have said that delay isunacceptable.   The trust said it is considering various options,including the immediate sale of Manville stock and borrowing.It may also start paying claims in installments, so thatclaimants won't have to wait several years before receivingany money at all. The trust, funded by Manville, isn'tscheduled to receive any additional money from the companyuntil August 1991.   In its motion filed with Judge Jack B. Weinstein infederal court in Brooklyn and state Justice Helen Freedman inManhattan, the trust said it will file a more detailedresponse to the judges' concerns by July 9.   The judges said they will consider taking action againstthe trust and the company if changes aren't made in thetrust's funding.   ---   DELTA AIR LINES is sued for libel by pilot fired after1988 crash.   In a case filed in state court in Fort Worth, Texas,Steven Judd alleges that Delta wrongfully blamed him forcontributing to the crash at Dallas/Fort Worth InternationalAirport that killed 14 people. Mr. Judd was the engineer on athree-man flight crew that Delta publicly faulted for thecrash. The airline said the crew had failed to properly setthe wing flaps for takeoff. All three were terminated.   But Mr. Judd asserts that he was exonerated by theNational Transportation Safety Board. Last September, theNTSB criticized the captain and first officer for &quot;inadequatecockpit discipline,&quot; but not Mr. Judd, the second officer.The report also said Delta hadn't moved forcefully enough tocorrect deficiencies among flight crews.   In a complaint seeking unspecified damages, Mr. Juddalleges that Delta's &quot;false public statements&quot; about his rolein the crash damaged his reputation so badly that majorairlines won't hire him. He also accuses Delta offraudulently encouraging him to testify favorably for theairline at NTSB hearings on the accident. A Delta spokesmansaid Mr. Judd, as a member of the flight crew, had aresponsibility to ensure that the flaps were properly set.   &quot;We stand firmly behind our position to fire the pilots,including second officer Judd,&quot; he said.   ---   JUSTICE DEPARTMENT is looking for a new criminal-divisionchief.   Assistant Attorney General Edward Dennis, the Reaganadministration appointee who now heads the unit, probablywill leave soon, according to people familiar with thesituation. The exact timing of his departure isn't known, andMr. Dennis hasn't responded to requests for interviews.   The Bush administration was expected eventually to nameits own person to the prestigious law enforcement post.Justice Department officials have denied emphatically thatMr. Dennis's probable departure has anything to do with arecent shakeup of Attorney General Dick Thornburgh's personalstaff. &quot;The attorney general has great confidence in Mr.Dennis's skills,&quot; said Dan Eramian, a department spokesman.&quot;There is no vacancy and nothing announced.&quot;   Mr. Dennis, a former U.S. attorney in Philadelphia, hasserved as the Bush administration's spokesman on a variety ofcontroversial issues, including expansion of the federaldeath penalty.   Mr. Dennis has come under fire from congressionalDemocrats who blame him and Mr. Thornburgh for failing topress white-collar prosecutions with sufficient zeal.   The white-collar issue has been heightened by the scandalsinvolving the savings and loan industry and the Department ofHousing and Urban Development.   ---   CHARACTER WITNESSES line up in defense of John A. MulherenJr.   Alan C. Greenberg, chairman of Bear, Stearns and Co.; SamuelBelzberg, chairman of First City Financial Corp.; and JackNash, general partner of Odyssey Partners all providedtestimony for Mr. Mulheren in his securities fraud trial infederal court in New York.   &quot;I would trust everything I have to John Mulheren,&quot; Mr.Greenberg testified. &quot;I just hope that each of my childrenhas a friend like John Mulheren,&quot; added Mr. Greenberg, aclose friend and business associate of Mr. Mulheren's. Mr.Belzberg, whose Vancouver-based company invested $80 millionin a partnership formerly run by Mr. Mulheren, said hebelieved Mr. Mulheren is &quot;a sincere, hard-working, honorablegentleman.&quot;   Messrs. Greenberg and Belzberg and Mr. Nash, who runsOdyssey, a New York-based investment firm, all said they knewnothing about Mr. Mulheren's dealings with Ivan F. Boesky,the convicted former stock speculator whose cooperation withthe government led to the case against Mr. Mulheren.   The defense is expected to continue its case today.   ---   Wade Lambert in New York and Wayne E. Green in Houstoncontributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>