<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911113-0118</DOCNO><DOCID>911113-0118.</DOCID><HL>   An Iraq Without Saddam Is Still Possible   ----   By Ahmad Chalabi</HL><DATE>11/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><RE>IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Seven months after the end of the Gulf war, Saddam Husseinremains in power. He is unrepentant, obstructionist and inflagrant violation of almost all UN resolutions. Resolution687, the cease fire resolution, which provides fordismantling Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, is the mostimportant to the American administration: Serious uncertaintystill prevails about the original extent of Saddam Hussein'snuclear program and the extent of what remains. There is nosuch uncertainty, however, about Saddam's intentions. Hisscientists have openly declared to United Nations inspectorsthat they will rebuild Iraq's nuclear weapons program.   While this situation is an international crisis, it is inthe first place an Iraqi disaster, threatening the life ofthe Iraqi people and the very existence of Iraq as a unifiedstate. U.N. Security Council resolution 688 demanded that theregime end the repression of its own people and respect theirhuman and political rights. But Saddam is preventinginternational relief agencies from distributing food, evenmilk to Iraqi children. The Iraqi people are hostages toSaddam's determination to stay in power at all costs. Saddamis using hunger and disease as levers to pry off the U.N.sanctions on Iraq.</LP><TEXT>   The freedom that prevails in Kurdistan represents the maininternal threat to Saddam's regime. He has stepped up hisefforts to coax and coerce the Kurds into agreement in thepast few days. Fuel and food supplies have been cut to manyKurdish areas, including Sulayminya. With the onset ofwinter, Saddam believes that the Kurds will have no choicebut to comply with his dictated terms.   Saddam seems to be calculating that the United States andthe rest of the world are too preoccupied with the Madridconference to take serious steps to stop this furtherviolation of U.N. resolutions, lest action upset thesupposedly delicate mechanics of the peace process.   While Saddam might be overthrown through violent militaryaction at any time, this seems unlikely. Saddam haseffectively vested military power in Baghdad in his specialsecurity battalions. These battalions are controlled by hisclose relatives. The officers and men are largely recruitedfrom his clan and district. They are given exceptionalprivileges and are made to believe that any danger to Saddamis a danger to their own lives. They possess the most modernweapons available in Iraq. They also have a virtual monopolyof military aviation.   It is true that the loyalty of regular Iraqi army units,even some Republican Guard units, to Saddam has been taxed tothe extreme. His control over military units is inverselyproportional to their distance from the centre. Saddam'streatment of his military commanders is notorious for itsbrutality.   The Iraqi people reject Saddam with great determination,but they are powerless to act. Saddam could, however, stillbe removed from power. He benefits from the contradictionsand conflicting goals of his enemies. They are confrontingSaddam by continuing the embargo and expecting that theharrowing state of affairs in Iraq will somehow impel amilitary cabal to overthrow him. This is largely a hope andnot a policy.   Instead, the Iraqi people ought to be assisted inestablishing a provisional government inside Iraq in areasbeyond the control of Saddam, in Kurdistan. The governmentwould be composed of recognized and respected civilian andmilitary leaders, both Arab and Kurd, Sunni and Shiite. Aprovisional constitution would be drawn by this governmentreflecting the aspirations of the Iraqi people and inaccordance with civilized standards.   The aims of the government should include:   i) The end of dictatorship and the establishment of aconstitutional parliamentary democratic system.   ii) The preservation of Iraq and the protection of itsterritorial integrity.   iii) Full autonomy for Kurdistan within Iraq.   iv) Respect for international law and the renunciation ofaggression.   v) The renunciation and destruction of all weapons of massdestruction and the declaration of a nuclear free zone in allof Iraq.   vi) The indictment and trial of Saddam for crimes againstthe people of Iraq, war crimes and crimes against theenvironment.   The establishment of a provisional government wouldprovide a rallying point for all the political forces opposedto Saddam and would encourage them to work together. Inparticular, it is expected that many army units would shifttheir allegiance to the provisional government.   The viability of this proposed democratic government iscontingent upon international support and assistance. For itto succeed the following conditions must prevail:   1. The ban on the use of Iraqi airspace and sophisticatedweapons should be extended to cover all of Iraq, not just thearea north of the 36th parallel. Saddam is in violation ofthe U.N.'s cease fire resolution. Instead of punishing Saddamby bombing Iraq again, punish him by denying him his mostpotent weapon of repression.   2. Food, medicine and other humanitarian supplies must beassured to the population in liberated areas of Iraq. Inaddition, more serious efforts must be undertaken to providefood and medicine to all of the Iraqi people. One way to dothis is to establish food distribution centers in Kurdistanand announce over the media that all Iraqis are entitled toget free food at those centers if they get there. This willcreate massive popular pressure on Saddam's regime should theregime attempt to prevent people from getting to the foodcenters.   3. The provisional government should be given access tosome frozen Iraqi state funds. There is a sum ofapproximately $300 million in Iraqi government accounts inLondon. This could serve as the seed money for theprovisional government.   4. The forces of the provisional government should begiven military aid in the form of supplies and training.   5. All gaps in the international embargo against Saddammust be blocked. The implementation of this plan requires aleap from the current international posture to a more activeposture designed to help the Iraqi people rid themselves ofSaddam.   ---   Mr. Chalabi is a businessman living in London. His familyleft Iraq in 1958.</TEXT></DOC>