<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900725-0082</DOCNO><DOCID>900725-0082.</DOCID><HL>   Rule of Law:   David Souter, Bush's UnBorkable Nominee   ----   By L. Gordon Crovitz</HL><DATE>07/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   With mystery nominee David Souter, conservatives get ahigh-stakes test of the judicial philosophy that what countsis not who wins and who loses in cases but how the judgesplay the game. His empty file on the hot-button legal issuesshould make no difference to anyone so long as he passes thelitmus test of reasoning by law and not by politics.   A review of Judge Souter's New Hampshire court opinionssuggests he is a practitioner of classic judicial restraint.He does not legislate from the bench or make up new parts ofthe Constitution. Indeed, several of his cases feature whatmight be called a Thrifty Yankee view of the Constitution:Use it sparingly.</LP><TEXT>   Judge Souter's supporters cite one case in particular toshow the importance of how a judge reaches his decision. NewHampshire v. Valenzuela (1987) was a run-of-the-mill appealby drug dealers caught with 65 pounds of cocaine, almost aton of marijuana and weapons. The defendants tried to invokethe exclusionary rule to suppress the evidence.   The police had used what's called a pen register to recordthe telephone numbers dialed by one of the drug dealers. Tothe defendants' argument that this was an unreasonablesearch, Judge Souter did not wade in to make newsearch-and-seizure law. Instead, he ruled that unlike awiretap attaching this device to a subscriber's telephoneline was not a search at all.   He dismissed the view that &quot;any effort to gather evidenceshould be treated as a search.&quot; Otherwise, he reasoned, thepolice would also have to get a warrant before they could useinformation given to an agent or informer. Judge Souter thusgave the Constitution the frugal reading it often deservesbut rarely gets from judges more eager to add theirfootprints to the head of a jurisprudential pin.   Civil libertarians and separation-of-powers cognoscentiwill also be cheered by this opinion. Judge Souter chastiseda magistrate in the case who had advised the police thatevidence would be suppressed if they denied one of thearrested defendants his request to make a phone call. JudgeSouter wrote that &quot;legal advice to police officers ought tocome from city or county attorneys or from the attorneygeneral's office, not from judges.&quot; Giving advice &quot;placesneutrality at risk, with potentially appalling consequences.&quot;He warned that &quot;all of us in the judiciary should take careto avoid occasions for any more litigation about judicialdetachment.&quot;   Judge Souter also criticized judges for adoptingmultipronged balancing tests as a hidden way of creating newlegal rules. The straightforward question in City of Dover v.Imperial Casualty andamp; Indemnity (1990) was whether the city wasimmune from liability when a woman slipped on a publicsidewalk. Somehow this tort case led to a majority opinion onthe wrinkles of the Constitution's equal protection clause.In his dissent, Judge Souter warned that the court's&quot;middle-tier equal protection scrutiny . . . and accompanyingquestions as yet unanswered will provide fodder for a goodmany opinions.&quot;   Judge Souter's dissent in New Hampshire v. Ballou (1984)is strict constructionism at work. The state extended theperiod of new committals to mental hospitals for criminaldefendants who plead guilty by reason of insanity.Recommittals would last five years instead of two years. Thedefendant claimed this violated the prohibition against expost facto laws for the punishment of criminal offenses.   But Judge Souter noted that the insanity plea is not anadmission of a crime. Instead, the purpose of the plea is toavoid criminal liability. &quot;A statute regulating commitmentsof dangerous defendants following findings of insanity doesnot deal with criminal offenses and, by definition, could notdo so,&quot; he wrote. Therefore, the ex post facto clause doesnot apply.   These cases help explain why -- proprieties aside -- theBush administration does not need to ask potential nomineestheir views on substantive issues. Put it this way: If youhave to ask a nominee his views after analyzing his opinions,you probably shouldn't nominate him. It is highly unlikelythat a judge who will parse the ex post facto prohibition todistinguish between criminal defendants and the criminallyinsane would then fail to take seriously other statutes orthe Constitution.   It's worth noting that litmus-test questions onsubstantive issues were put to judicial candidates during theCarter administration. This makes sense. It is obviouslyimportant to know the policy views of an activist judge whoselegal methodology could well be determined by the result tobe reached.   President Bush may well have found an unBorkable nominee.Judge Souter has apparently never written a law-reviewarticle or given a memorable speech. The liberal lobbyistswill have a hard time making much of his opinions likeliestto attract their attention. He has written on abortion, butin a medical malpractice case and only to say that doctorsdon't have to perform abortions themselves when they advisepatients that there may be a birth defect. In another case,he was part of a court that ruled New Hampshire couldprohibit homosexuals from adopting children, but also saidthe state could not exclude them from working in day-carecenters.   So if a fight develops against Judge Souter, it probablywon't be the smear and misrepresentation campaign that workedso well against Robert Bork. The lobbyists instead might haveto debate the role of judges. We already hear liberal voicestesting the waters by dismissing the distinction betweenjudges interpreting the law and legislating from the bench asnothing but a &quot;cliche.&quot;   Anyone tempted to push this notion might think twice. Forone thing, it is a problem for liberals to dismiss theexistence of judicial activism even as they erect monumentsto its champion, William Brennan. Justice Brennan had toignore whole tracts of the Constitution to find a prohibitionon the death penalty.   If liberal Senators defeat a judicial nominee because hebelieves too strongly in judicial restraint, they legitimizeactivist judging at their peril. After all, most federaljudges were appointed by President Reagan or Bush. No one hasseen a right-wing activist judge in many decades, but a newbreed is possible to imagine. Such a judge might ignore the16th Amendment in order to invalidate income taxes or dismissthe Clean Air Act as patently irrational and refuse to holddefendants liable.   More likely, Judge Souter will become Justice Souter intime for the next term of the Supreme Court. His closeanalysis of statutes and the Constitution will put him in theconservative camp of justices. His willingness to ask whetherall issues are necessarily legal issues could help nudge thecourt back to its more modest practice of avoidingessentially political cases. It is a tribute to the influenceof Justice Brennan that even his replacement by David Souterwould mean only that the new conservative intellectualjurisprudence will be off to a healthy infancy.</TEXT></DOC>