<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911115-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>911115-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Global Route:   A McDonnell Deal   In Asia Would Jolt   The Airliner Industry   ---   Firm Would Get Cash, Orders   And Low-Cost Suppliers;   Jobs, Trade Might Suffer   ---   Sending Technology Abroad?   ----   This article was prepared by   Wall Street Journal staff reporters   Rick Wartzman in Los Angeles,   Susan Carey in Hong Kong   And Jeremy Mark in Taipei, Taiwan</HL><DATE>11/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   BA E.CSA F.ABI F.ASP G.DAI G.MES LABOR MD Q.FPL Q.TAT U.BA</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)SHIPBUILDERS OF COMMERCIAL SHIPS (SHP)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)ALL TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT (TRQ)</IN><NS>LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)MISSOURI (MO)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SPAIN (SP)TAIWAN (TW)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   McDonnell Douglas Corp., on the verge of selling up to 40%of its commercial-aircraft manufacturing operations to TaiwanAerospace Corp. for as much as $2 billion, is about to givebirth to a trans-Pacific version of Europe's Airbus Industrieconsortium.   In one move, the weakest of the big-three world-widemakers of jetliners would turn the huge industry on its ear,with implications for the U.S. trade balance, domesticemployment and the transfer of technology abroad.</LP><TEXT>   McDonnell Douglas has been searching desperately forforeign investors to share the risk in building and financingits new MD-12 400-seat wide-body trijet, a $4 billiondevelopment program. It also has been looking for foreignaerospace companies willing to build parts of the plane at afar lower cost than McDonnell Douglas can. And it has beenseeking foreign airline orders.   The Taiwan deal could help accomplish all three. And sinceAsia's embryonic aerospace companies also are searching forlinkups that would enable them to make technological leapsinto world-class aerospace engineering, McDonnell Douglas'sneeds mesh nicely with their plans.   Although neither party will confirm details of thenegotiations, industry sources say Taiwan's role would be thefirst in a series of alliances that would transform McDonnellDouglas's Long Beach, Calif.-based commercial airplanebuilding activities into a cash-rich, Asian-backed consortiumwith low labor costs and ready access to the booming aviationmarket in the Pacific Rim.   For some, this is a disturbing prospect -- especially inone of the few multibillion-dollar industries still dominatedby the U.S. &quot;Manufacturing in general has become an unendingparade of foreign entities taking equity positions inAmerican technology,&quot; says Stephen Cohen, director of theUniversity of California at Berkeley's Roundtable on theInternational Economy. &quot;It's happening every day.&quot;   The objective for St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas isclear: By the time it builds the MD-12, it wants to be leftwith just the three most important jobs: designing theairplane, performing the final assembly and conducting theflight tests.   Thus, McDonnell Douglas would no longer manufacture themany individual sections -- the nose, wing, fuselage, tailand smaller parts -- that it says it has never builtefficiently anyway. By dumping these tasks, it believes itcan undercut rivals Boeing Co. and Airbus on costs. Spokesmenfor Boeing and Airbus, however, say the two companies wouldeasily remain competitive with McDonnell Douglas.   &quot;What we're embarking on is a fundamental shift,&quot; saysJohn Wolf, McDonnell Douglas's executive vice president forcommercial programs at Long Beach. &quot;We're looking out andsaying we see sources that can do things better, and cheaper,than we can do them ourselves.&quot;   Such an arrangement would intensify competition in athree-player industry that many analysts believe has roomenough for only two. For the market leader, Seattle-basedBoeing, it would present something of a squeeze play, withAirbus flexing its muscles in Europe and McDonnell Douglasdoing the same in Asia.   From an even broader view, an Asian alliance could sparkfears about potential damage to America's balance of trade:Last year, as the U.S. piled up another huge trade deficit,jetliner makers were a rare bright spot. They exported $16.69billion of their products, while only $737 million worth wereimported.   Union officials, meanwhile, are worried about losing jobs.&quot;It's a major concern not only to our members but tosubcontractors in the area,&quot; says Richard Rios, the presidentof United Auto Workers Local 148, which represents about19,000 workers at the factory in Long Beach.   Clearly, the deal still could fall through, particularlyif the Taiwanese cabinet doesn't approve it, a requirement inTaiwan. But from McDonnell Douglas's perspective, there'slittle choice but to press ahead. Although it plans todeliver $8 billion worth of commercial aircraft this year,its market share lately has been shrinking -- from a 50-yearaverage of 23% of the world-wide market to 17% today.   Also hurting McDonnell Douglas has been continuinginefficient production. Although the commercial divisionisn't any longer reporting the hefty losses of past years, acompany insider estimates that Boeing's costs run about 5% to7% less than McDonnell Douglas's.   Accordingly, McDonnell Douglas has felt the need to reachout -- or get out.   Through the mid-1980s it explored the prospect of somesort of joint venture with Airbus, though nothing ever cameof it. At other times, McDonnell Douglas has been on theverge of leaving the airliner business. In fact, executiveshave told Wall Street analysts that if an Asian deal doesn'tcome together, the company will simply &quot;harvest&quot; its currentnarrow-body MD-80 and wide-body MD-11 airliner programswithout further major development -- and then presumably quitthe field. Without something new to offer its airlinecustomers, McDonnell Douglas's Mr. Wolf acknowledges, &quot;wedie.&quot;   But what the company now envisions is an end run aroundBoeing and Airbus, via Asia.   A foreign cash infusion would allow it to launch the MD-12-- a direct challenge to Boeing's most important product, thejumbo, four-engine 747. Once the MD-12 is established,McDonnell Douglas would hope to use the new cost advantagesprovided by the Asian alliance to introduce more planes. Theyinclude a 100-seat MD-95 and a 200-seat model now known onlyas the MD-XX. If that happened, McDonnell Douglas wouldchallenge head-on one of Boeing's greatest strengths: itsfull product line.   In the meantime, the company would use the influence ofits Asian partners to give it a leg up in the lucrativePacific Rim market. Jet purchases among the growing ranks ofAsian-based airlines over the next 15 years are expected toswell to around 30% of the estimated $600-billion-plus worldmarket, up from 20% today.   Although Asian equity partners would get a percentage ofthe profit reaped by McDonnell Douglas's commercial business,they would also share in the risks. And an inflow of cash,analysts say, would help lower McDonnell Douglas's debt andits interest expense, thereby raising earnings.   In trading on the New York Stock Exchange, the price ofMcDonnell Douglas's shares rose $6.75 earlier this week onreports of the possible transaction with Taiwan Aerospace.Yesterday, on unrelated news that there might be problemswith the construction of parts of the company's transportplanes, the stock pulled back $2.125 to close at $77 a share.   For Taiwan Aerospace, a link with McDonnell Douglas wouldbe a much-needed boost. The company -- which says it iscurrently 29% government funded, a figure it expects to riseto nearly 60% soon -- was officially formed only last monthand has never built a thing. Indeed, all it has to show forits lofty plans to become a major player in aerospace is anoffice in one of Taipei's most desirable buildings, an emptyfactory in the central Taiwanese city of Taichung and acouple of dozen employees.   For various Asian countries, working with McDonnellDouglas presents about the only available avenue to gainexpertise. Airbus is obviously focused on Europe. And Boeing,for all its talk about the inevitability of global alliances,still does much of its most sophisticated manufacturing atits own plants. McDonnell Douglas, meanwhile, has reached astage where it is desperate enough to need a partner, butstrong enough financially to attract one. &quot;We're perfect,&quot;says Herbert Lanese, McDonnell Douglas's chief financialofficer, &quot;because we're humble.&quot;   Actually, Boeing has pursued some international links,especially through ties with Japanese industry. But thecompany has avoided risk-sharing arrangements that could giveaway Boeing technology and eventually turn the subcontractorsinto competitors.   McDonnell Douglas already subcontracts parts of itscommercial aircraft to some foreign concerns, includingKorean Air and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries of Japan. But thenew setup would go much further. For example, TaiwanAerospace could end up building the MD-12's fuselage andwing, according to industry officials. Then, as other equitypartners were brought in, Taiwan Aerospace could act as theholding company and sell some of its McDonnell Douglas staketo other Asian investors, several people familiar with thetalks suggested. Taiwan Aerospace could also give other Asiancompanies manufacturing subcontracts.   Privately, McDonnell Douglas officials have said theirother investment targets are in South Korea, Japan andSingapore. Together, Asian investors could take as much as49% of McDonnell Douglas's commercial operations.   The arrangement would be similar to Airbus in its design.Airbus is owned by four European aerospace concerns, all ofwhich build large portions of the consortium's airplane partsand then ship them to Toulouse, France, for final assembly.Each Airbus partner is responsible for its own subcontracts,financing, and design and development.   McDonnell Douglas for years has railed at foreigngovernment subsidies Airbus's partners have enjoyed. But now,the company's potential tie-up with Asia's emerging aerospaceindustries indirectly could channel government money intoMcDonnell Douglas's coffers. &quot;We're waiting to see . . .whether McDonnell Douglas is changing its spots on the Airbus{subsidy} issue,&quot; says Lawrence Clarkson, a senior vicepresident at Boeing's commercial aircraft unit.   Originally conceived as a venture between the privatesector and the state, Taiwan Aerospace increasingly has takenon the appearance of a government effort. Authorities hadhoped that the company would largely be funded by investmentsfrom major Taiwan business groups. But the private sector'swariness about the project caused several delays in startingup the company.   According to a list of investors released by TaiwanAerospace in late June, three government bodies werecommitted to providing about $17.1 million, or about half thecompany's total paid-in capital. The three are the IndustrialDevelopment Fund; state-owned Bank of Communications; andTaiwan's largest steelmaker, China Steel Corp., which is92.6%-owned by the Ministry of Economic Affairs.   Among the business groups committed to investing in TaiwanAerospace are: Tatung Group, a major electronics, applianceand heavy machinery maker; Formosa Plastics Group, Taiwan'slargest industrial conglomerate; Evergreen Group, the world'slargest shipping line; and Hualong Group, a major textilemaker. But several companies have failed to come up withtheir full commitments.   Even if the private sector continues to prove a hesitantparticipant in Taiwan Aerospace, the government is in aposition to back the company fully. Taiwan has more than $76billion in foreign reserves. On several occasions in the pasttwo years, the state has assisted Taiwanese companies inoverseas acquisitions that it considers to be of strategicimportance.   The key for McDonnell Douglas to complete the transactionwill be to convince U.S. regulators that vital technologywon't slip out of its control. It is a particularly worrisomeprospect to some observers because McDonnell Douglas is alsothe nation's largest defense contractor.   But a company spokesman maintains that McDonnell Douglaswill be able to demonstrate concretely that &quot;the militarybusiness will be completely separate.&quot; As for possibly givingaway aerospace technology, he adds that mastery of aircraftmaking is already widely known outside the U.S. because ofAirbus.   He also dismisses the issue of McDonnell Douglas possiblybenefiting from government subsidies similar to those Airbusreceives. &quot;There's a world of difference between the $10billion to $20 billion in subsidies Airbus has gotten and theequity investment being contemplated here,&quot; he says.   In the final analysis, this deal is in many ways make orbreak for McDonnell Douglas -- and its chairman, JohnMcDonnell. The enigmatic son of the company's founder, Mr.McDonnell has tried repeatedly to shake up the company'scommercial operations. Two years ago, for instance, heundertook a huge restructuring of the Long Beach factoryaimed at instituting Japanese management techniques. Theresult was chaos.   But all along, colleagues say, Mr. McDonnell has had thebroader vision of allying the concern with companiesoverseas. For months, he has been traveling through Asiatrying to broker the deal.   &quot;It's a bold move,&quot; McDonnell Douglas's Mr. Wolf says.&quot;But the payoff will be enormous.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>