<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911224-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>911224-0085.</DOCID><HL>   A Free Marketeer's Case Against Term Limits   ----   By Robert J. Barro</HL><DATE>12/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   To economists, term limits sound like minimum wages, rentcontrols and similar interferences with free markets. In eachcase, the government tries to prevent a mutually advantageoustrade: an employer hiring a low-productivity, hence, low-wageworker who is willing to work at that wage; a renter inducingan increase in the supply of housing by willingly paying ahigher price; and an electorate choosing a desiredrepresentative who is willing to serve. The real surprise isthat some strong supporters of free markets, such as The WallStreet Journal, have been the biggest advocates of termlimits. What is going on here?   One argument is that incumbent politicians have unfairadvantages in elections because of their ready access tocampaign funds, staff, mailing and travel privileges, mediapublicity, and so on. Hence, the electorate is fooledsystematically into supporting incumbents even when they areinferior to their challengers. This argument is similar tothe Galbraith-like view that big corporations with massiveadvertising budgets can consistently dupe their customersinto buying inferior products. Supporters of free markets andthe capitalistic system reject this message because they havefaith in the self-interested consumer to discipline thecompanies that do not deliver the goods. Advocates of thedemocratic electoral process ought to have similar confidencein the public.</LP><TEXT>   Another argument is that a citizen Congress with itscontinuing flow of fresh faces into Washington would resultin better government than that provided by representativeswith lengthy tenure. The counter-argument is that experienceis an important characteristic for legislators. Eachviewpoint has some validity. Presumably the best solution isto let the market decide, that is, to allow the electorate todetermine the proper balance between freshness andexperience. Most of us would not want the government todetermine whether a familiar or a new brand of toothpaste ispreferable; why is a political representative different inthis respect?   Many commentators bemoan the high tendency for incumbentsto be re-elected. But if the electoral control process isworking, so that officeholders conform with the interests ofthe majority of their constituents, then the electoraterewards its representatives with re-election. If the publicvoted against satisfactory performers just to install a newface, then officeholders would have less incentive to behaveand the system would work badly. Thus the main inference froma 95% re-election rate is that the political process isworking and that officeholders are conforming to the wishesof their constituents. If we ever see a 50% re-election rate,then there really would be reason to worry.   The threat not to re-elect works only if the incumbent isinterested in another term, whether for his current or foranother office. A problem with term limits is that it createsmore lame ducks, who are less responsive to the desires ofthe electorate. Much has been made of Alexander Hamilton'sreflections on this point in Federalist 72: &quot;One ill effectof the exclusion {from re-election} would be a diminution ofthe inducements to good behavior.&quot; (It is interesting tonote, however, that Hamilton was not discussing term limitson the legislature, and was actually arguing against the termlimits on the chief executive that are contained now in the22nd Amendment.)   The only respectable argument in favor of term limits thatI know of refers to the legislature and involves theinteraction with the seniority system. Representativesaccumulate more power as they become more senior, partlybecause of better committee assignments and more staff andpartly because of increased familiarity with governmentofficials and institutions and with outside interest groups.Some aspects of this power, such as greater experience withgovernmental programs, are desirable; others, such as theincreased ability to extract funds from interest groups, arenot.   Even if seniority is a net cost in the aggregate, however,each district has an incentive to re-elect its own incumbent(and would if possible vote against the incumbents from otherdistricts) because the representative's relative senioritytranslates into a large share of governmental largess. Thevoters would be better off if they could reach a bindingagreement that precluded the re-election of incumbents, thatis, if term limits were instituted. As an example, the votersof Washington state recently rejected a proposal that wouldhave limited the seniority of their congressionalrepresentatives relative to those of other states. Yet thesame voters likely would have approved a proposal thatlimited the terms of all Congressional representatives, notjust those from Washington.   Changes in the seniority system may therefore be asuperior alternative to term limits. If a representative'spower to favor his or her district did not vary withseniority, then voters would not have an excessive incentiveto re-elect incumbents. The seniority system could be changedonly by getting Congress to alter its own rules (as it has attimes in the past) or else by constitutional amendment, whichwould, from a practical standpoint, also have to initiate inCongress. Although the chances of success seem small, one wayto proceed would be to call the proposal the Civil RightsAmendment -- recent experience shows that calling something aCivil Rights Act helps to get it passed. It does not seem tomatter much -- it may even be detrimental -- if the contentof a Civil Rights Act actually has something to do with civilrights.   The weakening of the seniority system in Congress would,it must be conceded, sacrifice some genuine benefits. Greaterexperience may justify positions of more authority, and, therewards from seniority give Congress an efficient method tomotivate good behavior from junior members. These argumentsparallel the benefits from worker seniority in firms (or,indeed, the usefulness of a parole system as a carrot to helpcontrol inmates in prisons). The formal system of seniorityis also only a part of the story; members' increasingfamiliarity with interest groups is a kind of seniority thatwould not be eliminated by changes in the rules for committeeassignments, staffing and so on. It is unrealistic as well asundesirable to try to remove completely the operation of aseniority system in any legislature.   The various complexities about legislative term limits andtheir interaction with seniority do not arise for executiveterm limits. Voters do not have to worry that rejecting theirincumbent puts them at a disadvantage relative to othervoters' incumbents, so the electorate can properly weighexperience, fresh ideas, the value of rewarding satisfactoryperformance in office, and so on. The only defense forexecutive term limits is that the electorate needs to beprotected against itself, an argument which, if true, wouldmean that democracy was seriously flawed and would work muchless well than it seems to.   Of course, since the passage of the 22nd Amendment in1951, there is a two-term limit on the presidency, and 29 ofthe 50 states have some kind of term limit on the governor.(Seven of these limits have been introduced since 1960.)   The origins of these limits may have more to do withcompetition between legislative and executive branches thanwith a desire to improve public policy. The 22nd Amendmentreflected Congress's desire to shift the balance of poweraway from the executive, and notably the desire of aRepublican-dominated House and Senate to prevent the rise ofanother powerful Democratic president like FranklinRoosevelt. To some extent, the current pressures forlegislative term limits reflect the reverse desire to shiftpower away from Congress. From the standpoint of balance ofpower, it would surely be preferable to repeal the 22ndAmendment.   Perhaps the best test of executive term limits is to checkwhether the states with term limits on the governor haveperformed better or worse than those without such limits. Theanswer, if one holds constant geographical region and thelevel of per capita income in 1960, is that states with termlimits experienced slightly below average growth ofper-capita income over the last 30 years but were also alittle below average in the fraction of state product thatwent to state and local government expenditures. Notsurprisingly, the main message is that executive term limitsare not an important determinant of economic growth or statespending.   Executive term limits are therefore a bad idea, but oneshould not expect vastly better performance at the state ornational level from the elimination of these restrictions.Legislative term limits are less clear-cut and it is possibleto build a respectable case that favors such limits. But itis unrealistic to think that the enactment of these limitswould lead to great improvements in the functioning ofgovernment and hence, in the performance of the economy.   ---   Mr. Barro, a professor at Harvard, is a Wall StreetJournal contributing editor.</TEXT></DOC>