<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900515-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>900515-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Medicine:   Competitors' Drugs Battle Septic Shock   ----   By Richard Koenig   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   CNTO XOMA PFE CTUS G.BAY CHIR</CO><IN>MEDICAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY (MTC)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)</IN><LP>   The alarming signs appear in U.S. hospitals hundreds ofthousands of times every year. Patients show symptoms,perhaps a fever and a drop in blood pressure, that signal agram-negative infection. If their condition worsens, the nextstages can follow in days: septic shock, organ failure anddeath.   After decades of refining the standard treatments for suchinfections, doctors had begun to despair of cutting the deathtoll much more. But now there is talk of a breakthrough,possibly the next big products out of biotechnology.</LP><TEXT>   Two competitors, Centocor Inc. and Xoma Corp., are seekingclearance from the Food and Drug Administration for anentirely new sort of anti-infection drug, whetting keeninterest in medical and financial circles alike.   &quot;This could be a huge product&quot; category, says DavidWebber, a biotechnology analyst at Alex. Brown andamp; Sons Inc.,Xoma's lead investment banker. &quot;This has the potential tosave more lives than TPA,&quot; the flagship product of biotechleader Genentech Inc.   To be sure, only selected results from trials of the drugshave been made public to date. Doctors and analysts want tosee more, starting with published reports in peer-reviewedmedical journals. Even if the drugs fulfill their promise,questions will remain about how soon after the onset ofinfection the drugs should be given.   &quot;Data from both Centocor and Xoma are very exciting. Ijust think we don't want to go overboard&quot; in raisingexpectations for the drugs, says Harvey Rubin, aninfectious-disease specialist at the University ofPennsylvania who worked on the trial of Centocor's drug.   The latest disclosure came at a medical conference whereElizabeth Ziegler, a researcher at the University ofCalifornia at San Diego, reported on some of her group'sfindings with Centocor's drug, Centoxin. One striking result:Over the first 28 days of the trial, the drug cut the deathrate by 51% for severely ill patients suffering from septicshock, which is characterized by a sharp fall in bloodpressure, and failure of the lungs, kidneys or liver.   &quot;You could possibly fill Yankee Stadium with the peoplewhose lives will be saved each year,&quot; says Centocor'spresident, James Wavle. It might even be an overflow crowd atthe stadium, which has a capacity of 55,000.   By some estimates, there are about 200,000 cases a year inthe U.S. of gram-negative sepsis, the stage of the diseasewhen the infection begins to cause disturbing symptoms anddoctors might start using the new drugs. Some 80,000 of thosecases are estimated to be fatal. The toll in Europe, whereCentocor and Xoma have marketing plans as well, is thought tobe about as heavy. Since the death rate of patients who gotCentoxin fell 43% by the end of hospitalization, roughly69,000 lives could be saved a year in the U.S. and Europe.   The infection-causing bacteria, called gram-negativebecause they don't hold the dye in a laboratory stainingtechnique, grow benignly in the intestine. But they canbecome deadly if they enter the bloodstream or other tissuethrough burns, abdominal wounds, surgery or contaminatedcatheters.   The new drugs, unlike antibiotics that act upon thebacteria, latch on to toxins made by the bacteria, thusblocking the next biochemical step in the disease process.Both drugs are monoclonal antibodies, proteins that zero inon selected targets in the body. Centoxin is derived fromhuman spleen cells; Xoma's drug, called Xomen E-5, from mousespleen cells.   For Centocor, based in Malvern, Pa., and Xoma, based inBerkeley, Calif., the drugs could be company-making products.Neither sells a therapeutic product of any kind today. Eachcould vault into the top ranks of the biotech industry on thestrength of its anti-infection drug alone. Some estimatesfrom Wall Street put the combined U.S. and European sales forboth drugs at $750 million by the mid-1990s.   One reason for the jumbo market projections is sky-highprices for drugs produced by biotechnology. Centoxin andXomen-E5 both are expected to cost between $1,500 and $2,500for a single course of treatment, given by injection.   Another reason is the likelihood that the drug will beoverprescribed, since symptoms of gram-negative sepsis canmimic those of other types of infections. The lab testsneeded to confirm the initial diagnosis can take a couple ofdays, and a patient's condition may deteriorate in themeantime. As a result, doctors would tend to use the drugsearly and worry about perfecting the diagnosis later -- atleast until faster tests became available.   A suggestion of how often the drugs may be used onpatients for whom they aren't designed can be gleaned fromthe Centoxin trial. Of 543 patients given the drug becausethey appeared to have symptoms of gram-negative sepsis, only317 were proven by the lab work to have had gram-negativeinfections.   &quot;Even economically, it seems to make sense&quot; to use thedrugs early, says Roger Bone, a researcher on intensive-carecosts at Rush-Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center inChicago. Dr. Bone says that by keeping patients from becomingdeathly ill, the drugs would prevent stays in intensive-careunits that run up costs of several hundred thousand dollars.   With such a large market at stake, the two companies arealready taking swipes at each other. Centocor is hoping tobuild an early case that it has the more powerful drug, sinceXomen E-5 in its first trial didn't show effectiveness incases of septic shock with organ failure. Xoma PresidentPatrick Scannon, asserting that Centocor is &quot;data-dredging,&quot;replies by noting the companies' trials differed in the sortof patients evaluated in shock cases.   Xoma, which has reported that its drug was effective inpatients who weren't in shock, raises questions about thepotency of Centoxin in that group, for which Centocor hasn'tyet broken out numbers. To this, Centocor's research chief,Harvey Berger, retorts, &quot;They're just trying to find holes indata that's rock solid.&quot;   The battle of words between Centocor and Xoma is a previewof the fight ahead if their drugs get marketing clearancefrom the FDA. Centocor vows to market Centoxin by itself, incontrast to its practice of licensing its diagnostic productsto giant health-care concerns. The gain for the company willbe enormous if the drug wins acceptance, because all theprofit will be Centocor's.   The risk for Centocor is enormous, too. The companyexpects initially to have no more than 75 salespeople in theU.S. Xoma has licensed Xomen E-5 to Pfizer Inc., and so willhave a force of 750 behind its product. Xoma also beatCentocor by six months in applying to the FDA.   Already the contest has entered the courtroom, with Xomafiling a patent-infringement suit against Centocor in federalcourt in San Francisco last month. Other companies arelooking to join the fray, too.   Cetus Corp. has an antibody against gram-negative toxinsin early clinical trials, and Bayer AG has licensed fromChiron Corp. an antibody aimed not at the toxins but atharmful substances produced by the body in response to them.</TEXT></DOC>