<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920120-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>920120-0095.</DOCID><HL>   January Surprise:   Bush Plans to Unveil   a 90-Day Moratorium   On New Regulations   ---   He Hopes to Spur Economy   By Undoing Rule Growth   Under His Administration   ---   A Page Out of Reagan's Book   ----   By Bob Davis   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/20/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- In his three years in office, PresidentGeorge Bush has been turning into the Reregulation President.Now Mr. Bush plans to impose a sweeping 90-day ban on newregulation as part of the economic recovery plan he'll unveilin his State of the Union address next week.   The regulatory moratorium will affect nearly every federalagency, White House officials say, including thoseresponsible for the environment, finance, food, safety,transportation, labor and communications. During thethree-month ban, agencies will be ordered to review all theirregulations, particularly new proposals, with an eye towardeither scrapping rules that unduly burden business orslashing their costs.</LP><TEXT>   The moratorium is a page borrowed from Ronald Reagan'sbook of tricks. Shortly after taking office in 1981, Mr.Reagan ordered a two-month ban on new regulations. The banclearly set the tone for his administration.   But there's a difference: Mr. Reagan's ban was aimed atregulations developed during the Democratic Carteradministration. Mr. Bush is declaring war on his own team.   Mr. Bush has been president for the past three years, inwhich he rarely pushed for deregulation, and vice presidentand deregulation chief for eight years before that. Theregulations being halted are Bush regulations. The agencyheads implicitly being reprimanded are Bush appointees. Heand his top aides lobbied hard for the two most costly piecesof legislation for business during the past four years: theClean Air Act, which imposed a regulatory burden on businessestimated at $25 billion a year, and the Americans withDisabilities Act, with a $2 billion annual price tag.   &quot;It's the vision thing,&quot; says Robert Hahn, an economistwho worked in the Bush administration on the Clean Air Act.&quot;How do you get away from the fact that you're the people whobrought all this {regulation}? That's a toughie.&quot;   &quot;For Bush, in the winter of '92, to say that I didn't mean{to add regulation} or I let it get out of hand is ratherstrange,&quot; agrees William Niskanen, a Reagan administrationeconomic adviser who now heads the libertarian CatoInstitute. Mr. Niskanen says administration officials askedhim to write articles praising a moratorium, but he turnedthem down because he couldn't &quot;make much sense&quot; out of theBush proposal. He adds that a colleague was also asked towrite in favor of the moratorium, but said no too.   Michael Boskin, chairman of the president's Council ofEconomic advisers, and one of the architects of themoratorium, defends the plan. &quot;It's a way of focusing theattention of the regulatory community to redouble theirefforts&quot; to pare costly regulation, he says.   But it's unclear how far reaching the ban will be inpractice. The ban won't affect rules which must be imposed tomeet deadlines set by Congress. Agencies also won't hold up&quot;emergency&quot; regulations, such as Food and Drug Administrationapproval of new drugs, White House officials promise. Andso-called independent agencies, such as the FederalCommunications Commission and Securities Exchange Commission,would have to &quot;voluntarily&quot; agree to join in the moratorium.   The high cost of government regulation isn't as big anissue for business as it was in the 1970s. But sincePresident Bush took office, business grumbling aboutregulation has been steadily on the rise. Various studiesshow that regulatory costs have been rising under the Bushadministration, reversing a decline that began underPresident Carter and continued through the Reagan years.   A report prepared for the National Chamber Foundation, abusiness think tank, says regulatory costs dropped from$5,800 per household in 1977 to $4,100 in 1988. Since then,under President Bush, costs have climbed again and now equal$4,300 a household, and are expected to reach $4,500 a yearin 1996. (The figures are in 1988 dollars.)   Part of this reregulation reflects the explicit design ofthe White House, as in the case of the Clean Air Act. Partoccurred because of White House inattention. Unlike PresidentReagan, who frequently appointed agency heads hostile toregulation, President Bush has appointed a series of toughregulators to run the Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, the Environmental Protection Agency, theFederal Trade Commission, the Justice Department antitrustdivision and the SEC, among other agencies.   &quot;It's not that secret regulators were appointed contraryto the President's wishes, and pulled surprises,&quot; saysCharles Untermeyer, head of presidential personnel untilrecently. &quot;Able people came into jobs, read the laws andenforced them.&quot;   White House counselor Boyden Gray, another of themoratorium's architects, says he backed David Kessler as headof the Food and Drug Administration because theadministration wanted a firebrand who would try to slash thetime it takes the agency to approve drugs. But Mr. Kessler,perhaps the FDA's most activist chief ever, also cracked downon mislabeled foods and pushed hard for new food labels,which the food industry grumbles will cost more than $3billion and force them to change at least 257,000 labels.   &quot;Kessler has done a terrific job in drug approval,&quot; saysMr. Gray, who adds that he &quot;doesn't know&quot; about thefood-label controversy.   Other Bush appointees also have pushed tough regulationand enforcement. The FTC has charged several manufacturerswith conspiring with retailers to fix prices, includingvideo-game maker Nintendo Co. -- the first such cases in adecade. The Consumer Product Safety Commission is forcingmanufacturers to make changes in packaging, fireworks,cigarette lighters and crib toys to protect kids -- a tacticrarely used in the Reagan years. The SEC has imposed toughrules that have crippled the penny-stock industry, closingdown many fraudulent operations, but drying up funds forsmall companies too.   &quot;There isn't much awareness of what the agencies aredoing&quot; at the White House, says the head of one independentagency.   Presidential indifference to domestic matters is also toblame for reregulation. Mr. Bush invited regulators forcocktails at the White House in 1990 and regaled them withtales of his days as deregulatory chief -- the last suchmeeting. The administration has failed to fill a seniorregulatory post at the budget office for more than two yearsbecause of a fight with Congress. The White House doesn'teven have a nominee for the position anymore.   &quot;To the extent that the administration is seen as soft onregulation, it's more through inadvertence than consciousdesign,&quot; says Richard Schmalensee, a former Bushadministration economist who teaches at MassachusettsInstitute of Technology. &quot;There was an effort to avoid beingseen as reflexively anti-regulation. That may have been seenas weakness&quot; at the agencies.   It was. Senior appointees to regulatory posts don't feelthey must back administration positions. William Reilly, theactivist EPA chief, testified on Capitol Hill about awetlands proposal, even after he received a call on his carphone from a top aide of Vice President Quayle telling himnot to release it. The administration favored a proposal thatpermitted more development than the one Mr. Reilly presentedto Congress.   Then there is Susan Phillips, a former chairwoman of theCommodity Futures Trading Commission, who Treasury SecretaryNicholas Brady pushed for a seat on the Federal Reserve Boardbecause she was an expert on the futures market. At herconfirmation hearing, she said she opposed Treasury-backedlegislation concerning futures.   The administration rarely punishes regulators who deviatefrom Bush positions. Consider a battle at the FCC overwhether to discard 20-year-old rules blocking the televisionnetworks from owning the lucrative rights to reruns. Duringthe thick of the fight, White House Chief of Staff JohnSununu wrote a letter reiterating the President's &quot;aversionto unnecessary government interference with private markets.&quot;Says Mr. Schmalensee, the former Bush official: &quot;It was asstrong a body language as you could see&quot; that theadministration wanted the rules tossed out.   But three Bush appointees -- two Republicans and aDemocrat -- voted against scrapping the rules, and therestrictions remain largely in place. FCC Commissioner AndrewBarrett, one of the Republicans who voted against thePresident's position, says, &quot;I didn't come here to go alongif it was against my views.&quot; Not only hasn't the White Houseretaliated, he says, but after the vote he continued to go tothe White House to meet people and was invited to a statedinner honoring the president of Argentina.   President Bush's latest effort to declare himself aderegulator began last month when he authorized senior aidesto put together a regulatory plan as part of a &quot;growthpackage&quot; to revive the moribund economy and deflect attacksduring the presidential campaign that Mr. Bush lacks adomestic agenda. Justice Department staffers, who go so faras to claim that anti-trust enforcement is &quot;deregulatory&quot;because it boosts competition, provided some of the staffanalysis.   In a meeting headed by Mr. Quayle last week, in the OldExecutive Office Building, the vice president, BudgetDirector Richard Darman, domestic policy adviser RogerPorter, Mr. Gray, the White House counsel and Mr. Boskin, thepresident's economic adviser all endorsed the moratorium andregulatory review. Mr. Bush was described as &quot;quite positive&quot;about the plan and is expected to formally approve it earlythis week.   &quot;There's nothing like an election, with the president onlymodestly ahead of a challenger in New Hampshire, to focus theattention of the president and the White House,&quot; says JamesMiller, a former Reagan budget chief who has been lobbyingfor a moratorium.   But the Bush team has rejected an early idea to askCongress for a one-year delay in phasing in such laws as theClean Air Act -- a move that would save business substantialsums -- because it believed Congress would never go along.Instead, the White House intends to act unilaterally todeclare the three-month moratorium and regulatory review.   The White House plans to use the moratorium to pressurecabinet chiefs and agency heads to take an extra look atregulation and figure out ways to reduce their costs.Already, says Gerard Scannell, who resigned Friday as head ofOSHA, his agency was asked to produce an analysis of theeffect of OSHA safety rules on U.S. jobs. Meanwhile, the FCCwas asked to cite any action it has taken to cut regulation-- a task one official there compared to asking a group ofalcoholics what they're doing to promote temperance.   Regulators appointed by the President who have learned ofthe moratorium find it perplexing; career staffers find itdismaying. Mr. Boskin and Mr. Gray, the moratorium's mainarchitects, invited a group of regulators to a White Housebreakfast recently and briefed them on the plan. According toparticipants, FCC Chairman Alfred Sikes said a moratoriumcould be a problem because every action the FCC takesrequires a rule.   SEC Chairman Richard Breeden told the group that he wasworking on a plan to help small businesses attract capital.Don't stop that work, Messrs. Boskin and Gray told him; only&quot;burdensome&quot; regulations were the problem. Still, the reviewcould be massive. According to a government tally, 59agencies were working on 4,863 regulations, including 919 newones, as of last October.   White House officials say they are targeting eight broadareas for regulatory review: environment, energy,transportation, exports, telecommunications, biotechnology,access to capital and privatization. Among the regulatorybarriers the White House would like to lift or modify, sayofficials, are rules that block the sale of airports toprivate interests and lengthy safety reviews that delay theintroduction of genetically engineered plants andmicro-organisms.   Mark Silbergeld, head of Consumer Union's Washingtonoffice, accuses the White House of making regulation &quot;thescapegoat&quot; for the recession. But Mr. Boskin, the White Houseeconomist, counters that &quot;over-regulation is one of the majorimpediments to a growing economy.&quot; He adds that the reviewbuilds on the work of Vice President Quayle's Council onCompetitiveness, which has worked with the FDA to developproposals to speed drug approval, but has become steeped incontroversy for trying to weaken environmental regulations.   Environmental regulations play a big role in themoratorium as well. Several administration officials say theyexpect to closely review EPA proposals for handling thedisposal of wastes that contain relatively small amounts ofradioactive material, as well as rules covering water purityand Superfund toxic dumps.   In addition, they will look at the agency's growing role,as a result of the Clean Air Act, in the approval of theconstruction of natural-gas pipelines. It wasn't clearwhether these reviews would be done by the Council onCompetitiveness, which has a staff of just a dozen people, ora larger administration task force.   Something has to be done to cut the cost of environmentalregulation, says Robert Hahn, the former Bush economist. Hehas told the moratorium planners that the U.S. should offerpayments to consumers who trade old gas guzzlers for newcars, rather than relying solely on stricter regulations toclean the air. Complying with just the environmental rulesproposed or enacted this year, he figures, would cost $70.5billion -- more than any year but one during the Reaganadministration.   ---   Staff reporters Paul M. Barrett and Rose Gutfeld inWashington contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>