<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900416-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>900416-0116.</DOCID><HL>   The Red Army Fights for Its Life   ----   By Sergei Zamascikov</HL><DATE>04/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><LP>   The newly elected Estonian Parliament enacted a resolutionThursday relieving young Estonians of their legal obligationto serve in the Soviet army. Latvia will likely follow nextmonth. The Baltic Republics' challenge to Soviet militarypower suggests that there might after all be something in thesuggestion made by various members of the Soviet government-- including, it has been reported, President MikhailGorbachev himself -- that the Red Army instigated thecrackdown on Lithuania. While Western analysts have a naturalproclivity -- certainly justified by past experience -- todiscount stories about &quot;hardliners in the Kremlin,&quot; this timethese claims might be true.   The Soviet military does have reasons to make a show offorce in Lithuania. Although the armed forces initiallysupported President Mikhail Gorbachev's reform drive, thepolitical, social and moral status of the military have beenundermined by his policies. Minister of Defense SergeiSokolov was unceremoniously retired, along with a number ofsenior commanders; the defense budget has been cut and troopstrengths reduced; Eastern Europe has been lost; the standardof living of career servicemen, officers and NCOs has beenpermitted to deteriorate; and the leadership has failed tocontrol the criticism of the military in the newly freepress.</LP><TEXT>   There have been signs of military restiveness in recentmonths. In a March interview in Izvestia, defense ministerGen. Dmitri Yazov echoed the criticisms of Soviet defensepolicy made by Chief of General Staff Gen. Mikhail Moiseev inan interview with the army's newspaper, Red Star, inFebruary. Gen. Moiseev had expressed unprecedented criticismof the new party program and said that the cuts in thedefense budget might reduce the Soviet Union's militarypotential. Military journals such as Communist of the ArmedForces and the Military Historical Journal have issuedominous warnings to those who are trying to &quot;unilaterallydisarm us against the aggressor.&quot;   The military simply may not be prepared to accept anEastern European outcome in the Baltic states, not justbecause of the threat to Soviet security, but because of thethreat to its own integrity as an institution. The publicityaround the 500 deserters that the Soviets have rounded up inLithuania has created a false impression that the Soviets aredealing with the problem of desertion for the first time. Buteven before the crisis in the Baltics, desertion had become aserious problem for the Soviet military. The military hascomplained for years about the declining quality of itsrecruits, particularly their lack of motivation and poorphysical condition. Large numbers of Moslem draftees -- whoby the year 2,000 will provide more than 50% of the availablepool of young men -- speak virtually no Russian. Worse, theyshow extreme reluctance to serve.   Outright draft resistance, however, was virtually unknownin the Soviet Union before Mr. Gorbachev's time. Now it isspreading. Official figures list 6,647 young men who failedto register during last spring's &quot;call-up.&quot; A number ofunofficial reports suggest that the real figure is at leasttwice as high. More than 1,200 Armenian and Azeri soldiersfled their units and joined their fellow nationals during theethnic strife in Baku. According to the Chief MilitaryProsecutor, Gen. Aleksandr Katusev, more than 1,000 Balts arecurrently listed as deserters.   Military authorities are almost entirely dependent uponlocal law enforcement organs to ensure compliance with thelaw and punish those who resist the draft. Increasingly,these organs are reluctant to take action against fellownationals. Local political authorities have also lent supportto draft resisters and deserters.   Military authorities complain that local governments inLithuania have been refusing to establish draft boards andthat youth are being encouraged to join the republic's newmilitia and border forces. A local Georgian party secretaryreportedly responded to a military official's plea for helpin his district with the following statement: &quot;I am with thepeople. And the people don't want to serve.&quot; In Armenia,hatred of conscription led to an attempt on the life of thelocal draft commissioner.   The Russian republic itself is not immune to the problemsof draft evasion and desertion. In some Moscow districts,fewer than 5% of draftees reported on the first day of the&quot;call-up&quot; last fall. Although complete statistics are notavailable, the figures for large cities such as Leningrad andMoscow are apparently alarmingly large. The storming of theVilnius Psychiatric Hospital in search of Lithuaniandeserters on March 27 may have been a sign that further draftresistance and desertion will not be tolerated.   The military is also clearly unhappy about its new role inpolicing ethnic strife. In April 1989, airborne units werecalled on to suppress a massive demonstration in Tbilisi,Georgia. Since early 1989 the armed forces have beenenforcing martial law in Armenia and Azerbaijan.   The armed forces' strong show of force in Lithuania may beintended to relieve them of the necessity of suppressingsimilar rebellions elsewhere in the future. It may also bethat the military feels so reluctant to police the populationbecause it is aware of its inability to continue doing so forvery much longer.   The Soviet armed forces are composed of five separateservices: the strategic rocket forces, the ground forces, theair defense troops, the air force and the navy, but only somepart of the ground forces can be used against the population.Most ground forces divisions are of reduced strength. Withoutsummoning the reserves, these divisions are not capable ofdoing much more than maintaining and guarding equipment. Buta reserve &quot;call-up&quot; would require the cooperation of localauthorities -- the same authorities who have already shownthemselves to be at cross purposes with the military. TheJanuary &quot;call-up&quot; of Russian reservists for duty in Armeniaand Azerbaijan was canceled because of strong protests bymothers and wives, as well as reluctance to report among thereservists themselves.   The only forces reliably available to the Sovietgovernment to support the local police and the anti-riotinternal troop units are therefore the combat-ready regularstrength army troops and the elite airborne, air assault and&quot;spetsnaz&quot; units. Altogether, that gives the government: 24motorized rifle divisions and independent corps; 24 tankdivisions; five airborne divisions; 10 air assault brigades;20,000 spetsnaz troops; and 35,000 Ministry of the Interiortroops.   Although this &quot;order of battle&quot; may appear impressive, infact, most of the infantry and tank units listed are deployedin Eastern Europe and in strategically important areas nearthe borders. This leaves the airborne, the air assault andspetsnaz troops -- and these troops, though well trained anddrafted mostly from the Slavic regions of the Soviet Union,are hardly enough to suppress simultaneous large-scalerevolts.   Many of these troops are already deployed in theTranscaucasus region to control the Azeri-Armenian conflict.In Lithuania, the 7th Airborne division had to be utilizedbecause the only ground forces division in Lithuania is notcombat ready. While the Soviet military may be capable ofdealing with isolated disturbances, putting out manydispersed fires would seriously tax its capabilities.   The tensions in Lithuania now seem to be subsiding. TheLithuanians have adopted a less defiant attitude, and theSoviets have dropped hints that they are open tonegotiations. But once again the interests of the militarymay interfere. The 1990 spring call-up began on March 31.Many young Lithuanians can be expected not to have respondedby the May deadline. The military may then once again betempted to use force to reclaim what it considers its due:the military service of every eligible young man who lives inthose territories it believes to be its own.   ---   Mr. Zamascikov is a researcher at the RAND Corporation inSanta Monica.</TEXT></DOC>