<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910507-0134</DOCNO><DOCID>910507-0134.</DOCID><HL>   A Heartbeat Away:   Has Quayle Learned   Enough in Two Years?   The Public Is Skeptical   ---   His Bumbling Image Remains   Despite Some Hard Work,   Quiet Trouble-Shooting   ---   A Consistently Hawkish Voice   ----   By Michel McQueen and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- All joking aside, have the past two yearsleft Dan Quayle significantly better prepared for the role ofpresident than he was when he took office as one of the mostderided vice presidents of modern times?   With President Bush's hospitalization this week with heartproblems, the question is no longer academic. While the vicepresidency is a difficult post for building a record ofachievement, Mr. Quayle has his accomplishments -- thoughmost of them are small-scale and don't say much about thenature of any Quayle presidency, a prospect that continues toalarm many Americans and allies abroad.</LP><TEXT>   He hasn't humiliated himself or the president, as hisdetractors were sure he would. His actions have leanedheavily toward trouble-shooting, quiet lobbying within theadministration and with other governments for a select groupof public and private interests and causes, and aconsistently hawkish voice on foreign policy matters.   The affable and collegial Mr. Quayle also takes advantageof ties from his days as congressman and senator to act as anoften-effective lobbyist for administration causes on CapitolHill.   When Rockwell International Corp. feared that its petproject, the National Aerospace Plane, was in danger oflosing federal funding last year, one of its first calls forhelp went to Mr. Quayle. Soon, the vice president wascontacting some of his old colleagues in the Senate, and adeal was cut that restored some money for the superfastplane.   When public support for the Bush administration'shard-line stand toward Iraq was lagging last fall, Mr. Quaylequietly helped orchestrate an unlikely effort includingliberal Democratic consultant Ann Lewis and former ReaganPentagon official Richard Perle, who formed a committee thatlaunched a public relations blitz to support the use offorce.   And last December, when municipal officials complained ofa federal proposal to require cities to recycle a certainpercentage of their trash, Mr. Quayle stepped in to helpquash the regulation before it could take effect.   Yet such activities, while often effective, have failed totranslate into the broader public successes that Mr. Quayle'sassociates crave for him and that his own aspirationsrequire. For all his efforts, Mr. Quayle's bumbling imageremains seemingly set in concrete.   In the most recent Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, only33% of U.S. voters said they had positive feelings toward thevice president, a figure that has scarcely changed since hetook office. And this weekend's events sent new alarms aroundthe world. Britain's conservative Daily Mail editorializedthat the mere idea that the &quot;inadequate Danforth Quayleremains only a heartbeat away from the most powerful job onearth is enough to give even America's staunchest allies thevapours.&quot;   It's an attitude that infuriates Mr. Quayle's staff andclose associates, who wonder whether he will ever shake thedismal image he acquired during the 1988 campaign. His presssecretary, David Beckwith, laments that because no vicepresident is in the news every day, negative perceptions arehard to erase. Barring something like a presidential healthcrisis, &quot;people are not concerned&quot; about the vice president,&quot;so it's pretty hard to change that image.&quot;   The scare over Mr. Bush's health is sure to escalate callsfor Mr. Quayle to be dumped from the Republican ticket in1992 as both a political and substantive liability. But Mr.Bush himself shows no inclination of doing so. He said on hisreturn from the hospital yesterday that Mr. Quayle &quot;has myfull confidence.&quot;   One task that has won Mr. Quayle many friends in businesscircles is to needle foreign governments into giving U.S.companies more consideration in economic competition. In1989, he began bringing a Commerce Department official on alloverseas trips to advise him on trade matters. Beforetraveling overseas, he also meets with officials of U.S.companies for briefings on their complaints and problems --as well as success stories -- in the nations he is about tovisit.   For instance, in anticipation of his trip later this monthto Japan, Singapore and Indonesia, Mr. Quayle last week wentto Cincinnati and Chicago for meetings with officials ofMotorola Inc., Cincinnati Bell Inc., Procter andamp; Gamble Co. andCaterpillar Inc. He is scheduled to travel to Detroit onFriday for similar sessions with auto industry officials.   The vice president's aides claim that he has had a hand inwinning American companies billions of dollars in businessthat might otherwise have gone to foreign competitors.   In the fall of 1989, for example, he met in Jakarta withtop officials of the Indonesian government, which was then inthe midst of a world-wide competition for a contract forswitching and transmission equipment. Stressing thatIndonesia should choose the best bidder with the best price,he added a plug for American Telephone andamp; Telegraph'ssubmission, according to an ATandamp;T spokesman.   A year later, the country gave the multimillion-dollarcontract for 700,000 telephone lines to ATandamp;T, which sharedthe contract with Japan's Nippon Electric Co. &quot;He was veryhelpful in those discussions,&quot; the ATandamp;T spokesman says.   Similarly, Quayle aides say the vice president hasinterceded to promote the cause of Boeing Co. in airlinesales to Japan and Bolivia, where the American airlinemanufacturer was in heated competition with the Europeanconsortium that makes Airbus jets. And Mr. Quayle also hashelped an American glass company that was being squeezed by aJapanese concern in Thailand.   Most of Mr. Quayle's interventions stem from an ardentbelief in free trade. But he sometimes uses other arguments.In 1989, officials of Dow Jones andamp; Co., publisher of thisnewspaper, asked Mr. Quayle for help with Singapore, whichhad restricted the circulation of The Asian Wall StreetJournal and the Far Eastern Economic Review. Mr. Quayleraised the issue with Singapore government leaders, arguingfor press freedom and saying the actions damaged Singapore'simage abroad. The matter remains unresolved.   Edwin Feulner, head of the conservative HeritageFoundation, says that advocacy of American business interestsabroad is the kind of job Mr. Quayle assumes in part becauseothers atop the administration have their minds on flashiertopics. &quot;It may not have the glamour of sitting down with theforeign minister and the rest of it, but it's a realworkhorse role,&quot; he says.   Not surprisingly, Mr. Quayle seems to have modeled hisrole as vice president after the one played by George Bushfor eight years. For Mr. Quayle, that means working on twodistinct tracks.   The first is to be a personal adviser to Mr. Bush, whichoften means simply attending Mr. Bush's early-morningbriefings and being on hand for many other private meetings.The second is to take on a very small number of specific jobsto perform -- in Mr. Quayle's case, space policy andderegulation.   There's one big difference between Vice President Quayleand Vice President Bush, however. Whereas Mr. Bush almostnever voiced his own opinion to anyone other than PresidentReagan, Mr. Quayle is far less reluctant to speak up inmeetings at which other officials can hear his advice.   Mr. Quayle argued as early as last October, three monthsbefore the war against Iraq was launched, that Mr. Bushshould go to Congress and win a vote on a resolutionspecifically authorizing the use of force. Mr. Quayle and hisformer Senate colleague from Indiana, GOP Sen. Richard Lugar,both sensed that Mr. Bush could win narrowly if he foughthard enough, and both believed that having such a resolutionwould strengthen the president's hand in dealing with SaddamHussein.   Others, including Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, disagreedand didn't favor going to Congress. And in the end, Mr. Bushput off seeking congressional approval of the use of forceuntil January, after the United Nations already had passedits own such resolution.   In general, Mr. Quayle functioned as one of theadministration's hawks in the showdown with Iraq, though it'shard to find any specific examples of how he affectedadministration policy. The most important role Mr. Quayle mayhave played was trying to keep the administration attuned tothe risk of losing public support in the emotional run-up tothe conflict, officials say.   When he saw Senate Armed Services Chairman Sam Nunn, aGeorgia Democrat and a war opponent, run masterly hearingsairing doubts about a turn to military conflict, Mr. Quayleand his staff immediately drafted a speech arguing thatsimply waiting for economic sanctions to strangle Iraq wouldbe an immoral course.   Later, in one key postwar meeting at the White House March26, Mr. Quayle fleetingly raised the question of whether theU.S. also had some &quot;moral&quot; responsibility to rally to theside of Kurdish rebels in Iraq. But he didn't push the point,officials say, and the question was dropped after adiscussion of the military problems of getting directlyinvolved.   Generally, Mr. Quayle is one of the most pro-Israelofficials in the Bush administration, which isn't generallypopulated with staunch Israel supporters. White House aidessay that Mr. Quayle is the official they turn to most to wooJewish and pro-Israel groups; he recently made a point, forexample, of publicly greeting Israeli Ambassador ZalmanShoval after the ambassador had a public tiff with theadministration over loans to build housing for Soviet Jewsmigrating to Israel. And during the war with Iraq, Mr. Quaylemaintained a private channel of communications with IsraeliDefense Minister Moshe Arens, an old friend from Mr. Quayle'sdays in the Senate.   In the arena of U.S.-Soviet relations, the vice presidentand Mr. Cheney have assumed the role of principaladministration skeptics of Mikhail Gorbachev. The vicepresident is known to think that Mr. Gorbachev has moved outof the camp of reformers and toward the Soviet reactionaries,at least temporarily. But he also has argued privatelyagainst embracing the Soviet leader's principal rival, BorisYeltsin, arguing that despite misgivings about Mr. Gorbachev,he must still be the focus of U.S. policies.   Mr. Quayle has also spent much of his time on a fewprojects specifically assigned to him by the president. Oneis the Competitiveness Council, a new version of a group onregulatory relief that Mr. Bush headed as vice president.After a slow start, the council has recently become moreaggressive; it was through the council that Mr. Quayle helpedquash the Environmental Protection Agency proposal to requiremunicipalities to recycle 25% of their trash before buildingnew incinerators.   Mr. Quayle also heads the National Space Council, whichhas made important recommendations for changes in the spaceprogram. For the most part, though, space watchers say Mr.Quayle hasn't followed up by pushing for funding or lobbyingto ward off cuts by Congress.   Where Mr. Quayle remains most at home as vice president isin the clubhouse world of politics. Besides his energeticlobbying for GOP causes on Capitol Hill, he has also used hisinfluence on some bipartisan issues, such as a 1989congressional resolution by Democratic Sen. Charles Robb ofVirginia to authorize covert aid to non-communist rebels inCambodia. Robb aides credit Mr. Quayle with rounding up atleast a dozen votes for the resolution.   The vice president also remains at home on the campaigntrail. He spent much time last year working for GOPcandidates at every level.   &quot;His constituency at this point, at least for a while, isnot the general public but the administration, the Hill,Republican activists, the five or ten thousand people whomake the party go,&quot; says Mr. Beckwith, the vice president'spress secretary. He insists: &quot;Ironically, the more the newsmedia dumps on him, the more the hardcore Republicans comeout and show support.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>