<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911114-0009</DOCNO><DOCID>911114-0009.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>11/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   BUSH ENDORSED a $5.2 billion compromise measure to extendjobless benefits.   The president, who had killed two earlier versions, urgedquick congressional action on the bill, which he said wouldpay for itself with various tax- and debt-collection changesand wouldn't violate last year's budget agreement. Thepackage, which the House is expected to pass today, wouldprovide six, 13 or 20 weeks of additional jobless benefitsfor up to three million workers who have exhausted theirbasic six months of state assistance.</LP><TEXT>   The accord was reached when final differences were ironedout over the stepped-up collection of student loans, byrequiring credit checks and permitting garnishment of wages.   ---   DEMOCRATS ABANDONED their Soviet aid proposal amidmounting opposition.   The plan, which two weeks ago seemed headed forcongressional approval, was scuttled by surging anti-foreignaid sentiment on Capitol Hill, even though the proposalincluded no direct financial aid. Instead, up to $1 billionin Pentagon funds would have been used to help stabilize theSoviet Union. Georgia's Sen. Nunn, who co-wrote the plan withRep. Aspin of Wisconsin, said &quot;tepid&quot; White House support waspartly to blame for the proposal's demise.   Bush, in Kansas City, Mo., dismissed criticism of hisforeign travels as &quot;hogwash.&quot; He said the U.S. intends tohelp the Soviets and Eastern European nations in theireconomic transition.   ---   The Justice Department has obtained an indictment againstalleged terrorists for the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103over Lockerbie, Scotland, a U.S. official said. Theindictment, expected to be announced today, is the first setof criminal charges arising from the bomb, which killed all259 people on board and 11 on the ground.   ---   The House approved a bill requiring employers to offerworkers as much as 12 weeks a year of unpaid parental andother family-related leave, but the 253-177 margin of victorywasn't enough to override an expected veto by Bush.   ---   A cease-fire held in the Adriatic port of Dubrovnik butYugoslavia's federal army said it had almost overrun thestrategic Croatian town of Vukovar. Meanwhile, EuropeanCommunity mediator Lord Carrington said he hoped that theU.N. would agree to send peace-keeping forces to Yugoslavia.   ---   Heart researchers found a cholesterol difference betweenmen and women that may herald more definitive testing ofcholesterol levels. The scientists discovered that onecholesterol-related protein could help identify women who hadcoronary heart disease; a different protein was a more usefulindicator for men.   ---   New findings challenge the effectiveness of emergencytreatment that is routinely given to about 200,000 U.S.patients a year. A published study concludes that medicalefforts to save people who arrive at hospital emergency roomswithout a heartbeat are costly and almost always end infailure.   ---   Saddam Hussein appointed his half-brother to succeed acousin as interior minister, indicating a feud within thepresident's inner circle of relatives. The Iraqi leadershipchange was the sixth since March. Separately, Kurdish rebelswithdrew from three northern cities as part of an accord toend a government blockade.   ---   The Indonesian army acknowledged that soldiers killed atleast 50 civilians during a pro-independence demonstrationTuesday in East Timor. A spokesman for Timorese guerrillasand others opposed to Indonesian rule over East Timorreportedly said the rebels would retaliate. Indonesia annexedthe former Portuguese colony in 1976.   ---   Mandela announced that talks on a new South Africanconstitution would begin Nov. 29, but the Pretoria governmentsaid this was only a target date and that Mandela's statementwas &quot;improper.&quot; The African National Congress presidentdisclosed a date for the preliminary talks earlier in the dayas he responded to a reporter's question.   ---   Baker plans to ask for China's help in halting NorthKorea's rush toward nuclear weapons. The secretary of statewill travel to Beijing tomorrow amid heightened concern aboutthe North Korean nuclear complex at Yongbyon. China hasextensive economic dealings with the North Koreans.   ---   Female college graduates earn roughly the same salary asmen with only a high school diploma, according to governmentstatistics. At every education level, women make less moneythan men with the same amount of schooling. The pay gapbetween full-time working men and women grows wider as theyget older.   ---   A Senate panel approved, despite lengthy negotiations withthe White House, legislation that largely rejects Bush'sproposed education strategy. The bill cleared by the SenateLabor and Human Resources Committee would authorize $850million a year in grants to states to carry outschool-improvement plans.   ---   A Cambodian defense official charged that the Khmer Rougeguerrillas were ignoring a Paris peace treaty that was signedlast month, saying they are laying mines and attacking thecivilian population. The accusations came on the eve ofPrince Sihanouk's scheduled return today from exile to becomeCambodia's interim leader.   ---   Cuba decided not to press for a vote on a U.N. GeneralAssembly resolution it introduced that would have condemnedWashington's economic blockade against Havana, apparentlyrealizing that there wasn't enough support for passage.   ---   Died: Cardinal Paul-Emile Leger, 87, former Roman Catholicarchbishop of Montreal and African missionary who was onceconsidered a papal candidate, in Montreal, of respiratorycomplications.</TEXT></DOC>