<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900814-0013</DOCNO><DOCID>900814-0013.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>08/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE WHITE HOUSE SAID its naval barricade of Iraqi ships istaking hold.   As the U.S. ordered a fourth aircraft carrier to theMideast, Britain and Australia said they will help the U.S.interdict Baghdad's shipping, but France said it wouldn'tjoin the embargo. Included in the U.S. naval cutoff are foodshipments bound for Iraq. In Saudi Arabia, an Iraqi tankertried to dock at a terminal to take on oil, but was turnedaway. Pakistan voted to send troops to defend Saudia Arabia,joining ground forces from the U.S., Egypt, Morocco andSyria. The State Department said at least 500 Americansslipped out of occupied Kuwait despite Iraq's refusal to letnon-diplomats leave. The U.S. estimates 2,500 of its citizensare in Kuwait, and 500 to 600 in Iraq.</LP><TEXT>   Reuters reported that allies of the U.S. in the U.N.Security Council criticized the naval actions, arguing theU.S. didn't have the authority to enforce U.N. sanctions bymilitary means.   ---   Defense Secretary Cheney proposed scaling back plans topurchase super-quiet Seawolf submarines and the most advancedclass of destroyers in an attempt to cut a total of about $7billion from the Navy's procurement plans through themid-1990s.   ---   Soviet President Gorbachev signed a decree ordering thewidest rehabilitation yet of the millions of victims ofStalin's purges, saying the actions against them were illegaland a violation of basic rights. The decree singled outmeasures taken against landholders during the masscollectivization of the late 1920s and early 1930s.   ---   Washington's Mayor Barry switched his party registrationto independent from Democrat, clearing the way for a possiblerun for a city council seat in November despite hisconviction Friday on a drug-possession charge. The54-year-old official has urged the Justice Department againsta retrial on unresolved drug and perjury charges.   ---   Pakistan's armed forces repulsed an attack by India'stroops along the line that divides the disputed territory ofKashmir, officials in Islamabad said. New Delhi denied theclaim. In Karachi, ousted Prime Minister Benazir Bhuttospurned a reported deal with Pakistan's interim rulers thatwould have allowed her to leave the country.   ---   Kidnappers in southern Lebanon freed a Swiss hostage, ElioErriquez, after 10 months' incarceration, handing over the24-year-old orthopedic expert to Syrian authorities, RedCross officials said. He was taken to Damascus. Erriquez wasthe second Swiss captive released since last week.   ---   Mandela said the African National Congress may relax itsconditions for the lifting of trade curbs against SouthAfrica, saying the black nationalist group might settle for adeclaration of intent from President de Klerk on establishinga nonracial constitution. The ANC has demanded that such aconstitution first be implemented.   ---   A judge declared a section of the Immigration Actunconstitutional because it violates defendants' due-processrights. The section, aimed at curbing drug trafficking,allows legal aliens who have been jailed for some felonies tobe jailed again -- indefinitely and without a chance for bail-- during deportation proceedings.   ---   Firefighters in California treated giant 2,000-year-oldsequoia trees with fire retardant to protect them against aflames that were advancing through Yosemite National Park. InOregon, 1,200 Army soldiers were being sent to take uppositions against the lightning-sparked blazes. Fires alsoburned in Alaska, Washington, Idaho and Utah.   ---   Armenia and Azerbaijan agreed to hold talks over thedisputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, the Soviet newspaperPravda reported. A date wasn't given for the discussionsbetween the presidents of the two Soviet republics. Themeeting would be the first such high-level talks since ethnicclashes erupted in the territory in 1988.   ---   Bush ended the limit on the number of Soviet businesspeople permitted to live and work in the U.S., saying hewanted to improve economic ties with Moscow. The limit thisyear was 69, the White House said.   ---   Protesters in South Korea rallied at Seoul's YonseiUniversity to demand unrestricted travel to North Korea. Riotpolice clashed with about 3,000 students and dissidents whohad gathered to support unification of the divided Koreanpeninsula.   ---   U.S. Marines flew helicopters into rebel-held territory inLiberia to evacuate 97 foreign nationals, including at leastfour Americans. Separately, rebel leader Taylor agreed todiscuss the country's civil war with Gambia's president,which probably will delay the deployment of a five-nationWest African peacekeeping force.   ---   Salvage crews sopped up oil from the Houston Ship Channelafter the third large oil spill in as many months in or nearthe busy shipping thoroughfare. The Coast Guard said at least21,000 gallons of oil spilled Sunday when a barge buckled asit was being loaded with fuel oil.   ---   The FAA announced a freeze on some hiring and saidcontingency plans are being made for sharp cuts if Congressfails to pass a 1991 budget. In the event that automaticspending cuts take effect Oct. 15, administrator Busey saidsafety factors would force the agency to order reductions inairline and corporate flight schedules.</TEXT></DOC>