<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900730-0120</DOCNO><DOCID>900730-0120.</DOCID><HL>   Trail-Blazing Poles Now Begin Privatization   ----   By Therese Raphael</HL><DATE>07/30/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   WARSAW -- Poland is writing the first textbook on thetransition to a market economy from a communist system. OnJuly 13 the Poles continued to spearhead East Europe's reformmovement when the parliament passed a historic bill onprivatization of state enterprises.   More than 7,600 state enterprises are to be handed over tothe state treasury and transformed into limited liabilitycorporations with shares to be sold to the public within twoyears. The government is awarding every adult Pole free&quot;privatization bonds&quot; exchangeable for shares in the companyof his or her choosing. Workers will be given preferentialprices (at one-half market price) for up to 20% of theircompany's shares. To quell the fears of many Poles of foreignownership, foreigners need official permission to purchasemore than 10% of a company's shares. The transition processwill be overseen by a newly created Ministry of OwnershipTransformation.</LP><TEXT>   There are still many wrinkles to be ironed out. Because ofthe absence of developed markets, setting a price for theshares involves a lot of guesswork. Which illuminates themore general conundrum: You need to have a private market inorder to get one. Nevertheless, Poland must get on with theprocess even if it means windfalls for some bargain hunters.   But even given reasonable pricing there are problems.Andrzej Byrt, the Polish commercial counselor in Brussels,maintains that &quot;if you take all the financial resources inthe hands of Polish citizens, they could only purchase about6% of all state-run companies.&quot;   The Polish reform program has been depicted as a sort ofreckless leap into the unknown. But this ignores a centraltruth. The country was on the verge of implosion, thesalvation of which required drastic and immediate measures.The new government responded to the crisis by embracingfar-reaching measures. It set about to &quot;import&quot; competitionso as to rationalize the price structure and effect aDarwinian industrial selection process. Against the advice ofmany a nonbeliever, the zloty was made internally convertible-- that is, convertible for trade transactions, but not yetfor capital transfers -- at about 9,500 zlotys to the U.S.dollar. Trade barriers such as import quotas and excessivetariffs were eliminated or sharply reduced. The governmentsold some assets of small state enterprises to aidentrepreneurs. Meanwhile, domestic price controls andsubsidies were abolished.   As a result, shortages are practically non-existent,foreign goods readily available and hyperinflation stampedout. May's $2 billion trade surplus exceeded that for theentire previous year.   Many reports cite a 30% drop in production as proof of thefailure of the reform. But these figures ignore a dramaticincrease in private production -- it is estimated that 50% offood products are now sold directly by farmers -- unaccountedfor in the statistics of socialized industry. Stateproduction now shows signs of stabilizing, as companies thatinitially reduced production and raised prices aftersubsidies were withdrawn investigate ways to produceappealing products inexpensively.   Despite these improvements, the economy is still in arecession and saddled with a $42 billion foreign debt. TheWorld Bank, the International Monetary Fund and other sourcesare rapidly funneling more aid into Poland. The debt has beenrescheduled again. But while foreign aid may helpinfrastructure development, too often it can relieve pressurefor painful reforms.   International trade, needed to pull Poland to its feet,requires a favorable climate for foreign investors. As itstands, a foreign investor can own up to 100% of a company,with a minimum initial investment of $50,000. Foreigninvestors also have no wage restrictions and receive anautomatic three-year tax holiday, extendable up to six yearsif the business is deemed vital to Poland's economic growth.But here the clarity is blurred by complicated tax laws,vague property statutes and an outdated commercial code(unchanged since 1934).   Western investors also resent Poland's restrictions on therepatriation of profits. In an effort to prevent capitalflight, the government has limited the amount a company canrepatriate to the excess of its export revenues over itsimport spending. Where there are no export revenues it mayrepatriate 15% of all earnings. This is a sore point amongWestern investors who resent the obstruction of free mobilityof profits.   Potential investors also cite the need to bring thetelecommunications and banking systems up to snuff. Althoughboth have been deregulated and can have 100% foreignownership, they remain seriously inadequate. Preliminaryevidence suggests that it will take 10 years and $10 billionto give Poland an adequate communications system.   One thing Poland could do immediately to please foreigninvestors is eliminate the wage controls imposed in January.The controls had a certain unpleasant logic when there wasnobody to bargain with workers for wages except socialistmanagers indifferent to profit and loss. The concessions theymade to their employees drained the economy, exacerbatedinflation and significantly reduced real wages. Now that aprivatization framework is being established, however, thelabor market must be freed.   The reform program has been propelled by a rare politicalconsensus for parliamentary democracy and speedy integrationinto Europe. Lech Walesa's oft-questioned bid for thepresidency poses no threat to Poland's progress. Quite thecontrary, his experiences at the very heart of afflictedsocialist industry, his commitment to pluralism and speedyreform and his tremendous popular support would make him apowerful asset to the Solidarity government.   The real danger to political stability comes fromthird-way activists who throw hurdles in front of reform bypointing to misleading production and income statistics. At arecent conference in Vienna, Jeffrey Sachs, the Harvardeconomist who advises Solidarity, warned that claims thatreal incomes have plummeted by 40% because of the reformprogram are misleading. These claims are based on comparingthe nominal prices of goods in December -- when those goodswere in practice unavailable -- with their prices now thatthey are freely available. The statistics do not account forthe elimination of six-hour lines for certain commodities andthe general feeling of improved living standards.   As the largest country in Central Europe with a 38million-strong consumer market, many acres of uncultivatedland and plenty of natural resources, Poland has much tooffer. Reform must be taken in bold strokes -- thealternative is to go the way of the Soviet Union where reformtrickled in and the expectation of bold results goesunfulfilled.   Poland's challenge is therefore to stay the course. Theprivatization bill was another monumental step in the rightdirection. Continuing in this fashion, the unwritten chaptersof the Polish textbook will tell of the abjuration ofPoland's endemic economic deadweights and a successfultransition to a market economy.   ---   Miss Raphael is an editorial page intern at The WallStreet Journal Europe.</TEXT></DOC>