<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910903-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>910903-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   On Discrimination   ----   By Herbert Stein</HL><DATE>09/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><NS>LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)</NS><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The nomination of Clarence Thomas for membership on theSupreme Court is the occasion for some ruminations ondiscrimination, equal treatment, the level playing field andall that. These ruminations properly have nothing to do withJudge Thomas's qualifications for the Supreme Court, whichare a matter of his personal characteristics rather than ofgeneral principles. But they have something to do with thequality of the current discussion of his nomination and ofrelated civil rights matters, which I believe is low.   Many people are impressed that Mr. Thomas &quot;made it on hisown&quot; from a poor, uneducated, black background. They takethis as evidence that public assistance to those who arepoor, or to those who are black, is unnecessary if notpositively harmful. They interpret his life story as a rebuketo those, pejoratively called &quot;liberal,&quot; who favor suchassistance.</LP><TEXT>   The idea that anyone &quot;makes it&quot; entirely on his own, oreven mainly on his own, is, of course, an illusion. Everyonestarts with an endowment, more or less, of human talent andmaterial assets that he did not make. And how he fares withthis endowment depends on conditions, including institutions,laws and markets, that he did not make either. I doubt thatmany of the people who have made it in America in the lastquarter of the 20th century would have made it on RobinsonCrusoe's island or in Stalin's Russia or in most of the othertimes and places of human history. One doesn't have toimagine extreme cases. I suppose Michael Jordan made it onhis own. But even with his exceptional talents he would nothave made it in a world without pro basketball and television-- or at least would not have made it so big.   All of that is quite obvious, although often neglected. Weget closer to current issues when we recognize that theseconditions that affect which people prosper most are heavilyinfluenced by government. Government discriminates in favorof some people or some kinds of people and against others.That is inevitable. Government doesn't exist to keep thingsthe way they were without government, which means that itdiscriminates against the people who thrived in thepre-government situation. I can hear the physically strongand violent men driven out by the first village governmentcomplaining that the playing field is no longer level.   Government discrimination is pervasive. Free publiceducation is discriminatory in favor of poor people with manychildren against rich people with few. The income tax is abig fat book of discriminations. Agricultural and tariffpolicies are by nature discriminatory. Social Securitydiscriminates in favor of people born in 1915 and againstthose born in 1965.   Basically, the fact that government discriminates isaccepted. Demands for a level playing field are almost alwaysdemands that government do more for me. Even the word&quot;quota,&quot; such a hot political button, does not stir anyreaction when it refers to a quota on textile imports ortobacco production. We have longstanding &quot;affirmative action&quot;programs for tobacco farmers and textile producers.   The question is not whether government should discriminatebut for what purpose and by what means. As far as the meansis concerned, the test is efficiency -- achieving the desiredpurpose with the least cost.   Many government discriminations are highly inefficient.Programs to raise farm incomes by restricting agriculturalproduction are an example. These programs are intended, atleast nominally, to raise the incomes of poor farmers and arejustified by sympathy for poor people in general. But many ofthe farmers who gain the most are not poor, and consumers,the poor included, bear the cost.   If the purpose of the program is to raise the income offarmers in general, and just because they are farmers,production limitation is still inefficient. A more efficientmethod would be to allow the farmers to produce as much asthey want, which would increase the national output, and thento compensate them in cash for the effect of low prices ontheir incomes.   Although efficiency provides some guidance as to the wayin which government should discriminate, there is no similarguidance about the purposes or classes of persons for whichit should discriminate. At this point we must rely on thedemocratic process and, one may hope, on the good sense andmorals of the American people. Americans want to discriminatein favor of old folks for no other reason than that they areold. I disagree but I cannot prove the preference wrong.   Public policy about two kinds of discrimination is nowsettled, although not everyone is happy with the settlement.Discrimination on the basis of race is improper, whereasdiscrimination on the basis of economic condition is proper.   We have decided that the government must not discriminateon the basis of race and that racial discrimination is notpermissible in some private activities that are heavilyaffected by public policy -- such as employment, housing andeducation. Racial discrimination remains, but it no longerhas the moral sanction it once did. The idea that thegovernment should discriminate on the basis of economiccondition -- in favor of poor people -- is represented inwelfare, food stamps, Medicaid, the progressive income taxand much else. In both cases -- racial and economicdiscrimination -- many questions of definition, degree andimplementation remain, but the principle of what is apermissible basis of discrimination remains clear.   Confusion and problems arise because racial minorities inAmerica are disproportionately poor. The sympathy of thewhite community for the civil rights movement in the 1960swas, I believe, partly due to the miserable condition inwhich blacks were seen to live. Longstanding discriminationagainst Jews, for example, did not evoke similar sympathyfrom the Gentile community -- in part, I think, because Jewson the average by then were not poor. And policies to givepreference to minorities, or make avoidance of suchpreference hard, are still supported and sold on the groundthat the minorities are especially poor.   On the other hand, opposition in some quarters toanti-poverty programs is influenced by the feeling that mostbeneficiaries would be black. And there are people for whomopposition to racial preference seems to be at least a coverfor opposition to aid to the poor of all races. Those mostindignant about preferences for minorities are not leadingsupporters of colorblind anti-poverty programs.   Advocates of racial preferences should recognize that theyare not efficient ways of dealing with the real problems ofpoverty, high dropout rates, female-headed families,unemployment and violence that affect minoritiesdisproportionately but not only minorities. They do not reachthose who are most disadvantaged; if they take the form ofpreferences in hiring and college admissions, they reduceproductivity; and they impose burdens randomly among membersof the majority who are not particularly affluent, whichnaturally provokes resentment.   The advocates for minorities should recognize theirinterest in respecting the principle that discrimination byrace is illegitimate, a principle that is vital for theprotection of racial minorities. At the same time, those whoare most insistent on the impropriety of reversediscrimination, affirmative action and racial quotas shouldsee that they are not exempt from responsibility to face thereal problems of the disadvantaged in America, regardless ofrace. If this happens on both sides we may be able to getaway from largely irrelevant and outdated arguments andconfront some of these real problems.   ---   A former chairman of the president's Council of EconomicAdvisers, Mr. Stein is an American Enterprise Institutefellow.</TEXT></DOC>