<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910228-0028</DOCNO><DOCID>910228-0028.</DOCID><HL>   Winning the Peace:   U.S. Declares Victory   And Moves to Shape   A Stable Gulf Region   ---   Bush Halts Offensive Combat,   Says Kuwait Is Liberated,   Begins Postwar Planning   ---   Now, New Problems to Solve   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush declared victory in thePersian Gulf war against Iraq, ending the nearly seven-monthallied struggle to free Kuwait and the campaign to crushSaddam Hussein's army.   &quot;Kuwait is liberated. Iraq's army is defeated,&quot; thepresident told the nation in a televised address last night.&quot;Our military objectives are met.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   The president ordered a cease-fire -- but a temporary one,contingent on Iraq's freeing its captives, complying withUnited Nations resolutions and taking other steps to helpdefuse the region. He said that Secretary of State JamesBaker will ask the Security Council to begin arranging thewar's conclusion, and that Mr. Baker will travel to the Gulfnext week for consultations on establishing a permanentpeace.   Late last night it was reported that Iraq's U.N. missionhad sent a letter to the U.N. accepting all the SecurityCouncil resolutions on the Gulf war.   Although Mr. Bush took pains to note that &quot;no one countrycan claim this victory as its own,&quot; the triumph will clearlyleave the U.S., along with its friends in Egypt and SaudiArabia, as the dominant powers in the Middle East.   Yet even in the moment of victory, a whole new set ofchallenges and anxieties emerges. As the final tank clashesdrew to a close it became clear that allied success came onlyat a grisly cost in Iraqi lives, a reality that couldincrease the volume and anger of radical voices in theregion.   No one can be sure whether the smashing U.S.-led victorywill create a region safe from aggression -- or one sobruised and disheartened it is ripe for radicalization anddestabilization. And America's longtime adversary, Iran, nowmight step into a power vacuum, agitating for the departureof Western forces, opposing Saudi oil policies favorable tothe West, and spreading its brand of Shiite fundamentalisminto a weakened Iraq.   Winning the war, in short, doesn't guarantee the peace.   &quot;The problems, the question marks in this war have alwaysbeen political, not military,&quot; says Zbigniew Brzezinski, theformer national security adviser.   President Bush himself acknowledged the new and difficultcourse ahead. &quot;There can be and will be no solely Americananswer to all these challenges,&quot; he said. &quot;But we can assistand support the countries of the region, and be a catalystfor peace.&quot;   The Bush administration already is laying plans to makesure its gains aren't squandered after the war. U.S. policymakers are talking tentatively of securing Kuwait withdemilitarized zones and an Islamic peacekeeping force drawnlargely from Persian Gulf states and Egypt. Then the U.S.would extract its ground forces from the region while relyingon Gulf governments to craft a new security system that couldbe silently supported by Washington. The U.S. could at thatpoint refocus on the Arab-Israeli problem.   Before last night's cease-fire -- effective at midnightEST -- allied forces yesterday were still concluding whatGen. Norman Schwarzkopf called a &quot;classic tank battle&quot;against the two remaining divisions of Saddam Hussein'sRepublican Guard. That battle raged just inside Iraq to thenorth of Kuwait, where a broad sweeping maneuver by U.S.,French and British forces trapped the premier Iraqi force.   Iraq's army otherwise now lies in ruins. Following theallies' lightning-fast ground attack and unrelenting air war,as many as 3,700 of the roughly 4,200 tanks Iraq had in andaround Kuwait have been destroyed or captured, and well over50,000 Iraqi soldiers have been taken prisoner, Gen.Schwarzkopf estimated.   Early yesterday, Saddam Hussein had made another seeminglydesperate attempt to stop the fighting. In a statement readon Baghdad Radio, Iraq finally agreed to President Bush'sdemand not only to withdraw from Kuwait, but also to acceptU.N. Security Council resolutions that require Baghdad todrop its claim to Kuwait and that make Iraq liable for payingwar reparations.   The Bush administration quickly batted down that overture,as it had every other recent Iraqi peace bid. The statementwas unacceptable, officials said, because Iraq also insistedthat the U.N. simultaneously drop the three resolutions thatimposed trade and economic sanctions. The U.S. wants to keepthose sanctions in place as long as Saddam Hussein remains inpower -- one more incentive, perhaps, for the Iraqi people totopple him.   The very terms of the cease-fire are crafted partly tomaintain negotiating pressure over Saddam Hussein. Anadministration official said the U.S. doesn't expect him togive in to all of Mr. Bush's demands of last night. But, theofficial said, the administration can say it won't discusslifting economic sanction until Saddam Hussein takes the stepof negotiating a formal armistice.   But the postwar problems go well beyond this. &quot;At thispoint, making it very clear Saddam Hussein has been defeatedand there are no illusions about it is good -- provided thatwe know how to play the next phase,&quot; said William Quandt, aformer National Security Council Middle East analyst now withthe Brookings Institution.   Here are some of the challenges and opportunities as theynow appear on the eve of a clear military victory:   The first order of business will be simply pacifying thestormy border between Iraq and Kuwait. The problem isexacerbated by the growing likelihood, acknowledged privatelyby Bush administration aides, that Saddam Hussein willsurvive in power for at least a while longer. The task ismade all the more difficult by new signs that he retains theability to launch an occasional Scud missile attack to shakeup any postwar tranquility. U.S. commanders yesterdayconceded that Iraq went into the war with far more mobileScud launchers than U.S. intelligence had estimated. Mr. Bushlast night emphasized that the temporary cease-fire would beoff the minute that Iraq fired any Scud missiles.   So Bush administration officials have privately planned aseries of steps to protect newly liberated Kuwait.   To insulate Kuwait from follow-on attacks, they arediscussing what one aide calls &quot;reciprocal&quot; demilitarizedzones along the Iraq-Kuwait border. These might be builtalong the model of demilitarized zones in the Golan Heightsbetween Israel and Syria, which have proven highly successfulin keeping the peace.   Under those arrangements, Kuwait and Iraq would agree onprecisely what kind and how much military equipment andtroops would be allowed in specified border areas. Compliancemight be monitored by aerial surveillance.   Beyond that, officials of the Gulf Cooperation Council, amilitary alliance of Saudi Arabia and the five smaller GulfArab states, already have worked out plans for an Islamicpeacekeeping force to guard Kuwait. Its core would come fromCouncil states and Egypt, though other Islamic nations suchas Morocco and Pakistan might be represented.   In that way, U.S. troops could withdraw quickly from theslice of southern Iraq that they have swept through in theirattacks on the Republican Guard. American officials insistthey haven't any interest in occupying pieces of Iraq ortrying to set up a different government there. And they saythey don't plan for U.S. forces to provide the securityblanket Kuwait needs. Removal of foreign forces would helpprevent another nightmare turn of events or the internaldisintegration of Iraq.   &quot;We've been saying these are Arab matters for a specificreason,&quot; says one Bush administration official. &quot;We don'twant to be there. And that's not a trick.&quot;   The overall security and prestige of America's friends, ofcourse, is sure to be enhanced by the crushing defeat alliedforces have dealt to what was widely considered the Arabworld's best army. This particularly enhances the position ofEgyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Saudi King Fahd, whogambled that they could defy Iraq and rely on the U.S. tostand with them -- and who now can claim that their gamblepaid off handsomely.   &quot;This is almost unqualified good news&quot; for the Egyptianand Saudi rulers, Mr. Quandt of Brookings says. Though someEgyptian students have violently protested Egypt'sparticipation, the dissent has been less than feared.   The picture is more complicated for Syria. President HafezAssad's power clearly is enhanced by the defeat of hisarchrival next door, Saddam Hussein, and his new chumminesswith Washington.   But Mr. Assad also bucked overwhelming public opinion athome by joining a U.S.-led military coalition. Syrians don'tlove Saddam Hussein, but they aren't fond of the U.S.,either.   In private discussions with the U.S., Syria acknowledgedthat it faced serious internal unhappiness over sendingSyrian forces along on the ground attack in Kuwait. But inthe authoritarian Syrian system, public unhappiness can't bevented. So Mr. Assad is gambling that he will be able to usethe Iraqi defeat to enhance his own strength in the regionand secure his control over Lebanon while the U.S. and otherWestern countries keep silent in appreciation for his help inthe Gulf.   But there's a troubling long-term question for theseAmerican partners, and for President Bush himself: Preciselyhow much anti-Western sentiment has been stirred up by thesight of allied armies crushing Iraqi soldiers? Thatsentiment could vent itself through Islamic fundamentalism, apotential problem for Egypt and Saudi Arabia as well as forSyria.   The air campaign against Iraq, while swift and decisive,was more brutal than many in the region had anticipated. Thatmay not translate into much sympathy for Saddam Hussein --never personally beloved in the Middle East -- but it mayfeed anger in the streets.   In response to the potential for a backlash, America'sregional allies are likely to put new pressure on Washingtonto address the Palestinian problem. That, they will argue,will show that the U.S. is interested in the Middle East formore than its oil.   Yet that problem may be harder to solve now, rather thaneasier. For starters, there's likely to be new resistance inIsrael, where some are already asking what this war wouldhave been like with a pro-Iraqi Palestinian state next door.   Palestinians' support for Saddam Hussein has only deepenedIsraeli suspicions. And Yasser Arafat's pro-Iraq stand hascost him whatever support he had in the Bush administrationand Gulf states.   Similarly, Jordan's open sympathy for Iraq has deeplystrained relations with the U.S., creating another impedimentto solving the Palestinian problem. Jordan has long beenconsidered the Arab state most likely to help identify andshepherd moderate Palestinians into a peace with Israel.   And even though U.S.-Israeli ties have been strengthenedby Israel's restraint in the face of Scud attacks, strains inthe relationship between the Shamir government and PresidentBush surface easily.   During a recent Oval Office meeting between Mr. Bush andIsraeli Defense Minister Moshe Arens, for instance, Mr. Arensannoyed the president by complaining about how hard it was toexercise such restraint, and implied that Israel's air forcecould do a better job than America's of destroying Scudsites. Mr. Bush and other officials were miffed that solittle appreciation was expressed for U.S. efforts toeliminate the Iraqi military threat.   Yet an opportunity is hidden among the problems. The newU.S. bonds with Syria and Saudi Arabia create an opening toaddress the Arab-Israeli conflict on a more comprehensiveplane in which the U.S. tries first to lead Arab states tomake peace with Israel, then addresses the Palestinian issuein that broader process.   The biggest wild card, though, may be Iran. It isstrengthened simply because its Iraqi foe has been cut downto size. Tehran will insist on being a part of any newPersian Gulf security system, and may use its influencewithin it to agitate for expelling any Western forces fromthe region.   A muscle-flexing Iran also could clash with Saudi Arabiaon oil policy. The Saudis appear willing to support oil pricemoderation as they concentrate on keeping their ownproduction high after the war; Iran, still rebuilding fromits own debilitating war with Iraq, feels its interests arebest served by higher prices.   In addition, some Middle East specialists think radicalfundamentalists within Iran will begin trying to undermineIraq's government by extending their influence over Shiiteareas in southern Iraq. In 1979, after the Iranianrevolution, Shiite clerics funneled money to this region,preaching there and calling for the establishment of anIslamic state in Iraq, which has a large Shiite population.   &quot;If Saddam Hussein is weak enough, you'll see that kind ofthing going on again,&quot; predicts Kenneth Katzman, a formerU.S. intelligence analyst who now is a defense consultant.Any drift toward a radical Shiite government in Iraq, inturn, would alarm Saudi Arabia.   Mr. Katzman believes that Iranian President Ali AkbarHashemi Rafsanjani, who is considered a pragmatist, wouldn'tfavor such actions. But he probably would have to go along,much as he did when Iranian Revolutionary Guards sacked theKuwait and Saudi Embassies in Tehran following rioting inMecca some time ago.   Iran also may get some leverage from the nearly 150 Iraqiwarplanes &quot;parked&quot; in its territory. Shaul Bakhash, a GeorgeMason University scholar, says Iran worries that the U.S. andSaudi Arabia will dominate postwar regional politics. Tehrancould use its control over the warplanes both to secure itsplace at any regional security meeting and to press olddemands against Iraq.   ---   Robert S. Greenberger contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>