<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910401-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>910401-0080.</DOCID><HL>   A New Civil Rights Agenda   ----   By William J. Bennett</HL><DATE>04/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   We are in the midst of a sea-change in &quot;civil rights.&quot;   The most obvious evidence is the degree to which thecurrent civil rights movement is on the defensive. The HouseLabor Committee's Democrats renamed the &quot;Civil Rights Act of1991&quot; the &quot;Civil Rights and Women's Equity in Employment Actof 1991.&quot; (Can the &quot;Civil Rights, Women's Equity inEmployment and Pro-Environment Act of 1991&quot; be far behind?)Key supporters of last year's civil rights legislation arebacking away from this year's version. The willingness ofCongress and the White House to voice opposition to thecurrent civil rights bill is growing.</LP><TEXT>   A public opinion study last month commissioned by theLeadership Conference on Civil Rights (a coalition of liberalgroups) found strong support for the principles of equalopportunity, efforts to expand opportunity for thedisadvantaged, reward for merit and hard work, and fairnessin the workplace. It also found (to the dismay of the groupscommissioning the study) a widespread view that civil rightsorganizations are not committed to those same principles.According to Celinda Lake, one of the authors of the study,&quot;the civil rights organizations and proponents of civilrights were no longer seen as . . . addressing generalizeddiscrimination, valuing work and being for opportunity.&quot;   Of course the leaders of the civil rights movement will bethe last to acknowledge the fundamental changes that areoccurring; as guardians of the old order, they have the mostto lose. And on the surface, some things will probably notchange. Opponents of the 1991 civil rights bill can expect tobe on the receiving end of ugly charges of (at best)&quot;insensitivity&quot; and (at worst) harboring racist sentiments.&quot;Progressive&quot; politicians, columnists and many within themedia will line up behind supporters of the civil rightslegislation. But all to no avail, I suspect. It is becomingincreasingly clear that the current civil rights agenda, andits propagators, is rapidly losing its moral and politicalforce.   The civil rights leaders hitched their agenda on thequotas bandwagon. The legislation being promoted by the civilrights leadership and liberal Democrats is (like last year'slegislation) a de facto quota bill. Opponents know it.Businesses know it. And so, undoubtedly, do many of thebill's supporters. But most Americans deeply believe in theprinciple of equality; they are necessarily opposed,therefore, to quotas and reverse discrimination. In anattempt to square their &quot;civil rights agenda&quot; with politicalreality, supporters of the civil rights legislation havetherefore apparently adopted a two-track strategy.   First, doublespeak. Deny that the civil rights bill is aquota bill. Talk instead about things like &quot;disparate impact&quot;suits, minority &quot;set asides,&quot; &quot;time lines,&quot; &quot;race norming&quot;job tests, and the like. Second, try to preempt any seriousdebate on the effects of quotas and reverse discrimination.If a public official is against quotas and invites a publicdebate about them, accuse him of &quot;naked exploitation,&quot;&quot;race-baiting tactics,&quot; and &quot;visceral appeals to racialfears.&quot; Fortunately, the two-track strategy seems to befailing.   A second reason that the current civil rights agenda is introuble is the growing disparity between the most pressingproblems facing black America (dissolution of the family,births to unwed mothers, black-on-black violence, lowacademic achievement, the number of young black men droppingout of the economy), and the narrow, divisive agenda beingpushed by the civil rights leadership. What was once a gaphas become a gulf. Washington Post columnist WilliamRaspberry (a supporter of the Civil Rights Act of 1991)conceded as much when he recently wrote that the Civil RightsAct of '91 &quot;won't do a blessed thing&quot; for the most seriousproblems affecting black Americans. &quot;Worse,&quot; he said, &quot;itthreatens to divide America along racial lines.&quot;   A third reason is that during the past 25 years, theanimating spirit of the civil rights movement changed. Thevision of a color-blind society has been replaced by thevision of a color-conscious society. Martin Luther King'sdream was moored to American principles, and the most basicpromise of American life-equality. It judged individuals by,in King's own words, &quot;the content of character,&quot; and not &quot;thecolor of their skin.&quot; And it sought to bring Americanstogether by reminding us that we are one people. The currentcivil rights agenda undercuts the principle of equality; itjudges individuals on the color of their skin, not thecontent of their character; and it has the effect of pryingAmericans apart.   The old civil rights agenda is beginning to crumble at thecore. What should replace it? Let me suggest four things.   1) Reclaim control of inner-city streets. John DiIulio Jr.of Princeton argues that the underclass problem is mainly acrime problem. &quot;Those closest to the problem,&quot; Mr. DiIuliowrote in the summer 1989 issue of the Public Interest,&quot;understand that improving the response of criminal-justiceagencies is the sine qua non of progress on other fronts,&quot;such as schools, jobs and delivery of social services. Thevast majority of inner-city residents are decent, lawabidingindividuals. They suffer disproportionately from predatorycriminals. A civilized, humane civil rights agenda mustinclude a more effective criminal justice system. That means(among other things) tougher laws, more cops, more courts,more prosecutors, and more jails and prisons.   When drug dealers roam the streets of upper-middle-classChevy Chase, Md., the residents call 911. When the samepeople roam the streets of inner-city Anacostia, someliberals argue we should investigate the &quot;root causes&quot; ofdrug use and violence. Hold the root cause seminar later.Call the cops. What's at stake here is the fundamentalpromise of government to the citizens: the equal protectionof law.   2) Better schools. The strongest case for overhauling thecurrent education system is the lousy education theunderclass are receiving. The underclass are least able toafford a bad education, since a good education is still thebest way out of poverty. A 1986 Rand Corporation study of theeconomic progress of blacks since 1940 stated, &quot;the safestand surest route to permanent black economic mobility lies inadditional education in a good school.&quot; I believe thatquality education is the central civil rights challengefacing us today. And the best way to improve Americaneducation is to support a reform agenda based on parentalchoice, accountability, merit pay, alternative certificationand a solid core curriculum.   Far too many disadvantaged, minority students are notbeing provided a challenging curriculum. They are victims ofunwarranted pessimism, low aspirations and (hence) a subtleform of discrimination. It's time we do away once and for allwith Jim Crow math and back-of-the-bus science. Poor minoritystudents deserve the same kind of education that upper-classwhite kids get.   3) Promote &quot;empowerment&quot; and economic opportunity. DespiteDemocratic opposition, the Bush administration shouldvigorously promote (both legislatively and rhetorically) an&quot;empowerment&quot; agenda that stresses market-oriented solutions,choice, decentralization and accountability. In particular itshould throw its full support behind Jack Kemp's agenda oftenant ownership of public housing, investment in low-incomehousing, tax incentives to businesses located in &quot;urbanenterprise zones,&quot; community reinvestment and the like. Weneed to tear down the economic barriers that keep theunderclass in poverty.   4) Affirm individual responsibility. It is by now commonknowledge that the most serious problems plaguing the blackunderclass have to do with a breakdown of the family. Toomany young black children are being raised without thepresence of good men in their lives. How do you begin toreverse this fact? By moving ahead on several fronts,including crafting economic and social policies that supportthe two-parent family; fashioning public policies that rewardright behavior and penalize wrong behavior; using all themeans at our disposal -- in our public, private and socialspheres, through law and moral suasion -- to condemnirresponsible acts (for example, out-of-wedlock births);putting young men in the presence of positive male rolemodels; and insisting that people in responsible positionsaffirm the right things (honoring commitments, individualresponsibility, hard work, community norms, and virtue, toname only a few). Some of the solutions involve governmentaction. Many do not. And while none of these things are alonesufficient to the task, each is necessary.   In the past, Republicans have relegated themselves to thesidelines in terms of shaping the civil rights agenda. It istime that we became players and go on the offense. The partyof Lincoln should speak in confident, unapologetic termsabout the errors of the current civil rights movement. At thesame time, we have a responsibility to point to a better way,to call attention to what works, and to advance a new,positive civil rights agenda that improves the lives and thelot of all those who are deserving, but have been leftbehind. If in the process we gain politically, fine. Butabove all we should do so because it is right.   ---   Mr. Bennett, a former secretary of education and directorof national drug control policy, is a fellow at the HudsonInstitute and an editor of National Review.</TEXT></DOC>