<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900425-0174</DOCNO><DOCID>900425-0174.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   Social Security Can Build a National Trust   ----   By Martin Feldstein</HL><DATE>04/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LABOR TAXES</CO><IN>MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><LP>   The most important economic decision facing Congress thisyear is whether to continue the accumulation of a SocialSecurity trust fund. Under current law, the Social Securityprogram is projected to have a surplus of $70 billion thisyear and nearly $500 billion over the next five years. Sen.Daniel Moynihan (D., N.Y.) and others have recentlycriticized these surpluses, claiming that they are just anaccounting sham that disguises the deficit in the federalbudget and calling for a cut in the payroll tax to eliminatethem. The administration has defended the Social Securitysurpluses and has proposed steps to strengthen the process oftrust fund accumulation.   The resulting debate reopens an issue that Congressthought it settled in 1983. At that time, in response to theprospect of a large increase in Social Security benefits whenthe baby boom generation begins retiring after 2012, Congressvoted to raise payroll tax rates immediately in order toaccumulate a substantial Social Security trust fund.</LP><TEXT>   If everything goes according to plan, no further increasein Social Security tax rates will be needed despite the sharprise in the ratio of retirees to workers that will take placeafter 2012. Instead, the interest earned on the accumulatedfund will supplement future Social Security tax receipts tofinance the increased benefits. And when the interest and taxreceipts aren't enough, the Social Security system will startselling the bonds in the fund to meet benefit obligations.   Is this really possible? Will the Social Security trustfund really permit the benefits of the baby boom generationof retirees to be met without raising future taxes andtherefore without cutting the consumption of those who arethen working? The answer is &quot;yes&quot; -- if the Social Securitysurplus actually increases national saving and thus adds tothe nation's stock of plant and equipment and other forms ofcapital.   An increased capital stock can substitute for future taxhikes (and therefore for reduced consumption of those who areworking in the future) because a larger capital stock willmean a higher level of gross national product when the babyboomers retire. That extra national income, much of whichwill accrue directly to the Social Security system in theform of interest on the bonds in the trust fund, can be usedto finance the consumption of the increased numbers ofretirees. And, when that extra GNP isn't enough to meet theincreased benefit obligations, selling the bonds in the trustfund will shift resources from private investment to retireeconsumption while leaving the consumption of the workingpopulation unchanged. Even with a reduced level of investmentin those years, the total capital stock will remain higherand GNP greater than they would have been without the initialaccumulation of a trust fund.   The key question is therefore whether the Social Securitysurpluses and the accumulation of the trust fund actually doincrease national saving and capital formation.   Those who attack the current surpluses claim that they donot increase capital accumulation because they &quot;just financethe existing budget deficit.&quot; That argument is simply wrong.Although it is true that the Social Security trust fund isinvested in government bonds that are issued to finance theexisting budget deficit, the impact of the Social Securitysurplus on capital accumulation depends on whether thosebonds would otherwise have been bought by private investors.If so, the purchase of those bonds by the Social Securitytrust fund leaves private investors with the resources toinvest in new corporate stocks and bonds and to make loansthat finance private investment. In short, if the trust fundbuys bonds that would have existed anyway and been sold tothe general public, the Social Security surplus indirectlyfinances a greater rate of private capital accumulation.   The same point can be made in another way. It is wrong toargue that the Social Security surplus &quot;masks&quot; the existingbudget deficit. The budget deficit that matters for thenation's economic performance is the total or &quot;unified&quot;deficit that includes both the Social Security surplus andthe deficit in the rest of the budget. It is the unifieddeficit that the government must finance by borrowing fromthe private sector and the rest of the world. An extra dollarof Social Security surplus reduces the government's borrowingneeds by a dollar and thus adds a dollar to national saving.   Assessing the extent to which the Social Security surplusadds to national saving ultimately depends on a politicaljudgement: How large would the deficit in the rest of thebudget be if there were no Social Security surplus? If therewere no Social Security surplus now, there might well begreater political pressure on Congress and the administrationfor additional spending cuts or tax increases. If thatpolitical pressure caused spending cuts and tax increasesequal to the current $70 billion Social Security surplus, theSocial Security surplus has no net effect on the budgetdeficit or national saving.   Although that is theoretically possible, my judgment isthat it is very unlikely that Congress and the administrationwould have found $70 billion in other deficit reductions --more than all of the deficit cuts combined over the past fiveyears. As a practical fact, without the Social Securitysurplus, the budget deficit would be larger than it is todayand the rate of national saving would therefore be lower.   The same logic applies to future changes in the SocialSecurity program. The direct impact of the Moynihan proposalto reduce the Social Security tax rate and eliminate thesurplus would be to increase the annual budget deficit bynearly $100 billion in 1993 and by larger amounts after that.The government would therefore have to sell $100 billion ofadditional bonds to the public that year and $100 billion ofprivate investment would be crowded out.   If such a cut in the Social Security tax induced Congressto raise other taxes and to cut spending by a total of $100billion a year in 1993, the fall in Social Security revenuewould be neutralized. Everyone can make his own judgementabout whether that would be likely. But after watching thedifficulty with which Congress has achieved annual deficitreductions of less than $10 billion a year for the past fiveyears, I doubt very much that it would suddenly find $100billion a year of new taxes or spending cuts. The Moynihanproposal to cut the Social Security tax would make the budgetdeficit larger and the national saving rate smaller.   To make certain that the Social Security surplus keepsadding to national saving, President Bush has proposed asequel to the Gramm-Rudman legislation. The currentGramm-Rudman law calls for a balanced budget by 1993, withthe expected 1993 Social Security surplus of $98 billionoffsetting an equal deficit in the rest of the budget. Theadministration plan calls for a second phase of Gramm-Rudmanafter 1993 in which the budget -- excluding Social Security-- would be required to be balanced by 1997. Since the SocialSecurity portion of the budget would then have an annualsurplus equal to about 2% of GNP, the total budget would thenalso show a surplus equal to about 2% of GNP. That surpluswould reduce the national debt and be a net addition to ournation's saving and capital formation.   Such a budget surplus could in principle be achievedwithout a Social Security trust fund by other tax increasesand spending cuts. But I cannot imagine the political supportfor such large tax hikes or spending cuts just for the sakeof running a budget surplus and paying down some of thenational debt. Accumulating a fund to meet future SocialSecurity benefit obligations without the need for future taxincreases is a politically feasible way -- probably the onlypolitically feasible way -- to create a desirable andsustained surplus in the government budget.   The currently projected Social Security surpluses are thebest hope for a major rise in America's national saving ratein the coming decade. That could reverse the public-debtaccumulation of the 1980s and offset the adverse effect ofSocial Security on private saving. Proposals to shrink theSocial Security surpluses would take us in just the wrongdirection. What is needed instead is a tougher overall budgetframework to make certain that those Social Securitysurpluses become overall budget surpluses.   ---   Mr. Feldstein, former chairman of the President's Councilof Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard.</TEXT></DOC>