<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911028-0053</DOCNO><DOCID>911028-0053.</DOCID><HL>   Budding Issue:   Bush's Schedule Shows   He Spends Little Time   On Domestic Concerns   ---   White House Frets His Focus   On Foreign Policy May Be   Liability in 1992 Election   ---   President's Next Stop: Madrid   ----   By Michel McQueen and John Horwood   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Last month President Bush found time to sitdown with leaders of 21 countries, from Micronesia toLiechtenstein. But he didn't manage to squeeze in a sessionwith 16 GOP House members eager to discuss family leave forAmerican workers.   Mr. Bush also personally dealt with diplomatic issuesranging from civil war in Liberia to economic problems inPeru. But he held only three meetings with individual cabinetsecretaries with responsibility for domestic issues. And twoof them were literally on the fly-aboard Air Force One enroute to political events.</LP><TEXT>   The president spoke four times with Senate Majority LeaderGeorge Mitchellabout Israeli housing loan guarantees andnuclear weapons policy. But he never discussed the issue ofextended unemployment benefits with Mr. Mitchell, even asCongress moved to pass a Democratic bill while killing onebacked by the White House.   September was supposed to have been the month when GeorgeBush seized the initiative on domestic policy. Before leavingfor his August vacation in Kennebunkport, the president vowedto &quot;come back all ready to charge&quot; against his &quot;frustratinglynegative&quot; opponents in the Democratic-led Congress.   But a close examination of the president's activities forthe month shows just how little involved he actually was onissues here at home. Interviews with some two dozen WhiteHouse aides, legislators and others and a review of hisschedules for the month depict a president who rarely missesa chance to dabble in international matters, but who rarelyseizes a chance to take the initiative on domestic policy.   Today, Mr. Bush underscores the point as he flies toMadrid to meet with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and toopen a Middle East peace conference. Mr. Bush's schedulecalls for him to spend three weeks this fall overseas,visiting Rome, the Netherlands, Australia, Japan, Korea, andSingapore. He leaves as Congress is grappling with a flurryof tax and growth bills aimed at addressing the country'seconomic problems, while his own aides are still bickeringover administration strategy.   Even the announcement Friday that Mr. Bush has embraced anew compromise on a civil rights bill he previously rejectedshows less the stamp of his own initiative than hisacknowledgement of new political realities.   Most recent presidents -- Richard Nixon and Jimmy Cartercome immediately to mind -- preferred foreign affairs, withits intoxicating opportunities to exercise global power andleadership, to the messy and fractious world of domesticpolicy. But those presidents did become deeply involved in atleast some domestic issues -- Mr. Nixon in welfare reform andthe environment, for instance, and Mr. Carter in energy andwelfare reform.   By contrast, after almost three years in office Mr. Bushhas launched an array of domestic policy initiatives,relating to education, crime, transportation and theenvironment. Most have yet to be fully enacted, something Mr.Bush blames on a recalcitrant Congress controlled by hispolitical opponents. But only one of these measures trulyreflects both Mr. Bush's initiative and the impact of strongpresidential involvement: amendments to the Clean Air Act.Enacted early in Mr. Bush's term to bipartisan acclaim, thelegislation has been embroiled ever since in charges that hisown administration's regulations to carry out the measure areweakening the law.   &quot;This is a perfect coincidence of natural inclination andpolitical calculation,&quot; says Harvard presidential scholarRichard Neustadt, noting Mr. Bush's foreign-affairsbackground and the Democrats' control of Congress. &quot;Here's aguy who adores the foreign stuff and thinks he can getsomething done. The domestic stuff is nothing but trouble inhis situation.&quot;   The White House acknowledges Mr. Bush had just threeone-on-one meetings with cabinet secretaries dealing withdomestic issues last month, but notes that Mr. Bush met dailywith Chief of Staff John Sununu and frequently with Office ofManagement and Budget Director Richard Darman and domesticpolicy adviser Roger Porter. The White House also notes Mr.Bush met with science adviser Allen Bromley and EnvironmentalProtection Agency chief William Reilly, who don't havecabinet status. And Mr. Bush presided at a cabinet meetingand two sessions with his economic policy advisers.   Referring to the disparity between individual meetingswith heads of state and those with domestic cabinetsecretaries, White House spokesman Sean Walsh says, &quot;We justdon't feel that that's a fair comparison.&quot;   Republican National Committee Chairman Clayton Yeutterargues that any suggestion that Mr. Bush lacks vigor andconviction on domestic issues is simply partisan posturingfrom a weak and stumbling Democratic party. &quot;They're going totry to make that argument from now until Election Day,&quot; saysMr. Yeutter.   Yet Mr. Bush's recent international successes --postponing the Israeli loan guarantees, nearing a Middle Eastpeace conference and launching a widely praised initiative onnuclear arms -- only underscore nagging weaknesses ondomestic policy that plainly worry the president and hisstrategists as they approach the 1992 reelection campaign.   Mr. Bush cites the demands of momentous internationalevents and blames Congress and the media for ignoring hisdomestic proposals. More than that, he labors against thepolitically dangerous perception that he doesn't much careabout the problems of Americans at a time of economichardship. &quot;I'm deeply concerned,&quot; the president protested ata recent news conference. But his actions, or lack of them,leave Republicans and Democrats alike wondering.   &quot;They don't see yet those domestic moments where they canbe on offense politically,&quot; says House GOP Whip NewtGingrich. &quot;They are risk-averse.&quot;   Mr. Bush's simultaneous success on the Israeli loanguarantees and his political failure on unemployment policyat home underscore the schizophrenic nature of hispresidency. On the former, Mr. Bush personally grabbedcontrol of the debate, shucked off harsh criticism andprevailed through the public and private application ofpresidential power. On the unemployment issue, he reactedslowly and grudgingly only after opponents had painted himinto a corner.   Republicans &quot;absolutely lost the debate&quot; over theunemployment issue, Republican Rep. Vin Weber of Minnesotacomplains, even though Congress failed to override thepresident's veto of the Democrat's unemployment-benefitsbill. White House aides privately admit that the policyresponse Mr. Bush has finally adopted -- promotingeconomic-growth measures, including a cut in capital-gainstaxes -- is largely rhetorical, since the president and hisadvisers fear that strongly pushing it could ignite anotherdamaging debate about tax &quot;fairness.&quot;   Mr. Bush himself made the point at a news conferenceFriday. While expressing enthusiasm over the idea of middleclass tax cuts, he criticized congressional taxcut ideas asbudget busters. He eventually acknowledged that a primaryconcern was his fear of stepping into another political trap.&quot;I don't want to be out there again getting caught up in somemeatgrinder on taxes,&quot; he said.   The Israeli-loan issue erupted when the president declaredthat a debate over the loan guarantees, which Israel wants tohelp it house the influx of Soviet Jews, would havejeopardized plans for a Middle East peace conference. WhenIsrael and its U.S. supporters vowed to press ahead with theeffort to win the loan guarantees from Congress anyway, thepresident summoned congressional leaders to the White Houseand then stepped before television cameras to ask Americansto support his request for a 120-day delay in the interestsof peace.   The president also spent a weekend phoning some 15 membersof the House and Senate on the issue. His appeal worked;within two weeks, polls showed that Americans overwhelminglysupported Mr. Bush's position, and Congress backed off.   At the same time, the issue that soon would embarrass Mr.Bush was percolating in Congress. The day before Mr. Bush'sSept. 12 news conference, Democratic congressional leadersincluding Mr. Foley and Mr. Mitchell decided to resume thepolitical battle with the White House over jobless benefitsthat had ended inconclusively over the summer.   Five days later, the House overwhelmingly passed a newversion of extended benefits legislation. Mr. Bush, who wasmeeting for two hours that day with President Albert Fujimoriof Peru, said nothing publicly about the matter.   Mr. Bush tried to change the subject to a more congenialissue the following day. He flew to the Grand Canyon todiscuss the environment, explaining that &quot;we're focusing ondomestic.&quot; But a threatened showdown with Iraq over nuclearinspections overshadowed his remarks about the Clean Air Actand nearly everything else on a three-day West Coast swingspiced heavily with political appearances.   The Senate passed its version of unemployment benefitslegislation a few days later, while Mr. Bush was at theUnited Nations meeting with leaders of Norway, the MarshallIslands, Micronesia, Iceland, Cambodia, Venezuela, andLebanon. Mr. Bush reacted angrily to the development thatnight, denouncing congressional efforts on the issue as&quot;garbage&quot; in a fund-raising speech for New JerseyRepublicans. But even with the sharp language, muchappreciated by his partisan audience, Mr. Bush ordered hiswriters to add more to the speech to highlight hisinternational accomplishments.   But soon Mr. Bush felt the need to display greater concernabout the economy, prompted by the urgings of his advisers,complaints from business executives, and polls showing doubtsabout his economic leadership. Mr. Bush began praising the&quot;growth package&quot; backed by Rep. Gingrich and Texas GOP Sen.Phil Grammbut only after the Senate had declined to take upthe proposal during its jobless-benefits debate. Mr. Bushalso convened two high-profile meetings of his EconomicPolicy Council to discuss the &quot;credit crunch&quot; and otherissues. At the first meeting, Mr. Bush told aides he wasgoing to &quot;stir up the rhetoric.&quot;   Meanwhile, another potentially embarrassing issue washeaded Mr. Bush's way: legislation requiring companies togive workers &quot;family leave&quot; in the event of a birth orserious family illness.   Mr. Bush, who had vetoed a version of the legislation lastyear, had expressed willingness to take the issue up againthis year. Twice this summer, on July 26 and Sept. 9, NewJersey Republican Rep. Marge Roukema and 15 other GOPfamily-leave supporters wrote Mr. Bush to ask for a meetingto discuss the issue.   Neither letter ever received a response, the lawmakerssay. Nine days after the second letter, Missouri RepublicanSen. Christopher Bond announced a bipartisan compromiseversion of the legislation. White House aides expresseddispleasure with Mr. Bond's proposal, but Mr. Bush himselfdidn't address it. Two weeks later, the proposal passed theSenate overwhelmingly, setting up another possible vetoconfrontation.   Mr. Bush defended his position on family leave at a newsconference earlier this month, saying he opposes mandates onbusiness. On jobless benefits, he emphasized his support fora Republican alternative sponsored by Senate Minority LeaderRobert Dole of Kansas. But he acknowledged that much of thepublic wasn't aware of his support for a GOP alternative, andeven his allies suggest the White House put itself in anunnecessarily defensive position. &quot;Maybe we should have had abig news conference at the White House saying this is thepresident's proposal,&quot; observes Sen. Dole, who still thinksMr. Bush can recover his footing on the issue.   GOP Whip Gingrich believes that Mr. Bush, so comfortablein his role as &quot;leader of the world,&quot; is gun-shy on domesticissues following his political difficulties in the 1990budget summit. Mr. Gingrich contrasts the administration'sdomestic timidity with its performance on the Israeli loanguarantees, where Mr. Bush and his aides knew they couldprevail by turning up the volume of the debate. &quot;I wouldcomplain about him a lot more if he weren't so damnsuccessful,&quot; Mr. Gingrich says.   A recent Des Moines Register poll buttresses Mr.Gingrich's point. The poll found that only 21% of Iowans givePresident Bush excellent or good marks on improvingeducation, 18% approve his handling of the economy, and amere 14% give him positive marks on improving health care.Yet 75% rate him high for negotiating with foreign countries,and 74% for commanding the military. And that, for themoment, seems to be enough: In a state Michael Dukakiscarried in 1988, 69% approve of the job George Bush is doingas president.</TEXT></DOC>