<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911121-0057</DOCNO><DOCID>911121-0057.</DOCID><HL>   No More Excuses --   GM Tries a New Tack:   Build the Cars Right,   Admit Your Mistakes   ---   Restyled Models Get Raves;   Quality Expert Deming   Revs Up Engine Makers   ---   Profits Still Not in Sight   ----   By Joseph B. White   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GM</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><NS>ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES andamp; COMPANIES (ANL)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)RESTRUCTURINGS, RECAPITALIZATION (RCN)</NS><RE>EUROPE (EU)MICHIGAN (MI)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   DETROIT -- Going strictly by the numbers, General MotorsCorp. is the sick man of American industry.   Its core North American auto business has lost more than$1 billion a quarter for the last 15 months, and GMexecutives have no idea when profits will return. Standard andamp;Poor's is warning it may downgrade GM's debt for the secondtime in about a year. Some 27,250 GM workers have lost theirjobs but are still getting paid, in accordance with theirunion contract.</LP><TEXT>   To shore up cash reserves, the company plans to sell up to$750 million in new preference shares, and recently sold themachinery in its newest factory. Now it leases the equipment.Although GM's European operations are robust, thanks to aturnaround in product design and factory efficiency in themid-1980s, European car demand is softening. And tougherJapanese competition could mean earnings growth there haspeaked.   Yet beneath the dismal surface, some important things arestarting to go right at General Motors. Reforms that were outon the fringes for years are finally working into thecompany's mainstream. Consider:   -- After a decade of launching one committee-designedyawner after another, GM this fall is rolling outeye-catching new versions of the Cadillac Seville, PontiacBonneville, Pontiac Grand Am and Buick Skylark. These cars,particularly the Seville, are garnering favorable reviewsfrom automotive critics who had long scorned GM. &quot;The newSeville . . . may be exactly what's needed to turn back therising tide of super cars from the Orient,&quot; wrote Car andDriver columnist Brock Yates, a frequent GM critic and authorof &quot;The Decline and Fall of the American AutomobileIndustry.&quot;   -- GM wasted years in search of a &quot;magic bullet,&quot; rangingfrom its new Saturn division to a robot-buying binge to asweeping corporate reorganization, but now it is tackling amore fundamental overhaul of the way it does business. Thecompany is abandoning an internal scorekeeping system thatset department against department with up to 2,500 scoresrating various operations. Now GM headquarters will receivejust 60 &quot;performance measures&quot; for entire systems, such as anengine or transmission, instead of profits for individualparts. Chief among the new measures is quality.   -- Like an addict emerging from the denial phase of hisillness, GM is acknowledging past problems. Cadillac divisionchief John Grettenberger recently declared that the $60,000Allante coupe &quot;wasn't completely right when it wasintroduced&quot; in 1987. Indeed, the removable top leaked and thecar's engine was sluggish. While stating the obvious, suchadmissions were unheard-of a few years ago but are now socommon that GM's PR staff frets that the confessionals aregetting out of hand.   All of this -- the provocative styling, the qualitycrusade and the mea culpas -- is part of a big gamble. GM isbetting it can pursue a crash course in organizationalreform, achieving by the mid-1990s the consistent efficiencyand quality that rivals mastered over decades. At the sametime, GM is scrambling to win back customers alienated byyears of flawed cars.   Understandably, there are skeptics. &quot;I have seen GM changein small and sometimes significant ways,&quot; says auto analystMaryann Keller of Furman Selz Inc. in New York. But &quot;GM needsreally significant cost-cutting measures. They need crisismanagement.&quot;   This month Sandamp;P expressed doubts about GM's strategy thatcould lead to increased borrowing costs for GM. Commercialpaper from General Motors Acceptance Corp., the nation'sbiggest issuer of such short-term corporate IOUs, could loseits top-tier rating, meaning many mutual funds couldn't buyit.   Even GM executives caution that any turnaround in salesand profitability could be years in the making. GM's share ofU.S. car sales slipped in the first 10 months of this year to35.3% from 35.7% a year before. The main reason: Sales ofolder models are fading faster than the new cars catch on.Sales of the Chevrolet Cavalier, for example, plunged 44%last month from October 1990.   But GM is encouraged by the sales performance of itsnewest offerings. GM's design renaissance began more than ayear ago, with the 1991 Buick Park Avenue.   That car won back Mitt Romney, the 44-year-old chiefexecutive officer of Bain andamp; Co., a Boston consulting firm.Mr. Romney, despite being the son of former Michigan governorand American Motors chairman George Romney, had given up onDetroit cars. But he recently bought a Park Avenue to replacethe family's Saab. &quot;The Park Avenue looks like a Jaguar. It'sa pretty car,&quot; Mr. Romney says.   This fall came a wave of nine new-look GM cars. Despitethe auto industry's deep slump and a slow production startup,sales of the redesigned Bonneville are up 18% since the startof the 1992 model year. Seville sales in early November areup 30% from a year before, thanks to interest from youngerpeople and professionals, dealers say. &quot;I never even lookedtwice at Cadillac; it was an old people's car,&quot; says WilliamWeiss, a 40-year-old San Francisco lawyer. Now, he says, &quot;I'mtrading my Mercedes in on the Seville.&quot;   But GM executives are acutely aware that they mustdemonstrate to skeptical consumers, particularly the 74% ofbaby boomers who don't buy GM brands, that the company'squality problems are over. Buick, Oldsmobile and Cadillac1991 models had fewer problems than average for the industry,according to a survey by J.D. Power andamp; Associates. But evenGM's best brands lag behind those from Toyota Motor Corp.,Honda Motor Co., Daimler-Benz AG and Ford Motor Co.   GM's concern about quality is one reason many potentialbuyers of the top-of-the-line Seville STS model are waitingup to 12 weeks for their cars. GM is keeping early productionslow in an effort to prevent assembly goofs. It also chosenot to rush development of the powerful 32-valve V-8 engineit wanted for the Seville STS. That will come next year.   The person overseeing the reform effort, 58-year-oldChairman Robert C. Stempel, has shunned the limelight sincetaking over as chief executive officer 15 months ago. This issuch a contrast to Roger Smith, who loved headline-grabbingacquisitions and organization changes, that a leading tradepublication recently dubbed Mr. Stempel GM's &quot;stealthchairman.&quot;   Mr. Stempel is an ardent disciple of 91-year-old qualityguru W. Edwards Deming, the man Japanese auto makers creditwith laying the foundation for their success. The chairman istrying to transform GM's culture with methodical movesinstead of grand gestures, even at the risk of proceeding tooslowly. His style is evident in quarterly fireside chatsbeamed live to the troops on an in-house TV system.   In last month's pep talk, Mr. Stempel praised Cadillac forholding down the cost of the huge metal-stamping dies used topound out body panels for the '92 Seville. The dies cost$290,000 each, down 36% from the $450,000 per die that GMspent on the Chevrolet Lumina launched in 1989. But Mr.Stempel was quick to warn that &quot;we haven't met our goals&quot; forcost reduction. &quot;If we can,&quot; he said, &quot;we can price ourproducts more competitively while still making a profit.&quot;   This may sound like so much common sense, but at GM itrepresents a novel approach. Some GM middle managers say thecompany is more open to their suggestions, even if the payoffis long term.   It used to take five days, for example, to ship parts froma metal-stamping plant near Cleveland to a minivan assemblyplant in Tarrytown, N.Y. Now the parts get to New York in 31hours, using 35% fewer shipping racks and fewer rail cars.The key: GM's finance staff agreed to a longer-than-usualpayback period for the special shipping racks.   At GM's Lansing, Mich., plant, officials stoppedproduction of redesigned 1992 Pontiac Grand Ams for threeshifts in September to fix a problem with a mechanism thatopened the trunk. &quot;With down time, there's no revenue; themotivation is to get the car out,&quot; says Maureen Young, aproduct planner for the Lansing division. &quot;We said, `Qualitywill be the valve' {on production}. That's a real shift forus.&quot;   Such incidents show that &quot;decisions are finally coming outthe right way,&quot; says John Casesa, auto analyst at Wertheim,Schroder andamp; Co. and himself a former GM staffer. But GM's corebusiness is losing so much money, it may not have time forthe evolutionary change Mr. Stempel wants to foster. A keyproblem: A GM assembly plant takes more than 30 hours onaverage to build a car. Ford averages about 22.   Indeed, despite all the cost-cutting -- including moves tocut 6,000 white-collar jobs by year end -- GM lost $2.2billion in the first nine months. The loss for all of 1991,which analysts project at about $2.7 billion, will mark thefirst time in 60 years that GM has been in the red for twofull years in a row. (Its 1990 loss was mainly due to a $2.1billion charge for the costs of factory shutdowns and staffcutbacks.)   The deep U.S. auto sales slump is more than offsettingefficiency gains. GM is offering discounts even on some ofits new cars in an effort to jump-start sales. Rivals,including Honda's Acura division, are discounting, too. ButGM can ill afford to give up the $1,000 or more per car thatdiscounts are averaging.   Meanwhile, GM must grapple with daunting structuralproblems. It's nursing along institutions that made sense (orat least made money) when it owned 45% of the car market, butperhaps not now. Oldsmobile, for instance, has nearly 3,000dealers and six car lines -- each shared by another GMdivision. But Olds sold 229,000 fewer cars in the 1991 modelyear than Honda Motor's Honda division did with just fourmodel lines and fewer than 1,000 dealers. Since Oct. 1,Oldsmobile's two newest models have shown strong salesincreases. But sales of its four-year-old midsized CutlassSupreme model are down 48% from weak year-ago levels.   Early on, Mr. Stempel signaled he would focus on customersand cars, even at the expense of short-term shareholderconcerns. Last fall he cut the common-stock dividend 47%, buthe still had to cut 7% from the crucial product-developmentbudget.   Still, the reform effort appears to be producing results.A particular hotbed of the new GM culture is its huge engineand transmission making operation, the Powertrain group.   Dr. Deming, once shunned by Detroit, now is a friend atGM's Powertrain Group. Richard Donnelly, the 48-year-old vicepresident in charge, greets a visitor with a copy of Dr.Deming's book &quot;Out of the Crisis.&quot; An early test of theDeming approach came in the form of GM's 3800 V-6 engine,which powers the Park Avenue sedan. Its cylinder openings andvalve rods were misaligned, causing premature breakdowns at arate of 50 per 100 cars.   In 1988 the components were re-engineered to line upproperly and fit with less variation from one engine toanother. Today the 3800 is a smooth and reliable engine withdefect rates as low as six-cylinder engines from Japan,according to GM's warranty data.   Mr. Donnelly is trying to use the same quality-improvementtechniques on all of GM's engines and transmissions. He hasput nearly all of the Powertrain Group's 55,000 employeesinto teams, each focused on one product. The teams -- made upof engineers, finance staffers, purchasing managers andhourly workers -- decide how to boost quality while reducingcosts.   Now the Deming methods for controlling quality and tearingdown internal rivalries must spread. In the past, Mr.Donnelly says, GM's Central Foundry division, which makesengine blocks and crankshafts, measured its success by tonsof metal poured. &quot;The way you got tons poured was to produceregardless of quality,&quot; Mr. Donnelly explains.   But today the foundry's focus is on &quot;net good piecesdelivered,&quot; Mr. Donnelly says. Foundry managers are evaluatedon quality, not quantity. Last month, GM went a step furtherand merged the Central Foundry with its customer, Mr.Donnelly's Powertrain Group, to produce closer cooperationand greater efficiency. Three years ago GM had 12 differentparts divisions, each with its own management structure; nowthere are eight.   Amid all this, GM still faces a tough challenge to forgebetter relations with its nearly 300,000 blue-collaremployees represented by the United Auto Workers. Last fallGM made a huge down payment by agreeing to spend nearly $4billion to protect laid-off workers' incomes.   Some hourly workers say managers are finally listening totheir concerns. &quot;There's been a total reversal ofmanagement,&quot; says Rick Teachout, a 23-year veteran of theLansing plant's body shop. Mr. Teachout worked with engineerswho designed the machines that build the new Grand Ams -- afirst that helped reduce defects in the early productioncars, he says.   But GM's relationship with UAW leaders has been hurt asthe company has announced eight plant closings over the pastfour years. Executives privately concede that more closingslie ahead. And to speed development of new models, some GMdivisions are giving work to independent design andengineering shops.   Stephen P. Yokich, who heads the UAW's GM department, isfiring warning shots across GM's bow. In early October, hesanctioned a strike that shut down two GM plants in Dayton,Ohio, that make brakes, including new low-cost anti-lockbrakes that GM is putting on most 1992 cars. The disputeflared over GM's effort to subcontract certain work tonon-UAW employees. With its 1992 model launch threatened, GMsettled the strike in three days by agreeing to restore mostof the work to UAW employees.   The episode was a reminder that GM rarely moves fasterthan two steps forward, one step back. &quot;It's like bowling,&quot;says one white-collar staffer. &quot;It's easy to get good. It'shard to get better.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>