<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910912-0073</DOCNO><DOCID>910912-0073.</DOCID><HL>   Don't Overregulate After BCCI   ----   By John G. Heimann</HL><DATE>09/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   BCCI</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)EUROPE (EU)LUXEMBOURG (LU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   This week, the House Banking Committee resumes itsfact-finding hearings on the BCCI affair. These and the othercontinuing investigations, here and abroad, may well unearthrevelations that will lead to major changes in bankingpolicy. But when it comes to U.S. financial regulation andlegislation, my guess is that what needs to be done is prettystraightforward -- and already in the Federal Reserve BoardBill on Foreign Bank Supervision that is before Congress.Further legislative action is not needed.   The gang at BCCI are old acquaintances of mine. Twice,these rogues attempted to buy into the U.S. while I was abank supervisor. The first time, the New York BankingDepartment, which had jurisdiction, refused BCCI entrybecause it firmly believed that no foreign bank should bepermitted to operate in the state unless it had ahome-country primary supervisor to whom the department couldturn for information. A primary supervisor is so importantbecause it has the responsibility -- and the power -- to knoweverything, good or bad, and to take a consolidated view ofthe bank, regardless of the scale of its internationaloperations.</LP><TEXT>   The second time BCCI tried to invest here, it openlyattempted to buy Washington-based Financial General Corp.(now known as First American Bankshares). Then, the Fed hadjurisdiction, and it too turned BCCI down. It also felt thatanyone who structured a bank in such a way as to hide itsoperations presented problems. Specifically, it saw that atime might come when it would be difficult to protect theU.S. public and the U.S. financial system. So neither the NewYork Banking Department nor the Fed let BCCI in. This one, atleast, we got right.   Still, after a second rebuff, a new group appeared,consisting of individual investors who were looselyassociated with BCCI. The group was headed by Clark Clifford.The regulators were advised that there would be no effectivetie with BCCI, and on that understanding the group wasallowed to take control of First American. But, over time,BCCI moved in behind this individual investor group,eviscerating the agreement with the Fed.   Was the Fed easily duped? Fraud by its very nature isdifficult to detect. BCCI was the type of institution thatwas prepared to run a bank within a bank within a bank. Inprinciple, there is no level of deception that cannot bemaintained given the power of computers to generate numbers-- real or fictitious -- and the relatively low costs ofcreating a succession of corporate and partnership identitiesbehind which to hide the ownership.   I suppose the lesson is that supervisors must be alert andask whether there is a depositor, or a deposit, correspondingto that particular book entry. And they must ask if theindividuals named in an investor group are truly theeffective controlling interest. As soon as there are groundsfor suspicion, they need to check the fundamentals -- asapparently they did. Perhaps in BCCI's case the supervisorswere as alert as possible. This week's hearings should helpsettle that issue.   When I look back at its origins, I am struck by howrespectable BCCI appeared then. Among other things, Bank ofAmerica was a major shareholder. Regulators in many nations,including Britain, opened their doors to what looked like auniquely dynamic, well-backed Third World bank. Later, Bankof America sold and dispersed its shares; the link betweenownership and control was weakened. BCCI grew and itsinfluence expanded.   At some point -- it is unclear precisely when -- BCCIbegan to launder money, finance arms deals and hide itslosses from its auditors, regulators and even its owners. Ithad by then adopted its dual structure, creating a non-bankholding company with separate banks licensed and regulated inthe two separate jurisdictions of the Cayman Islands andLuxembourg. In addition, its operational headquarters was inBritain. Effectively, the lead regulatory responsibilitieswere split between three different jurisdictions. The absenceof a unique primary supervisor must have greatly aided BCCIin its deceptions.   Then, in 1988, BCCI tripped and was caught launderingmoney. World-wide it came under closer scrutiny-and theextent of the illegal dealings, the secret holdings in FirstAmerican Bankshares, the bank within the bank, and otherrelated skulduggery became apparent. It was only on July 5 ofthis year, after Price Waterhouse found incontrovertibleevidence of BCCI's endemic corruption and massive losses,that the Bank of England could seize BCCI and close it downin concert with the regulators of 60 other nations.   The affair as it now stands raises enough questions aboutdictators, spies, financiers and regulators and about thefrailty of human nature in general that the important -- butquite limited -- lesson for the international financialregulatory system is in danger of being lost.   Why do I say that the lesson of the largest internationalbanking scandal since the South Sea Bubble is so limited?Because much already has been done by banking supervisors toharmonize and coordinate bank regulation.   The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Developmenthas created widely observed standards for bankingsupervision. The GATT is working to deal with the issue ofaccess to banking markets in the context of the currentUruguay Round of trade negotiations. And the BIS Committee onBanking Regulations has established, among other things,minimum standards of capital adequacy for internationalbanks. Above all, there is informal, effective cooperationamong national banking regulators: Witness how well theclosing of BCCI was orchestrated internationally.   The present system of coordination could of course bestrengthened. It would help if there was a clearer commonlyaccepted conceptual framework for thinking through anddividing up responsibilities on international bankingregulation, as was argued in a recent Group of Thirtymonograph. But no radical new initiatives are called for.Indeed, that BCCI's failure had no perceptible effect onfinancial markets is testimony to the faith of the markets inthe ability of regulators.   Still, there is a limit to what can be achieved, as longas sovereign nations want to supervise the activities ofbanks under their jurisdiction in their own way. Bankingsupervision in different countries is a reflection ofdifferent national histories, cultures and traditions, not tomention distinct legal frameworks, accounting practices, andregulatory apparatuses. Differences are bound to create someopportunities for fraud.   The task for regulators, nationally as well asinternationally, is to work toward reducing the opportunitiesfor fraud while keeping the costs of regulation withinbounds. It might help if the national regulators in eachmajor banking market not only were empowered to prevent theentry of banks whose practices they had reason to suspect --by and large, the present situation -- but were also able toeject a bank when it changed its organizational structure sothat it no longer has a primary supervisor. After all, why dothis, except to perpetrate fraud]   A small change in the British law along these lines wouldhave helped the authorities there to anticipate events. WhenBCCI adopted its hydra-headed structure, the Bank of Englandcould then have evicted BCCI. Under the law of the day, itcould not act until there was strong evidence of wrongdoingand unsafe and unsound practices. Whether there wassufficient evidence of this nature is the issue beforeBritish courts right now. As in the U.S., banking regulatorscannot go around, willy-nilly, seizing private propertywithout proof of wrongdoing or insolvency. But they should beable to counter international strategies whose sole purposemust be to evade regulation, as soon as those strategiesbecome apparent.   In the U.S., the Fed has proposed legislation that shouldfit the bill. It gives the Fed the power to prevent foreigninvestors of any sort from acquiring a bank if they have nounique primary supervisor abroad, and the power to eject themlater on for the same reason. It may be enacted before theend of this legislative session. It ought to be, and othernations should adopt similar legislation soon.   In other countries, much that regulators know about thebanks under their jurisdiction is confidential. If U.S.regulators are to continue to enjoy good working relationswith their counterparts abroad, confidentiality must beprotected.   The many investigations under way will no doubt revealmore corruption, more doubtful judgments in differentbranches of the government about what was in the publicinterest. We may find out who knew what and when. But a solidcase for more sweeping legislation seems unlikely to emerge.It is particularly important that Congress resist thetemptation to be overzealous and load extra compliance costson legitimate foreign banks that might in effect be highlyanti-competitive.   The Fed proposal would make it most unlikely that acorrupt bank could become as big as BCCI, or that a big bankcould become as corrupt. Any malfeasance should beconstrained and detected earlier. Lightning will no doubtstrike again, but not quite in this spot and, let us hope,without quite the same destructive force.   ---   Mr. Heimann, Merrill Lynch's chairman for global financialinstitutions, was New York state superintendent of banks,1975-77, and U.S. comptroller of the currency, 1977-81.</TEXT></DOC>