<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910220-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>910220-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Bush Is Cool   To Moscow's   Peace Proposal   ---   President Appears Unwilling   To Allow Postponement   Of Plans for Ground War   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and David Rogers   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST AFRIC</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush, appearing intent onlaunching a ground attack soon on Iraqi forces, said a Sovietpeace plan doesn't come close to meeting his conditions forending the fighting.   U.S. officials complained privately that the Soviet plan,which seems to assure the Iraqi government that it won't bedismantled if it withdraws from Kuwait, would give Iraqileader Saddam Hussein too much of a face-saving way out ofthe war just when U.S. officials think they have him on theropes. Indeed, there were new signs yesterday that Mr. Bushis ready to order a ground attack within the next few days.</LP><TEXT>   Officials said the administration also is unhappy that theSoviet plan would provide too much &quot;linkage&quot; between an Iraqiwithdrawal from Kuwait and a settlement of the Palestinianproblem, and also seems to guarantee an end to economicsanctions against Baghdad.   But Mr. Bush will face enormous political problems, bothwithin the international anti-Iraq coalition and at home, ifSaddam Hussein accepts the Soviet plan, administrationofficials acknowledge. Mr. Bush likely would face intensepressure from the Soviets and some Arab and European leadersto put off a ground attack. In addition, Mr. Bush might run abig domestic political risk if he triggers a bloody groundattack at a time when it appears a peaceful solution ispossible.   At the same time, though, the main Arab members of theanti-Iraq coalition -- Saudi Arabia and possibly Egypt andSyria -- likely would urge Mr. Bush to push ahead with aground war anyway to smash Saddam Hussein's regime whilethere is a chance to do so.   As if to underscore the delicate problems facing thecoalition, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger hasjust completed a secret mission to assure Morocco's KingHassan about the war, administration officials acknowledged.Morocco has contributed troops to the coalition, but it alsohas been the scene of big anti-war protests.   Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz is due to return toMoscow with his country's response today. Mr. Aziz, whoreceived the Soviet plan in a meeting with Soviet PresidentMikhail Gorbachev in Moscow on Monday, flew back to Baghdadyesterday for urgent consultations with Saddam Hussein.   There were increasing signs that Iraq has little, if any,time to move diplomatically to stop an American-led groundassault on its troops occupying Kuwait. A U.S. official withknowledge of troop movements in the region described a groundwar as &quot;imminent,&quot; and much the same message was carried by aHouse delegation that returned from the region late Mondaynight.   Rep. John Murtha (D., Pa.), chairman of the House DefenseAppropriations Subcommittee, said the U.S. commander, Gen.Norman Schwarzkopf, was even more optimistic than topPentagon officials in his assessment of the allies' position.Mr. Murtha warned that Iraq must move quickly to avertattack.   &quot;They'd better move pretty fast,&quot; he said of the currentdiplomatic discussions. &quot;It's got to be movement, not justtalk.&quot;   Officials said allied destruction of Iraqi armor units hasescalated significantly as more &quot;smart,&quot; or guided, munitionshave been turned against enemy ground forces. Officials saidthe earlier, heavy bombardment by B-52's had only limitedeffectiveness, but the more targeted attacks have given theallies a decided advantage on the ground.   Allied pilots are still encountering heavy anti-aircraftfire. Perhaps more significantly, a U.S. official said pilotshave reported Iraqi use of Roland air-defense missiles,sophisticated weapons made by Germany and France and firedfrom mobile launchers. Still, Gen. Schwarzkopf's damageassessments indicate the effectiveness of some Iraqi unitshas been reduced by as much as 40% to 50%, Mr. Murtha said.The lawmaker agreed that such numbers are subject to wideinterpretation, but he and other members of a congressionaldelegation that just returned from Saudi Arabia said theunderlying message conveyed by military commanders wasconfidence that Iraqi units have been greatly weakened.   The increased destruction of Iraqi forces on the groundmakes it easier for U.S. officials to give the go-ahead for aground attack because they are more confident Americancasualties could be kept down. One official, referring toIraqi forces, said, &quot;They're good on the defensive butthey're not 10 feet tall.&quot;   U.S. officials say they are prepared to stop the war ifIraq clearly declares it will withdraw from Kuwait and beginsdoing so on a massive scale. But they don't seem eager toaccept any diplomatic formulas that offer Iraq many optionsbeyond that. Mr. Bush said the Soviet proposal &quot;falls wellshort of what would be required.&quot;   Mr. Bush went out of his way to avoid offending Mr.Gorbachev, whose support was crucial in winning adoption ofUnited Nations resolutions ordering Iraq to withdraw fromKuwait and in assembling the international force opposingIraq. &quot;I do appreciate President Gorbachev's providing me acopy of his proposal,&quot; Mr. Bush said in brief comments toreporters.   Mr. Bush clearly is leaving open the door for furtherSoviet mediation with Iraq. He said the Soviet initiativewill be &quot;thoroughly explored.&quot; Administration aides said thepresident sent a personal message to Mr. Gorbachev earlyyesterday morning offering detailed comments on the Sovietpeace plan.   But Mr. Bush also tried to stanch any effort to turnSoviet diplomacy into drawnout negotiations that wouldinterfere with prosecution of the war. &quot;Let me justreiterate,&quot; Mr. Bush said. &quot;As far as I'm concerned there areno negotiations.&quot;   The president's carefully calibrated comments suggest heis trying both to prevent a rift with Moscow that couldundermine the coalition opposing Iraq and to leave open thechance that Moscow might yet be able to arrange a swift andunconditional Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.   Such a withdrawal before a ground war begins would leaveSaddam Hussein in power with a substantial army intact.Still, Mr. Bush might be inclined to accept it and frame itas a major victory for him because it was achieved withsurprisingly little loss of American life.   Some administation aides suspect, though, that the Sovietsare engaged in their peacemaking efforts as much to win goodwill in the Arab world in the postwar era as out of anyrealistic belief they can stop the war.   It remains difficult to assess the Soviet peace planbecause neither the Soviet nor the U.S. government willdisclose its details officially. But U.S. officials, speakingprivately, say that while it clearly calls for a speedy Iraqiwithdrawal from Kuwait, it also attempts to address some ofIraq's demands.   For instance, officials said, it promises some &quot;progresson the Palestinian issue&quot; after an Iraqi pullout. Iraq hasdemanded a new international push to force Israel to abandonPalestinian lands in conjunction with any Iraqi withdrawalfrom Kuwait. President Bush has complained that any nod tothat Iraqi demand would amount to a reward for SaddamHussein's invasion of Kuwait. He may have a hard timerejecting the Soviet plan, though, because a joint statementissued several weeks ago by Secretary of State James Bakerand Soviet Foreign Minister Alexander Bessmertnykh alsoreferred vaguely to making progress on Arab-Israeli disputesonce the war is over.   Mr. Bessmertnykh declared in a debate in the SovietParliament yesterday that &quot;ultimately Israel will be forcedto leave the occupied territories.&quot; He and other Sovietofficials also have suggested that their plan carries someKremlin guarantees that Iraq's borders will be protected andits right to sort out its own affairs protected. Mr.Bessmertnykh said the Kremlin wants Iraq, a longtime ally, tobe &quot;a flourishing state with territorial integrity andplaying a worthy role in the world community.&quot;   One U.S. official complained that the Soviet plan wouldgive Saddam Hussein a face-saving way out of his predicamentat a time the Bush administration doesn't want to offer &quot;evenrhetorical face-saving.&quot;   Mr. Bessmertnykh criticized President Bush for hisnegative reaction to the proposal. &quot;That plan was addressedto the Iraqi leadership, so he rejected the plan which didnot belong to him,&quot; the Soviet foreign minister toldreporters.   But there also are signs that Moscow doesn't want to letthe Bush administration's criticism of its peace plan sourrelations with Washington. Mr. Bessmertnykh defended actionsof the allies opposing Iraq during a lengthy barrage ofquestions in the Soviet Parliament session. At one point, hecountered criticism that allied air raids are harmingcivilians by declaring: &quot;Don't forget about the Kuwaitis.They are also suffering and we must try to protect them aswell.&quot;   Bush administration willingness to plunge ahead with aground war may stem from continuing signals that Iraqi forcesare in bad shape. Information gathered from prisonersindicates major supply problems on the Iraqi side, officialssaid. Also, equipment captured during a battle over the Sauditown of Khafji proved to be poorly maintained and led theU.S. command to downgrade its evaluation of Iraqi forces.   U.S. special forces units are believed to be operatingalready inside Kuwait to assist in targeting for any groundattack. The high-tech air war also has produced some humansolutions to the need for tactical intelligence. In one suchcase, a two-seater F-18 was adapted as essentially a forwardobservation craft, with one officer flying and a secondsearching the ground for targets.   ---   Robert S. Greenberger contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>