<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910114-0057</DOCNO><DOCID>910114-0057.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Cover-Up at American Express Is Alleged   ----   By Wade Lambert and Pauline Yoshihashi   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   AXP AMC TAXES WNEWS</CO><IN>DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC (FIS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><LP>   American Express Co. shareholders filed a lawsuit accusingcompany officials and directors of covering up misconduct inan alleged scheme to discredit international financier EdmondSafra.   The suit, filed in federal court in Manhattan, alsoaccuses some of the defendants of being involved in a plot tospread false rumors and plant negative stories in the pressaccusing Mr. Safra of being involved in drug trafficking,money-laundering and the Iran-Contra affair.</LP><TEXT>   In 1989, American Express issued a public apology for an&quot;unauthorized and shameful effort&quot; in connection with thematter and paid $8 million to Mr. Safra and charities heselected.   A spokeswoman for American Express said the company wasunaware of the suit and declined to comment. American Expresspreviously denied that any of its employees knowingly spreadfalse information about Mr. Safra.   The suit accuses the board and current and formerofficers, including Chairman James D. Robinson III, ofviolating their fiduciary duty by approving the $8 millionpayment to Mr. Safra. Instead, the suit said the individualsallegedly involved in any wrongdoing should have paid thesettlement and been punished by the firm.   &quot;The image and reputation of both American Express andShearson {Lehman Brothers Inc., an American Express unit}, aswell as their financial condition, have been severelydamaged,&quot; the suit said.   In addition to the $8 million paid to Mr. Safra, the suit-- known as a shareholders' derivative lawsuit because it isfiled on the company's behalf by holders -- seeks unspecifieddamages from certain officers and the directors. The suitsaid the damages would be paid by the officers' anddirectors' liability insurance.   In the suit, the three shareholders said they first askedthe company to take action against individuals linked to theSafra matter in August 1989, after the $8 million payment wasannounced. The board rejected the shareholders' request, thesuit said.   Fred Taylor Isquith, an attorney for the shareholders,said his clients decided to file the suit because they &quot;hopedthe board would do something more. . . . {the directors}essentially have circled the wagons and are protecting thepeople who conducted the operation.&quot;   In the suit, the shareholders said, &quot;Members of the boardknew that authorizing {legal action against individualemployees} on behalf of the company would lead to scrutiny oftheir own roles in the wrongful acts at issue.&quot;   The shareholders who brought the suit are Harry Lewis ofBrooklyn, N.Y., Charles Harden of Greensboro, N.C., and AndyGrey of Chappaqua, N.Y.   ---   SOME CHARGES AGAINST KEATING are dismissed.   A Los Angeles Superior Court judge dismissed 12 of 46fraud counts against Charles H. Keating Jr., the formerchairman of American Continental Corp., and three associates.   Judge Lance Ito cited technical problems with theprosecution's charges. He granted a motion by the defense toremove six of the counts because the district attorney'soffice filed them belatedly on Nov. 19. The defense hadargued that those counts should have been approved by thegrand jury that returned the original indictment inSeptember.   The other counts were dismissed because they were&quot;internally inconsistent,&quot; Judge Ito said. The judge alsoraised the possibility that more charges may be dismissed ata hearing scheduled for June 7, when defense lawyers willargue a motion to dismiss the indictment. A trial date hasbeen set for Aug. 2.   Mr. Keating and his associates are charged with makingfalse statements and other securities violations inconnection with the sale of more than $250 million ofAmerican Continental unsecured debentures.   Sandi Gibbons, assistant district attorney in Los Angeles,said the prosecution was disappointed by the ruling, and willconsider an appeal. &quot;We'll be preparing for trial on theother counts,&quot; Ms. Gibbons said. Mr. Keating's lawyerscouldn't be reached for comment.   ---   FEDERAL JUDGE STRIKES DOWN local law banning politicalsigns.   The city ordinance in Ladue, Mo., St. Louis's mostexclusive suburb, came under legal attack when city councilmembers denied a resident permission to mount a sign in herfront yard criticizing American troop involvement in thePersian Gulf.   The 2-by-3-foot sign read: &quot;Say No to War in the PersianGulf, Call Congress Now.&quot; A similar sign had been stolen fromher yard and a second was torn down. But when Margaret Gilleoreported the incidents, she was told of the ordinanceprohibiting all residential lawn signs, except certainmunicipal and real estate signs.   The law is unusual because it gave more protection tocommercial free speech than political free speech, thereverse of well established constitutional principle. Ms.Gilleo, represented by the St. Louis law firm of Green,Hoffmann andamp; Dankenbring, sued on First Amendment grounds.   At a hearing last month, Ladue's mayor maintained thatprivacy, safety and aesthetics were the prime concerns behindthe ordinance. Lawyers for the city argued the law should beleft intact because it was &quot;content neutral&quot; -- it banned allpolitical signs. But U.S. District Judge Jean Hamilton in St.Louis rejected that argument last week, ruling that theordinance would have to ban all yard signs to be legallyneutral.   Ladue's city council hasn't decided whether to appeal thedecision or amend the law, a lawyer for the city said.   ---   UNIVERSITY WITH RELIGIOUS ROOTS loses battle over tax-freebonds.   The Virginia Supreme Court ruled Friday that a plan byLiberty University in Lynchburg, Va., to issue $60 million intax-free industrial revenue bonds violated the constitutionalseparation of church and state.   The university, headed by the Rev. Jerry Falwell, said itwouldn't appeal, in part because of the cost of litigation.   Officials in Lynchburg had originally approved Liberty'sproposal to issue the bonds through the city's IndustrialDevelopment Authority. That decision was upheld last April bythe local circuit court. But two Lynchburg residentsappealed, arguing that the city's decision violated the FirstAmendment, the Virginia Constitution and state law, byproviding government assistance to a &quot;pervasively sectarian&quot;religious institution.   The state's Supreme Court agreed. Calling Liberty &quot;aninstitution in which religion is so pervasive that asubstantial portion of its functions are subsumed in itsreligious mission,&quot; Justice Henry H. Whiting said: &quot;Theproposed bond issue would violate the establishment ofreligion clauses of the U.S. and Virginia Constitutions.&quot;   In a statement, the university said: &quot;Unfortunately, itnow appears that evangelical Christian institutions will beunable to take advantage of the same financing that isavailable to other educational institutions, including manyreligious and denominationally controlled schools.&quot;   ---   GOVERNMENT DROPS APPEAL in Medicare payment dispute.   The Justice Department said it will withdraw its appeal ofa decision by a federal judge in a case filed by the AmericanHospital Association.   The Washington judge ruled last year that an estimated6,000 hospitals didn't have to comply with a Department ofHealth and Human Services rule requiring payments tohospitals to be limited to the amount specified by Medicare,even if the patient received additional liability-awardpayments or was entitled to them under a liability-insurancepolicy. The hospitals had sought the right to bill liabilityinsurers or file liens against liability awards to help covertheir actual costs.   Withdrawal of the appeal now clears the way for hospitalsto collect millions of dollars that otherwise would have beenlost, said Gregory M. Luce, a lawyer with Fulbright andamp;Jaworski, the law firm that represented the AHA.   A Justice Department spokesman said the U.S. is continuingits appeal of attorneys' fees awarded in the case.   ---   SHEARMAN andamp; STERLING NAMES new head of firm.   Stephen R. Volk, a corporate partner who helped build thelaw firm's mergers and acquisition practice, was elected to asix-year term as senior partner.   He succeeds Robert Carswell, whose term expired. Mr.Carswell, a former Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, willresume practicing corporate and banking law full time.   Mr. Volk, who will continue to practice law, hasrepresented Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., First Boston Corp. andMorgan Stanley andamp; Co. Shearman andamp; Sterling, New York, has about600 lawyers in nine offices.   ---   HOW DO MERGING LAW FIRMS choose a new name?   In the case of two large Alberta, Canada, law firms, theyflip a coin.   Milner andamp; Steer of Edmonton and Fenerty Robertson Fraser andamp;Hatch of Calgary decided to merge last week. But duringapproximately five months of negotiations, the law firmshadn't agreed on a name for the new 180-lawyer firm. That'sthe kind of issue that makes or breaks merger talks. But,says Fenerty partner Francis M. Saville, &quot;You had to askyourself whether this was a big enough issue that it woulddetermine whether we should merge or not. We used a littlebit of common sense and got a coin.&quot;   The coin in question was especially minted for thepurpose, with the name &quot;Milner Fenerty&quot; on one side and&quot;Fenerty Milner&quot; on the other. A law firm consultant hired bythe firms flipped the coin.   Milner Fenerty, as it will be called as of Feb. 1, will bethe largest law firm in Alberta.</TEXT></DOC>