<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910829-0054</DOCNO><DOCID>910829-0054.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>08/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   A POST-COUP PURGE ROCKED the Kremlin; a foreign ministerwas named.   Soviet President Gorbachev dissolved the governing body ofthe KGB and his cabinet was dismissed. Prosecutors charged 12people with treason for allegedly participating in the coup.Boris Pankin, Moscow's envoy to Czechoslovakia and a vocalopponent of last week's coup, was appointed Soviet foreignminister. A delegation from Russia and the Soviet Parliamentarrived in the Ukraine to discuss border issues. In Moscow,an economist indicated that the shortfall in grain productionthis year would be more severe than had been expected.Meanwhile, new details about the coup emerged.</LP><TEXT>   U.S. officials have been instructed to resist new aid tothe Soviet Union at a meeting today in London of officialsfrom seven industrialized nations.   ---   A SUBWAY TRAIN DERAILED and crashed in New York, killingfive people.   The 10-car train, which apparently was speeding as itapproached a Manhattan station, slammed into a pillar,shearing the lead car in half and leaving the rest of thetrain mangled. Scores of passengers were injured. Theoperator, who fled the scene, was charged with five counts ofmanslaughter, police said. He was found to have ablood-alcohol level of twice the legal limit, according topolice. Officials said an empty crack vial was found in theoperator's cab. Late yesterday the cause of the crash wasundetermined.   The accident sparked immediate concern nationwide amongadvocates of drug testing for transportation workers whosejobs affect public safety.   ---   Yugoslavia's collective leadership issued a new appeal foran effective cease-fire, as fighting raged in breakawayCroatia. Radio reports said federal army tanks were involvedin clashes in the east Croatian town of Vukovar, which hasbeen attacked repeatedly over the past week by federalplanes.   ---   A former Panamanian envoy pleaded guilty to transportingcocaine and agreed to testify against Manuel Noriega whenPanama's deposed leader goes on trial next week in Miami.Ricardo Bilonick, 44, who served as ambassador to the U.S.,told prosecutors Noriega took $10 million in bribes toprotect U.S.-bound cocaine shipments.   ---   Tests by civilian scientists failed to determine whetherthe turret explosion that killed 47 sailors on the USS Iowawas sabotage or an accident, congressional investigatorssaid. The Navy initially concluded the 1989 explosion wasdeliberately caused by a gunner's mate. But the GAO found noevidence of a hypothetical chemical ignition device.   ---   A federal appeals court ruled that lawyers can't be heldresponsible for clients' misrepresentations, even if thelawyers prepared the offending documents. The court saidthat, as long as lawyers themselves don't lie, theyordinarily have no obligation to inform authorities aboutclients who might be lying.   ---   Perez de Cuellar announced that he wouldn't seek a newterm as U.N. secretary-general, noting that he already hasserved 10 years in the post. Separately, he issued a reporturging industrial nations and commercial lenders to eitherreduce or forgive Africa's debt, which totaled more than $270billion at the end of last year.   ---   Cambodian peace talks bogged down in Thailand overdisagreements on disarmament, elections and human rights.Mediator Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who voiced optimism Tuesdayafter the factions agreed to cut their forces by 70%, saidyesterday that he didn't expect to reach a comprehensivepeace settlement. The talks end today.   ---   Israeli Housing Minister Sharon told the nation'sParliament of his plans to expand Jerusalem so that the citywould link up with the largest West Bank Jewish settlement,Maale Adumim, three miles to the east. Separately, an Israelinewspaper reported that Israel asked Germany for $5.7 billionin aid to help settle immigrants.   ---   Pakistan and India reported heavy firing between theirtroops in the disputed Kashmir region for the thirdconsecutive day. Both countries said there had beencasualties among their forces. Pakistani officials said theyplanned to bring up the Kashmir issue at next week's meetingof nonaligned foreign ministers in Accra, Ghana.   ---   Togo's president agreed to surrender power to a primeminister chosen by a pro-democracy conference, effectivelyending his 24-year military rule. In accepting theappointment, Gnassingbe Eyadema backed off from his earlierattempts to suspend the conference that had selected interimPremier Kokou Koffigoh.   ---   Texas sued the federal government, demanding more than $1billion in federal aid that the state's officials claim willbe lost because of a faulty census count that missed about600,000 people statewide. Among the defendants named in thesuit are Bush and Commerce Secretary Mosbacher, whosedepartment managed the census.</TEXT></DOC>