<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900716-0117</DOCNO><DOCID>900716-0117.</DOCID><HL>   Keep the Republican Faith   ----   By Peggy Noonan</HL><DATE>07/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   I have been asked to speak about what Republicans are, andwhat we must be in the future -- not only in order to win,but to lead wisely and justly. I can remember what we were,once, back in the mists of the past.   I was born in the Democratic precincts of Brooklyn, NewYork in 1950, and I grew up with people, the children andgrandchildren of the immigrants of Europe, who thought -- asI was taught to think -- that the Republican Party, forgiveme, was the party of rich dullards. In our neighborhood,Democrats were cops and firemen. Republicans had profoundlyuninteresting jobs, like . . . insurance company vicepresident. They always seemed like that great cliche --country club guys, fat, a little self-satisfied, kind ofsnoozy.</LP><TEXT>   The Democratic leadership in those days had something tosay. Let's get this country moving again, let's help people.In the early '60s they lowered the top tax rates, cut capitalgains, reminded us that a rising tide lifts all boats. Theysaw communism not only in military and political terms but inmoral terms -- and they led an America able to articulate itsopposition, its superiority, its faith. Liberals had heart;conservatives had adding machines. Liberals wanted to helppeople; conservatives kept the books, and fretted about thered ink.   It all started changing in the late '60s, you know how andthe reasons why. By the '70s, the Democrats, still themajority party, seemed like a giant bound, unable to freeitself from the assumptions of the recent past. A partywhipped by special interests -- tied down by what had becomealmost an addiction to high taxes and high spending, in thethrall of what George Bush called the &quot;idea boutique&quot; atHarvard Yard -- a party farther than ever from the commonman's common-sense understanding of the world.   Across the nation you could see the stirrings ofdiscontent. In California, a tax revolt; in middle America,the anti-abortion movement, composed largely of traditionalDemocrats who could no longer tolerate the position of theparty of their parents; in the East, a newly sophisticatedanticommunism that was grounded in both passion andscholarship. Throughout the land, a simmering sense of enoughis enough.   The Republican Party awoke from its post-Watergateslumber. Suddenly it was saying wait a minute -- you can'ttax the little guy to death -- you can't tax him 40%, 50% onhis overtime -- you can't take his freedom from him and letgovernment call all the tunes -- you can't let the economystop pumping out the jobs the people need. We backed lowtaxes, low spending, enduring values, a strong defense.   And along came Reagan. And because of the ideas herepresented we owned the '80s. Suddenly, almost withoutnoticing it, the Republican party became the party of thepeople. Protector of the people, protector of theirinterests. And one day we looked around and realized: My God,we're not only on the side of the guy at the country clubanymore -- we're on the side of the waiters]   The differences between the two parties were not always,in a cultural sense at least, clean-cut or unambiguous. Butthe point is, we had the issues -- we were on the right sideof the issues -- and the key now, for the future, it seems tome, is simple: Don't give those issues up.   The message of the '80s, the era of the great Republicanresurgence, is: We are at our best when we believe. We are atour best when we are in tune with the country, and respectfulof it, when we try not to be more like the Democrats, butmore like us. As we owned the '80s, we can own the '90s. Andwe can, before this decade is out, take Congress.   The economy of course is still the issue. We've all beenvery happy the past 10 years to have two presidents with highpopularity ratings. They deserved and deserve them. But Ioperate with the theory that when there is peace andprosperity the American people find reasons to like theirpresident, reasons to see their charm and low-key humor. Andwhen we don't have prosperity, they find reasons to decidetheir president is an unattractive, charmless dolt. (They didit to Carter.) Not because they're cynical, but because theyhire presidents to run things, and they want results.   We Republicans still have the advantage on the economy,because to the men and women of America we're still seen asthe grownups on this issue. But we must be true to what weare. We must continue as the party of low taxes, the party oflower spending.   We must not lose the tax issue. We must not lose it forreasons having to do with responsible governance: If we godown the road we went down in the '70s, our least effectivedecade -- if we become &quot;low budget liberals&quot; and let thebudget grow -- if we go down that road it will hurt theeconomy and we will stop being the job-producing wonder ofthe world. We'll stop being the party of hope, the party ofthe people. And we cannot lose this issue for politicalreasons: If we become like the Democrats, we will suffertheir fate.   President Bush has been statesmanlike in telling Congresshe'll do a great deal, go to great lengths, to end the budgetmess. Reagan was criticized in the media, and by somethoughtful voters, for seeming sometimes intransigent,confrontational, unwilling to talk. Bush has avoided thatcharge.   It's right and legitimate that he should tell theDemocrats, &quot;I'll consider anything to make serious progress.&quot;It's good to be reasonable, in a crisis, to declare youropenness to all ideas. But if the ideas offered are,ultimately, the same old bad ideas -- &quot;We'll spend, and youraise the taxes to support us&quot; -- then it will be right andreasonable for the president to push away from the table and&quot;cut himself a walking stick.&quot; That was Tolstoy's phrasewhen, at the age of more than 80, he walked out on an unhappymarriage after almost 50 years. He was endlessly patient --just like a Republican.   If, in the next few weeks or month the president sees thatno serious structural reform is possible -- that no seriousattempt will be made to control waste, to gain control ofdomestic spending; if he comes to suspect that even if heraises taxes the Democrats won't control spending, and onceagain the Republican Party will have the job of &quot;taxcollector for the welfare state&quot; (and every time we go downthis wrong road the Democrats win, because they always seemto be spending money to help the poor while we'll seem to betaxing middle-America to bail out bankers and pay lawyers);if no serious progress occurs it will be right and legitimate-- and statesmanlike -- for the president to push away fromthe bargaining table, stand up, acknowledge what's happening,declare that an impasse has been reached, and tell theDemocrats: I'm taking it to the people.   The 1990 elections are three months away, and there isstill no more fruitful and legitimate issue for us, and forthe country, than wasteful spending, than a budget out ofcontrol, than congressmen raising taxes -- there is no morepotent issue than this.   There isn't a man or woman in America who doesn't knowthat the budget's out of control -- every American over theage of 12 knows it -- and the funny thing is they're nottight, they're not skinflints, they just want to know themoney's going to good use.   People are becoming newly re-sensitized to taxes, from NewJersey to California, they're starting to get clobberedagain. And there's another part of the mix: an anti-incumbentspirit that is sweeping the country. Everywhere, at thedinner table, the PTA meeting, the cocktail party, you canhear it: Throw the bums out. As the majority of Congress areDemocrats this is not exactly bad news. If we take this issueto the people, the people will support us. I always want tosay to my old friends in Washington: Trust the people. Afterall, they had the wit to trust us.   Someone told me the other day, &quot;But George Bush doesn'tlike confrontation.&quot; Well, George Bush likes peace andprogress -- but I saw him in 1988 when he was 14 points down,and when it's time to fight, he can mix it up with the bestof them. The part of him that was an 18-year-old fighterpilot revs up, and with an absolute lack of ferocity, with akind of gentlemanly conviction, he hits every target.   So my hope is that this party will take the tax andspending issue to the people -- because the people are on ourside. And sometimes you only make progress in a negotiationwhen you end it. You remember when Ronald Reagan let theSoviets, in one of their big flamboyant rejections of theU.S. position, walk away from the arms talks. It was a bigbreak, big news, headlines that said &quot;Arms Talks Collapse.&quot;Reagan was criticized, as usual. But he said, in his sunnyway, &quot;Don't worry, they'll come back.&quot; And they did.   A second issue on which the people trust us -- an issuewhich ought by rights to be ours -- is crime. You all knowthe facts, the statistics, how crime most grieviously hurtsthe poor and middle class. I would add only that this is anissue that resonates powerfully with my generation, the babyboomers. We grew up during the great explosion of crime inAmerica -- grew up hearing our parents say, wistfully, &quot;Wedidn't even have to lock our doors at night.&quot; We're nostalgicfor what we never knew.   Books like &quot;In Cold Blood,&quot; movies like &quot;The BostonStrangler&quot; infused our art and imaginations when we wereyoung -- and we have children now, and are afraid. WeRepublicans must be the leading anti-crime party. There arethose who worry about the departure of communism as a cuttingissue. But, for those who want to help the oppressed and thehelpless, in domestic terms, crime is the communism of the'90s.   Another issue: I will tell you frankly that I believecorruption -- the political corruption of our great cities,the abuses of the machines, a story so constant and pervasivethat it's always in the papers in New York, but on page 12because it's not news anymore -- this is another great issuefor us. We are ripe for a Teddy Roosevelt or two -- we areripe to seize this issue, because it speaks of the crumblingof the cities, the anxiety of the suburbs and the abuse ofthe poor. The machines are Democratic -- the corruption isDemocratic -- and a poor woman who spends two hours waitingfor a city-run ambulance when her husband has a heart attackis a victim who deserves our attention. She and others likeher will, in time, join us if we begin to speak forcefullyfor their interests.   Another issue, a delicate one, abortion. Lee Atwater isright -- we are the party of the big tent -- and we oldroustabouts stick together as much as we can. If we are to bea modern, viable party then we know that debate anddissension must be a part of us. We care about ideas and canargue for justice. We have room for disagreement, we don'tshun people for being politically incorrect.   But I will tell you that I feel strongly that we mustcontinue to be the party that speaks against abortion, thatspeaks to the conscience of the nation.   I think that no one, pro- or anti-, is entirely 100%comfortable with his or her position on this issue. We all inour hearts have our doubts, and our questions. We all in ourhearts, in our best selves, in our private lives, leanagainst abortion.   Both George Bush and Ronald Reagan have said, eloquently,that abortion on demand coarsens us as a people. You arefamiliar with their arguments. But I have a hunch. Thetechnology of abortion is changing, and more and more it willcome down to one woman, or one couple, standing alone anddeciding. And if we are the party that tells her, or them,no, rethink it, think twice and three times -- they will notresent it.   I think the national defense is still a potent issue,because the American people have common sense. They knowperfect peace and lasting tranquility have never happened inthe history of man and likely never will. A strong Americadefense is still the greatest peace-preserving force in thehistory of man. Fifty years without a world war -- it wasAmerican strength, and the taxes sacrificed by the Americanpeople to maintain it -- that did that. And when somethingworks, don't be in such a hurry to make radical change.   Another issue looms on the horizon, coming ever closer. Wemust make a connection with America's new immigrants. So manyof them hold the enduring values for which we stand, and yetthose values do not necessarily translate into Republicanallegiance by any means. I do not know what is the modernequivalent of the local political club -- my people becameDemocrats originally because the local Democratic boss madesure you had a turkey at Christmas -- I don't know what isthe modern equivalent of that presence, but it would be inour interests to figure it out.   And a word, in closing, on what I think is, right now, agreat challenge to us as a party. It's subtle, in a way. It'sthat, after 10 years in power, the people will come to see usas the Washington Party, when it is we who have opposed themischief and machinations and self-interest of that town.   We are not the party that splits the difference with theDemocrats in big rooms on the Hill, we're not the &quot;insiderparty,&quot; we are not the party of the bureaucracy, of thefederal government, of centralized power of Washington. Weare the opposition in power. We forget this at our peril.   And so what we are talking about this fall, in 1990, inevery congressional race and state Senate contest, is thecontinuance of our right and ability to govern this nation --this great and moving nation, this most generous country onearth, this most yearning place -- a party, still, worthy ofthe people, protector of their interests -- a party thatkeeps the faith, that remembers we are at our best when webelieve.   If we only remember what we believe we will own the '90s-- and we will be right, and we will win.   ---   Miss Noonan, who wrote speeches for President Reagan andfor George Bush, is the author of &quot;What I Saw at theRevolution: A Political Life in the Reagan Era,&quot; (RandomHouse, 1990). This is adapted from a speech she gave Fridayto the Republican National Commmittee in Chicago.</TEXT></DOC>