<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910225-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>910225-0008.</DOCID><HL>   WAR IN THE GULF: The Ground Campaign   ---   Allies Drive to Kuwait City;   Republican Guards Await   ---   U.S. Aides Say Big Question   Is Fighting Capability   Of the Elite Iraqi Units   ----   By Andy Pasztor and David Rogers   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Pentagon officials privately warned that thebloodiness of the ground war won't become apparent until anallied strike force of more than 1,300 tanks swings throughsouthern Iraq and tries to surround Saddam Hussein's eliteRepublican Guard units.   Military planners expressed the concern while celebratinga seemingly triumphant first day in the ground campaign ofOperation Desert Storm. American and allied troopsencountered only scattered resistance while thrusting northin three broad assaults -- along the coast to Kuwait City,across the sand-dune barricades and minefields spanningKuwait's southern border, and into Iraq, where the RepublicanGuards await.</LP><TEXT>   As ground forces advanced -- capturing more than 8,000Iraqis prisoners, by some accounts -- other attacks came fromabove. Army paratroopers dropped inside Kuwait while hundredsof helicopters from the 101st Airborne drove deep into Iraqitself, where troops seized land to be used as an apparentstaging and supply area for later attacks. U.S. ships andplanes stepped up bombardment of Iraqi positions despite badweather, suppressing Iraqi attempts to slow the groundadvance with artillery and antitank fire.   Officials said Defense Secretary Dick Cheney toldPresident Bush yesterday evening that Kuwait City is expectedto be under allied control shortly, perhaps within a day ortwo.   Taken together, 13 countries, including Kuwait, Britain,Syria and Saudi Arabia, participated in what is believed tobe the largest combined air, land and sea offensive operationsince World War II, with some units racing more than 30 milesinto enemy territory during the first day. Initial fieldreports concerning U.S. casualties were confusing, rangingfrom less than 12 to more than 75 soldiers killed or wounded.   The biggest question about the allied battle plan remainedthe fighting capability and will of the Republican Guarddivisions hunkered down in southern Iraq, just north ofKuwait. One high-ranking Pentagon official said portions ofthe massive allied armored corps late yesterday were stilllooping around the western tip of Iraqi defenses and probablywouldn't engage the main body of the Republican Guard for atleast a day or two.   &quot;Once our tanks get there, we're not sure how much fightthey will have left in them,&quot; the official said. &quot;More thananything else, that will determine the level of U.S.casualties.&quot;   U.S. Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf has never hidden his desireto bloody the Guard, and recently he said privately that thebombardment of bridges over the Tigris and Euphrates Riverswas designed to cut off not only supplies but also avenues ofretreat for Saddam Hussein's best units, according to U.S.officials. &quot;If you break the back of the Guard,&quot; said oneperson familiar with the commander's thinking, &quot;you eliminateIraq as a power in the region.&quot;   Determined to liberate Kuwait City quickly andsimultaneously strike at the heart of Saddam Hussein's mostpotent forces further to the north, allied commanders simplyare bypassing huge chunks of the Iraqi army.   During the first day of the ground war, U.S. Marines,often wearing chemical suits and traveling in longsingle-file convoys, breached troublesome mine fields andbarbed wire through several lanes and took 4,700 Iraqiprisoners, according to reporters on the scene. The Marinesreportedly suffered a total of 20 killed and injuredsoldiers.   But contrary to some reports, Pentagon officials said theMarines hadn't launched a major amphibious assault. Whetheror not the more than 16,000 seaborne Marines come ashore,said Rear Adm. John LaPlante, commander of the amphibioustask force, their mission is to freeze Iraqi divisions inplace so they are unable to move to counter allied forcesmaneuvering on the ground.   When the allies finally enter Kuwait's capital, reportedlyrocked by a series of explosions and fires yesterday, Arabsoldiers are expected to take the lead in securing the cityand rounding up prisoners.   Commanders announced that more than 5,500 Iraqi prisonersalready were in custody after the first hours of the groundwar, though some military officers in Washington later saidthe total may have climbed above 8,000. &quot;The puzzle for meremains why this army doesn't fight,&quot; said Rep. Lee Hamilton(D., Ind.), chairman of the House Foreign Affairssubcommittee on the Middle East.   There were numerous reports of Iraqi troops falling backand desperately searching for anything white to signal theirwillingness to surrender. Officials said allied forcescontinued to drop leaflets, use loudspeaker-equippedhelicopters and rely on other methods to urge Iraqi fightersto surrender.   But despite their evident confidence, U.S. and alliedmilitary leaders cautioned that major obstacles remain. &quot;Thefirst Iraqi forces that have been encountered are the leastcapable and with the lowest morale,&quot; British DefenseSecretary Tom King said yesterday at a London newsconference.   Once the Republican Guard units decide to leave theirdefensive positions, for instance, they could inflictsignificant casualties on the advancing allied forces. IfSaddam Hussein opts to try to save a big chunk of his besttroops and orders them to withdraw, President Bush and hismilitary advisers could face a difficult decision of how farto pursue them into Iraq.   The battle plan against the Guard, though, is designed tominimize U.S. casualties by relying on air power to killIraqi tanks from long distances before engaging the enemy onthe ground.   Officials said the allied war plan calls for no deeperpenetration of Iraq than the Euphrates River, but themovement yesterday suggests a pincers movement to isolate theGuard. The French Sixth Light Armored Division, along withheavier U.S. armored units, surged north into Iraq, appearingintent on blocking the Guard from withdrawing into thenorthern two-thirds of Iraq.   &quot;We have no interest in occupying Kuwait,&quot; DefenseSecretary Cheney said yesterday on CBS-TV's &quot;Face The Nation,but &quot;there won't be any sanctuary inside Iraq for thoseforces who've been involved in occupying Kuwait.&quot;   Secretary Cheney and other Pentagon officials speculatedthat Iraqi forces may have been too disorganized and undertoo much pressure to use any of the chemical weapons storedclose to the front lines. There was relief at the results,but senior field commanders went out of their way to warnabout about the dangers of overconfidence. &quot;It's going verywell -- it's gone too smoothly,&quot; Marine Lt. Gen. WalterBoomer told reporters. &quot;The further we move, the harder thefight will become.&quot;   Another U.S. officer cautioned that celebration should becontained until the majority of Guard units are neutralized.&quot;You've always got to be alert to {Saddam Hussein} strikingout in some way. As soon as you get too comfortable, you gethurt.&quot;   The very speed of the allied advance, in fact, couldcreate problems down the road. U.S. pilots, for example,spoke of targets and missions being changed at the lastminute because the front was advancing so quickly. Slip-upscould result in U.S. pilots bombing friendly units.   Processing the anticipated huge number of prisoners --perhaps more than 100,000 -- also could hamper advancing U.S.and allied forces, as could delays in moving artillery tokeep up with the tanks. Furthermore, shortages of fuel trucksand other logistics bottlenecks could pose difficulties forthe strike force rumbling toward the Guard.   Though the allied offensive is described as beginning at 4a.m. local time, some front elements had already crossed intosouthern Kuwait by last Friday by exploiting openings or&quot;seams&quot; in the Iraqi line created by weeks of extensive airraids. &quot;The Iraqis are falling back,&quot; one U.S. official said,hours before the full-scale offensive began.   Some ground units served to probe for openings in theIraqi line, while the allies enjoyed an extraordinary abilityto see the shape of the battlefield before them. Air power isenhanced by an array of radar and satellite systems, as wellas unmanned drones capable of flying over enemy positions andsending back images of targets.   Even where the technology isn't so modern, the desertclimate can give the allies an advantage. When the sands coolat night, for example, infrared scopes are able to target notonly the still warm metal of Iraqi armored units but also thesignature of a human body against the desert floor. Where theIraqis have stood their ground, the advantage of the U.S. airattack is still immense. The FB-111 pilots have learned tooperate in tandem, with one racing in to drop a bomb, while asecond stands out of range of anti-aircraft fire and uses hisplane's laser system to guide the &quot;smart&quot; weapon to thetarget.   ---   John Connor in Dhahran contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>