<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900814-0076</DOCNO><DOCID>900814-0076.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Judge Moves Forward With Plans   For Class-Action Asbestos Lawsuit   ----   By Wade Lambert and Martha Brannigan   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   MVL EPI TOPPC</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal judge pushed forward with plans for aclass-action lawsuit likely to benefit former asbestos makerswho say they are running out of money.   In federal court in Brooklyn, New York, U.S. DistrictJudge Jack B. Weinstein also said he expects that funds fromthose companies will be combined with the Manville trust tosettle the asbestos personal-injury claims. And he indicatedthat he will take a hard line on plaintiffs' attorney fees.</LP><TEXT>   The move was the first step in carrying out a joint effortannounced by 10 federal judges Friday to come up with anationwide resolution of the asbestos suits. The backlog ofasbestos personal-injury cases across the country now totalsabout 90,000, and tens of thousands more are expected in theyears ahead. Most of the victims are former construction andshipyard workers who developed cancer or respiratoryillnesses years after their exposure to the insulationmaterial.   The motion asking Judge Weinstein to approve a classaction was made by Eagle-Picher Industries Inc. ofCincinnati, which claims that it and some other defendantsdon't have enough money to continue fighting asbestos casesindividually.   &quot;We believe there is a general risk that the assets ofEagle-Picher and other defendants may be insufficient to meetthe claims,&quot; said Arvin Maskin, an attorney for theEagle-Picher.   Under Friday's agreement, the class action before JudgeWeinstein can include as many as six asbestos defendants, ifit is shown that as a group they indeed lack enough assets topay future claims. Judge Weinstein set a hearing for tomorrowto begin examining the financial condition of Eagle-Picherand the other defendants. He said the analysis would becompleted within three weeks. He also appointed formerfederal judge Marvin E. Frankel to determine whetherdefendants' funds are inadequate.   Although several companies have been mentioned as possibleco-defendants along with Eagle-Picher, none has asked to beincluded in the case. Judge Weinstein has authority over theManville trust, which he has ordered to come up with newfinancing to overcome its cash shortfall. The trust wasformed by Manville Corp. as part of its bankruptcy-courtreorganization in 1986 to pay asbestos claims.   Gene Locks, an asbestos plaintiffs' attorney inPhiladelphia, asked Judge Weinstein to reject Eagle-Picher'smotion, questioning whether the company actually lacks funds.He said the class action will reduce the amount of moneyavailable to asbestos victims, and instead suggested that thecompanies should turn to Chapter 11 protection under thefederal Bankruptcy Code.   Judge Weinstein, however, said he doesn't favor &quot;pushinginto bankruptcy major segments of our industrial base. . . .We want to avoid forcing companies into bankruptcy if wecan.&quot; The judge also said that even though a company mayqualify for the class action, it doesn't mean the company isinsolvent.   To reduce costs, the judge said plaintiffs' attorneyswould have to accept cuts in their fees. &quot;It is intolerable,given the limited funds, for two-thirds of the availableassets to go to transaction costs,&quot; mainly legal fees, thejudge said.   ---   IMMIGRATION ACT section is declared unconstitutional.   The amendment, aimed at curbing drug trafficking, allowslegal aliens who have served prison sentences for certainfelonies to be jailed again -- indefinitely and without achance for bail -- while deportation proceedings are underway.   But in federal court in Manhattan, Judge Gerard Goettelruled that the requirement violates the U.S. Constitution bynot granting defendants the right to possible release onbail. Although the government's intentions may have beenlegitimate in fighting drug sales, the means used to enforcethe law &quot;are excessive and violate {the defendant's}substantive dueprocess rights,&quot; the judge ruled.   &quot;A bail hearing wouldn't pose significant fiscal oradministrative burdens on the government and would greatlyminimize the risk of erroneous deprivation of a libertyinterest,&quot; Judge Goettel wrote in his opinion. The case isone of the first to challenge the regulation'sconstitutionality.   Arthur Helton, an attorney with the Lawyers Committee forHuman Rights, which deals with immigration issues, said thedecision &quot;is a judicial warning that neither Congress nor the{Immigration and Naturalization Service} will be able to takeshortcuts in immigration law enforcement that fly in the faceof constitutional entitlements.&quot;   Carolyn Goldfarb, an attorney for the prisoner who filedthe case, said she will seek a bail hearing soon. If notreleased on bail, her client is expected to spend more timein jail during the deportation process than the eight monthshe served on his criminal conviction, she said.   Timothy Macfall, an assistant U.S. attorney who handledthe case, said the government hasn't decided whether toappeal.   ---   DEATH PENALTY case challenged on grounds of racialdiscrimination.   With aid from the NAACP Legal Defense and EducationalFund, a black murder defendant in Georgia is trying to blockthe use of the death penalty in his case, arguing that theprosecutor has systematically discriminated against blacks.   The fund asserts the case of William Anthony Brooks, whois charged with killing a white female, is of nationalsignificance because it is &quot;a model of new defense strategiesthat seek to prove purposeful discrimination in an entirecriminal justice jurisdiction&quot; to meet the tougher standardof proof now required by the U.S. Supreme Court under a 1987case, McCleskey vs. Kemp.   But attorneys with the National Association for theAdvancement of Colored People were chagrined at a rulingyesterday by Superior Court Judge Hugh Lawson, which said thedefense, in asserting racial discrimination, could presentevidence only of discrimination by the current prosecutor --Muscogee County District Attorney Douglas Pullen -- and notof alleged discrimination by two previous district attorneyswho had been in office during the 17 years that Mr. Brooks'case has dragged on. His earlier conviction was overturned ona technicality by the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.Judge Lawson &quot;gave a very narrow reading&quot; of the McCleskeyruling, said Daniel Fleshler, a spokesman for the fund.   In its 1987 ruling, the Supreme Court, rejecting a majorchallenge to the death penalty, refused to accept historical,statistical evidence of possible racial bias in deathsentences as proof that an individual defendant's rights wereviolated. The Supreme Court ruling means that death-penaltydefendants must prove on a case by case basis that theysuffered discrimination at the hands of a &quot;decision maker,&quot;such as a judge, jury or prosecutor, in order to prove thatthe use of the death penalty in their case is raciallymotivated.   At a hearing in Columbus, Ga., today, defense attorneysplan to present evidence that the prosecution, among otherthings, systematically weeds out potential black jurors fromjury panels that already include few blacks.   The defense will also argue that the prosecutor focuseshis energies on prosecuting crimes against white victims,giving short shrift to black victims who suffer adisproportionate number of the area's crimes.   Mr. Pullen, the prosecutor, said the charge ofdiscrimination was an attempt to divert attention from thecrime committed.   Asked whether race entered into the state's decision toseek the death penalty, Mr. Pullen said: &quot;There might havebeen a time when that would have been a significant factor,but no more. This crime offended the whole community.&quot;   ---   JUDGE BARS U.S. from enforcing restrictions on &quot;phone sex&quot;companies.   Under a law that takes effect this week, companies thatcharge a fee for sexually explicit telephone conversationsare required to take additional steps to make unauthorizeduse of the phone sex services more difficult. But a federaljudge in Manhattan ruled that the restrictions, known as theHelms Amendment for the law's sponsor, Sen. Jesse Helms, areunconstitutionally vague and too severe.   &quot;The enforcement of the Helms Amendment presents a threatof imminent, irreparable harm to First Amendment freedoms,&quot;said U.S. Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. in his order.   The law requires phone companies to block access to adultphone services unless a customer specifically requests theability to make such calls from his or herphone. The law alsorequires that extra measures be taken to deter children fromcalling the services, such as having the caller use apassword or pay with a credit card.   Civil liberties lawyers have argued that the law infringedon constitutionally protected speech between consentingadults. The judge said Congress could come up with a lessrestrictive way to keep children from using the services. Healso said the law is illegally vague because it doesn'tspecify what constitutes the &quot;indecent&quot; speech it is meant torestrict.   The U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan said it isreviewing the case to determine whether to appeal.   ---   FOOTBALL CARD DISPUTE is settled by the NFL and Topps.   In a joint announcement, Topps Co. and National FootballLeague Properties Inc., the league's licensing arm, statedthat there was an amicable settlement of the suit Toppsbrought against the National Football League on June 28.   The suit by Brooklyn-based Topps accused the NFL andNational Football League Properties of an &quot;unlawful attemptto block Topps&quot; from selling its 1990 series of professionalfootball player cards.   The suit alleged that by refusing to renew Topp'slicensing contract, the league and NFL Properties sought &quot;toeliminate Topps as a competitor to Pro Set Inc.&quot; Pro Set,which is also licensed by the NFL, introduced its first cardsunder the trademarks &quot;NFL Pro Set&quot; and &quot;The Official NFLCard&quot; prior to the 1989 season. They were, according toTopps, the top-selling football cards in 1989.   Under terms of the settlement, a three-year licenseagreement has been signed which calls for Topps to continueto market its football player cards as an official licensee.Topps football player cards will be on sale this month.   ---   Mark Robichaux contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>