<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920221-0125</DOCNO><DOCID>920221-0125.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>02/21/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   A PANEL RECOMMENDED that breast implants be allowed butwith restrictions.   The FDA advisory group voted for the first time to limitthe number of women who will be able to obtain the siliconegel implants for cosmetic breast enlargement. But it saidwomen needing reconstructive surgery for cancer ordeformities should be able to get implants. The panel saidthat there is &quot;no concrete evidence&quot; the devices causedisease but that more study is needed. FDA chief Kessler mustrule on the issue within 60 days.</LP><TEXT>   Dow Corning, which will decide soon whether to resumeimplant production, said the panel's conclusions would be&quot;extremely confusing&quot; to patients.   ---   ISRAELI TANKS PUSHED into southern Lebanon, prompting aU.N. protest.   The Israeli troops breached U.N. barricades in a drive tohit Shiite Muslim guerrillas who have bombarded Israel withrockets. Prime Minister Shamir, while ruling out anyrepetition of Israeli's 1982 invasion of Lebanon, said hissoldiers would keep up the assault until they halt theHezbollah rocket attacks. The incursion drew a sharp protestfrom U.N. chief Boutros-Ghali, who called for an immediatepullout.   Shamir won a vote to retain leadership of the ruling Likudparty. He will challenge new Labor party leader Rabin in anational election June 23.   ---   SOUTH AFRICA'S LEADER SET a whites-only vote on endingapartheid.   Reformist President de Klerk, in the wake of a by-electionvictory by a party seeking to reinstate apartheid, vowed toquit if he loses the referendum, expected before the end ofMarch. His action was seen as an attempt to outmaneuverpro-apartheid forces while he still has the support of mostwhites. The nation's finance chief warned that Pretoria wouldface renewed sanctions if whites tried to bring backapartheid.   The African National Congress, the main black oppositiongroup, denounced the referendum plan, saying it delaysprogress toward democracy.   ---   A peacekeeping operation was outlined for Cambodia by U.N.officials, who said they plan to dispatch at least 22,000foreign staff there. The effort, involving military, policeand civilian personnel, would cost $2 billion over 18 months.Under terms of a treaty signed last October, the U.N. willsupervise elections scheduled for April 1993.   ---   A Libyan judge announced he would resign as head ofLibya's investigation of the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing, andhe predicted that his action would end Tripoli's inquiry intothe 1988 terrorist attack.   ---   Samuel Singletary pleaded guilty to tax evasion related toa Reagan-era influence-peddling scandal at HUD. Singletary, alongtime associate of former housing chief Pierce, faces amaximum penalty of five years' imprisonment for the felonycount. Under the agreement, Singletary will cooperate with aprobe of the scandal.   ---   Armenia and Azerbaijan took a step toward resolving theirbattle for control of the mountainous enclave ofNagorno-Karabakh by agreeing that an immediate cease-fire wasneeded. Following a seven-hour meeting in Moscow, foreignministers of the two neighboring states expressed hope theycould resolve the conflict.   ---   A U.N. team will begin blowing up hundreds of leakingchemical weapons today at a damaged Iraqi bunker. The head ofthe team said rockets filled with the nerve gas sarin wouldbe destroyed on site because of dangers involved in movingthem.   ---   Quality standards were unveiled by the government togovern the operation of 200,000 medical labs. The rulesrequire labs that perform moderately or highly complex teststo be inspected at least every two years.   ---   India's ruling Congress party won Wednesday's legislativeelections in Punjab, where intimidation by Sikh militantskept voter turnout at the lowest level in Indian history. TheCongress party also was set to win 12 of Punjab's 13parliamentary seats.   ---   The House Judiciary Committee passed a bill that wouldfreeze forced repatriations of Haitian refugees for sixmonths. Meanwhile, the U.S. is trying to decide what to doabout 230 Haitians who may be eligible for political asylumbut who also have tested positive for the AIDS virus,officials said.   ---   Three research teams pinpointed the gene that causes themost common form of muscular dystrophy, the latest in aseries of discoveries that are expected to lead to earlydiagnosis and perhaps eventual treatment. A report by one ofthe teams appears in today's issue of the journal Cell.   ---   North Korea's leader met with officials of South Korea anddenied his nation was building a nuclear bomb. But two daysof talks in Pyongyang failed to produce any accord to verifyKim Il Sung's assurances. He also repeated his demand thatthe U.S. withdraw its troops from South Korea.   ---   Died: Roberto D'Aubuisson, 48, rightist politician in ElSalvador widely accused of directing death squads in theearly 1980s, in San Salvador, of throat cancer.</TEXT></DOC>