<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910926-0014</DOCNO><DOCID>910926-0014.</DOCID><HL>   A Palestinian State With Full Israeli Security   ----   By Mark Helprin</HL><DATE>09/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)ISRAEL (ISR)IRAQ (IZ)JORDAN (JD)LIBYA (LY)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)SYRIA (SY)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   Six months after allowing two Iraqi Republican Guarddivisions to escape back into their role of ensuring SaddamHussein's political future, the president is ready to commitAmerican forces to deal with the torrent of Saddam's lies anddouble-dealing. A year ago, Mr. Bush was unceremoniouslybetrayed by King Hussein. Today, he is pushing Israel toovercome its chronic inability to trust.   The confusions of America's Middle East policy areespecially unfortunate now that, with the Soviet Union fadingfrom the equation, the U.S. is free to call the shots. Thepresident's Middle East advisers should have the memories ofidiots savants and the reflexes of gladiators, but they seemto ignore history even less than a year old, and they blindlywaste unprecedented opportunities.</LP><TEXT>   The opportunity they are now set to squander is that ofthe occupied territories. Though they have focused on thecurrent pace of Israeli settlement, this has little bearingon the fundamental issues. In a quarter of a century, Israelhas placed 100,000 Jews in Judea and Samaria. In the next twomonths how many more can join them? Certainly not enough toalter the eventual disposition of the occupied West Bank bystrengthening Israel's hold.   The U.S. has allowed Israel and the Arabs to frame thequestion of the occupied territories, and in framing thequestion solely to their own advantage, both have obscured asimple and just solution.   Israel has a good historical claim to all of the West Bankof the Jordan, but the existence of 900,000 Palestinians inthe disputed precincts makes historical argument irrelevanton humanitarian grounds. Though a case can be made that afteryears of jingoism and terrorism the Palestinians do notdeserve a state, self-determination is a natural rightdespite disqualifications. This was certainly the philosophyof the Allies regarding Germany and Japan, and it has been asuccess.   On the other hand, even if statesmen dare not say it, anypromises on the part of Syria or the Palestinians to respectIsrael's existence are worthless, and their participation ina settlement would be nothing more than a maneuver toposition themselves for the eventual destruction of theJewish state. When the Arab states other than Egypt speak ofthe &quot;occupied territories,&quot; they mean all of Palestine, andevery Middle East expert in the State Department knows thatthis is so.   How then does one reconcile these two conditions, the needfor the Palestinians to finish with the occupation and havetheir own state (which is what the U.S. is pushing for inregard to the West Bank, however coy it may be at themoment), and Israel's need for protection from obvious andimplacable Arab hostility?   A solution has existed since the first day of theoccupation. It is simultaneously workable and the only thingthat will work. It gives Israel real security and thePalestinians a state, and it is not dependent upondismembering Jordan, as logical as that may be. It is how theconflict might have been settled from 1967 onward had theArabs been more forthcoming or had Israel chosen to actunilaterally, and it is what the U.S. should be promotingrather than prostrating itself before Syria.   The U.S. has yet to recognize that although Israel doesnot need all of the former Jordanian territory on the WestBank, it does need some of it. By avoiding this simpledistinction, extremists who seek Israel's aggrandizement dragunwillingly in train those who want to preserve itsexistence, and extremists who seek to destroy it dragunwillingly in train those who are moved by the plight of thePalestinians. On the other hand, insisting upon andemphasizing this distinction breaks the power of the zealotsto attract.   In the quarter of a century since Israel captured Judeaand Samaria, the Jordan River has lost much of its utility asa military barrier. To keep a non-militarized Palestinianstate true to its promises, the occupation of all theterritory between Israel's coastal plain and the Jordan isunnecessary; the purpose can be served by modern sensors,airborne command and control, and stand-off weapons.   Israel needs approximately 10 miles of strategic deptheast of the former green line, to take it to roughly the3,000-foot level of the central plateau. With a foothold onthe high ground, room to maneuver, and remote sensing, Israelcould ensure that the first tank to cross the Jordan wouldalso be the last.   Far more important and as an adjunct to these militaryarrangements would be an initiative by the major powers tomaintain Israel's stocks of first-line weaponry at a levelsufficient to counter those of the Arab confrontation states.This is possible for the first time since 1955, when Sovietweapons shipments to Egypt shattered the TripartiteDeclaration by which the U.S., Britain and France hadattempted to regulate the area's balance of power bycontrolling the supply of arms.   The greatest danger to Israel's security is that acoalition of Arab states will amass enough planes to negateIsrael's qualitative aerial advantage and overwhelm theIsraeli Air Force even while losing most of its own planes.Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Libya together have threetimes the number of Israel's combat aircraft. It is notinconceivable, especially in light of inter-Arab securityneeds and an eventual Iraqi military resurrection, that theimbalance would increase to the point of overcoming Israel'squalitative edge. If the U.S., Britain and France, withcooperation from the Soviet Union, were to guaranteecontinuous arms parity for Israel, that danger woulddisappear. A precedent for this exists in the Greco-Turkishaid ratio.   In addition, the U.S. can conclude a treaty of mutualdefense with Israel and might share tripwire bases -- an airbase in the Negev and a naval base at Haifa -- that wouldgreatly augment not only Israel's security but America's aswell. Israel has always been proud of its self-reliance, butthen again so have the British, and the U.S. has a number ofbases in Britain. Cooperative defense research andproduction, the pre-positioning of American weapons inIsrael, and, lastly, its recognition by the Arab states wouldfinally free Israel from its persistent and very real fear ofdestruction.   In return the Palestinians would get a state that includedtwo-thirds of the area of the occupied territories on theWest Bank, two-thirds the population, all of its majorcities, a fully contiguous territory, unfettered access toJordan and the Arab world, access to Islamic holy places inJerusalem in exchange for granting access to Jewish andChristian holy places in their new state, and, with thegrowth of peace and trust, the use of Israeli ports, a routeto Egypt and North Africa, trade with their former enemy, andintegration in the world economy. Although many Arab villageswould be annexed, a large proportion of their residents mightchoose to participate in a population exchange with theIsraeli settlements that would be forced to abdicate theirpositions on the Palestinian side of the new lines.   With the growth of peace and trust, and the assurance ofthe military arrangements, the issue of the Golan could thenbe revived -- but not until then. Syria wants the Golanpurely for military advantage. As it has already gained asolid position on Israel's northern flank, in Lebanon, itshould be obliged to wait until it resembles more an ordinarystate seeking normal relations than it does a cat hunting abird.   As for Jerusalem, Israel will suffer its own destructionrather than cede its ancient capital. It tries very hard tomake this understood, and it is not bluffing.   Despite the fact that a plan of this nature offers Israelreal security and the Palestinians a state,full-annexationists in Israel will reject it. So, too, willmany Palestinians, sensing that its terms will not create ajumping-off place for the conquest of Israel, but rather onlywhat they habitually claim to want, when speaking to Europeand the U.S.   The rejectionists in both camps, however, have beentemporarily weakened, and one of the most intriguing aspectsof the plan is that it can be accomplished by Israel, withthe aid of the U.S. and the Europeans, almost unilaterally.Of course, the Arabs will see this as evidence that all isunfairly weighted toward Israel, but the unilateral move isin fact a withdrawal. The first steps have been taken, inthat the Soviet influx will break Israel's dependence on WestBank labor, and the intifada has severed the few links that,over a quarter of a century, had been forged between the twocommunities. These are the kind of opportunities that theU.S. is currently squandering by leaning either to one sideor the other and calling the sum total &quot;between.&quot;   If the U.S. is to take advantage of the vacuum of power inthe Middle East, it must do so more intelligently andimaginatively than has heretofore been the case. And if it isto exert pressure, its justification must be the kind ofsolution in which a wide central boulevard cuts through thetwisting warrens of extremism.   ---   Mr. Helprin, a novelist and contributing editor of theJournal, is a graduate of Harvard's Center for Middle EasternStudies and served in the Israeli infantry and air force.</TEXT></DOC>