<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900827-0042</DOCNO><DOCID>900827-0042.</DOCID><HL>   U.S. Is Signaling   Readiness to Set   Talks With Iraq   ---   As Sanctions Are Tightened,   Diplomatic Path to End   Standoff Is Being Sought   ----   By Robert S. Greenberger and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   After three weeks of saber rattling, the Bushadministration began signaling that with economic sanctionsnow in place it is willing to look for a diplomatic way outof its standoff with Iraq's Saddam Hussein.   Tensions also eased somewhat in the Mideast over theweekend, as Iraq reversed its decision and permitted 55 U.S.diplomatic dependents who had traveled to Baghdad from Kuwaitto leave Iraq. The Associated Press reported that 52 membersof the group crossed into Turkey last night. Three maledependents of Kuwait Embassy staffers reportedly weredetained by Iraqi border guards. Iraqi troops also didn'tmake any move to oust the U.S. diplomats remaining in thebeseiged U.S. Embassy in Kuwait City.</LP><TEXT>   But the potential for confrontation still remains. TheUnited Nations Security Council over the weekend authorizedthe world's navies to use force to put teeth in the tradeembargo against Iraq. (However, the Soviet Union, which hadsupported the resolution, said it wouldn't use force.) And 54male U.S. diplomatic personnel, who had left Kuwait for Iraq,were in the U.S. embassy in Baghdad and not allowed to leaveIraq.   Brent Scowcroft, President Bush's national securityadviser, said yesterday on ABC-TV's &quot;This Week with DavidBrinkley&quot; that it would be &quot;clearly acceptable&quot; for UnitedNations Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar to beginefforts to negotiate an end to the crisis. The U.N. officialalso got a green light over the weekend from Saddam Hussein,who welcomed the U.N. call for negotiations. The U.N. chiefreportedly will meet with Iraq's foreign minister in JordanThursday.   Mr. Scowcroft, who refrained from making the harshpersonal attacks on Iraq's Hussein made earlier by PresidentBush, reiterated that Iraq must withdraw from Kuwait, restoreits government and free foreigners being held hostage. But healso began laying some domestic political groundwork tojustify the military buildup by asserting that if asettlement is reached, the U.S. would have gotten more forits display of military muscle than just a return to thestatus quo.   &quot;There will still be a fundamentally different situationin that area, in that collective action will have been shownto work against a case of aggression,&quot; he said. &quot;And,therefore, the situation will not be the same afterwards.&quot;Earlier, administration officials had given the impressionthat Saddam Hussein must go.   The public signals reflect a private belief of theadministration that it isn't necessary, or perhaps evendesirable, to use the current crisis to push out SaddamHussein. The Bush administration isn't sure that anysuccessor would be better; indeed, Saddam Hussein's topdeputy, Taha Yassin Ramadan, is known to be equally tough,and many of the top officers who fought in the war with Iranalso are hardline.   The U.S. shift in tone reflects an assessment byadministration officials that Saddam Hussein is squirming asa result of the big American military buildup and U.N.-backedembargo. While administration officials spent the past threeweeks comparing Saddam Hussein to Hitler, Mr. Scowcroftyesterday seemed to be appealing to his sense of reason.   &quot;The course of prudence for a leader in this situation,&quot;Mr. Scowcroft said, referring to the squeeze on Iraq, wouldbe to give in to U.S. demands and begin negotiations. And,noting that Saddam Hussein recently agreed to a settlementwith Iran that gave up all he had won in the Iran-Iraq war,Mr. Scowcroft said: &quot;He's shown that he can be a realist whenit needs to be done.&quot;   Mr. Scowcroft said he believes that Saddam Hussein &quot;iscasting about for a way out of the box in which he findshimself.&quot; The national security adviser also said that onceIraq met the U.S. requirements, any grievances between Kuwaitand Iraq that led to the invasion in the first place could benegotiated.   John Kelly, the assistant secretary of state for theMideast, underscored that the U.S. is willing to talk toIraq. Yesterday on NBC's &quot;Meet the Press,&quot; he said the seniorU.S. diplomat currently in Baghdad &quot;has been talking to theIraqis&quot; and is willing to continue to hold talks. Theadministration also is signaling privately that it is willingto hold talks at a higher level.   The administration still calculates that diplomacy won'tsucceed unless economic sanctions continue to squeeze Iraq.And in pursuit of that goal, the U.S. is likely to beginstopping, boarding and possibly even firing on Iraqi ships inthe next few days. The Bush administration had been holdingoff on full-scale naval interdiction awaiting passage of theU.N. resolution explicitly authorizing use of naval force toenforce the trade embargo.   The Arabian peninsula country of Yemen could be a focalpoint as the U.S. steps up its naval interdiction efforts.The administration believes that Iraq had hoped to use Yemenas a trans-shipment point for its oil to circumvent the tradeembargo, sending oil tankers there to unload oil that thencould be intermingled with other oil and shipped to the worldmarkets anonymously.   Under pressure from the U.S. and other nations, Yemen lastweek forced an Iraqi tanker that was unloading to leave portwith half of its oil still on board, and then refused entryto a second tanker at which the U.S. Navy had fired warningshots. Over the weekend, there were at least three othertankers destined for Yemen. U.S. officials will be watchingclosely to see whether Yemen keeps its word to honor theembargo.   If ships believed to be carrying Iraqi cargo try to eludeU.S. ships, American naval commanders intend to fire at theships' rudders to disable them. But in the case of oiltankers, the ships sometimes are floating so low in the waterthat the rudder isn't visible, and captains are likely todisable such ships by firing at the bridge or at the cableslinking the bridge to the rudder.   The U.S. is hoping these pressures will take their toll onIraq. Although administration officials remain intrigued bythe notion of using the current crisis to knock out Iraq'schemical-weapons and nuclear programs, they worry that theymay get trapped in a prolonged and unpredictable conflict bypursuing such broader goals rather than the short-term goalof forcing Iraq out of Kuwait.   It isn't clear, though, that others in the U.S. or theMiddle East would share the administration's view that such alimited outcome would be a success. Some of America's bestfriends in the region -- particularly Egypt and Saudi Arabia-- want the U.S. to remove Saddam Hussein from power, andsome American analysts suggest that any arrangement that isseen as a draw between Iraq and the U.S. will erode U.S.credibility in the long run.   Yesterday, Mr. Kelly suggested the hope that if the U.S.keeps up the pressure, opposition to Saddam Hussein may beginto develop even in Iraq's repressive society. Referring toHussein's leading Iraq into the Iran-Iraq war, which endedwithout gain, and the Kuwait invasion, which has broughtworld condemnation, Mr. Kelly said Iraqis &quot;must be wonderingwhere he's taking them.&quot;   If the conflict ends short of an all-out war,administration officials envision a scenario in which aUnited Nations force guards the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border,significant stockpiles of American military equipment areleft in Saudi Arabia for use in any future emergency, someAmerican airmen remain based permanently in Saudi Arabia, andthe U.S. assumes a bigger explicit role in protecting otherGulf countries.</TEXT></DOC>