<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900920-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>900920-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Workplace:   Integrity-Test Firms Fear   Report Card by Congress   ----   By Gilbert Fuchsberg   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   Publishers of so-called integrity tests, which employersuse to help screen millions of job-seekers each year, are ina furor over the pending release of a government study thatthey fear could demolish their products.   The study, by the congressional Office of TechnologyAssessment, is expected to cast doubt on whether integritytests work as advertised. In other words, can they accuratelypredict which employees are likely to steal or goof off onthe job?</LP><TEXT>   A damaging report could leave droves of employers in thelurch. An earlier report by the congressional office helpedprompt the banning of most lie-detector tests in theworkplace two years ago. Since then, a growing number ofemployers have turned to the written integrity tests, whichthey now administer to an estimated five million jobapplicants each year.   The report isn't expected until next week, but publishersof the tests have seen draft versions, and the prospect of anegative assessment has panicked them and others who believethe tests are a valid screening tool. Led by a coalition ofdisgruntled testing firms, supporters of the exams have beenfrantically goading government researchers and congressionalaides for 15 months to postpone and alter the study.   They've had some success. The report is a year past dueand has been rewritten dozens of times. It won't be asdamaging as some drafts suggested, say those who've seen thefinal version. But it clearly won't endorse the tests, astheir publishers had hoped. So now they are intensifyingtheir fight, launching an angry, pre-emptive campaign toundermine the congressional offices's credibility.   &quot;There is nothing more that we can gain from a dialogue,&quot;says Ryan A. Kuhn, president of Reid Psychological Systems, aChicago test publisher.   Gathered in their lobbyist's Alexandria, Va., office thisweek, officials of the three largest testing companies --Reid, London House of Park Ridge, Ill., and Stanton Corp. ofCharlotte, N.C. -- cited a three-inch pile of chronologies,charts and critiques they have gathered to use in theircampaign to show a pattern of misconduct by the congressionaloffice and others. They charged that the research agency hasbeen biased and sloppy, that it ignored conflicts of interestamong reviewers of the drafts and that its report will proveto be unscientific and misleading.   &quot;It embarrasses me as a citizen that the government isdoing such shoddy research,&quot; says John W. Jones, vicepresident of research and development at London House.   The technology office allows that it made some mistakesalong the way and that staffing problems have plagued theproject, but denies the publishers' charges and says it hasconfidence in the quality of its final report. Thecongressman who requested the study, Pat Williams (D.,Mont.), says he plans no immediate effort to introducelegislation restricting the tests. He says that challenges tothe report are premature. &quot;I can't presume to know how goodthis study has been before it's been released,&quot; he says.   John Andelin, an assistant director at the technologyoffice who supervised the integrity test study, says thecomments on drafts that the technology office solicited fromtest publishers and others have been &quot;helpful&quot; in improvingthe reports. But he scoffed at what he calls &quot;a lobbyingeffort to kill the report.&quot;   Mr. Andelin adds that some reviewers say the draft reportshaven't been critical enough. &quot;We have people who think weare too harsh and too charitable on almost every issue,&quot; hesays.   The dispute has proven to be unusually heated. &quot;I've seenlobbying by people who are complaining about the report at alevel (of intensity) I've never seen before,&quot; says TomMcNamara, chief of staff to Rep. Don Sundquist (R., Tenn.), amember of the congressional board that oversees thetechnology office.   The office had intended the study to be a modest memo thatwouldn't require the congressional approval mandated formajor studies. But a barrage of complaints from testpublishers persuaded Mr. McNamara and his counterparts todemand regular updates on the project, including the reviewof several separate drafts. Typically, even major studies getjust one formal review.   &quot;It may seem trivial,&quot; Mr. McNamara says. &quot;But we can'tjust allow something that's this controversial to be movedout and produced and given the (technology office's) stamp ofapproval if it's not very well done.&quot;   For months, test publishers have been deluging Washingtonofficials with letter after letter assailing the draftreport. For instance, in a long appeal in July to Sen. OrrinG. Hatch (R., Utah), a member of the technology office'sboard, the coalition of test publishers blasted what itcalled the office's &quot;calculated attempts to produce adocument that is rife with heavy-handed political statements,rather than limited to objective scientific issues.&quot; It addedthat the technology office &quot;is trying to point the debate ina particular direction. That direction is clearlyanti-business.&quot;   At the heart of the dispute are questionnaires that arenow widely used in banks, stores and other workplaces whereconcern about employee theft and dishonesty runs high. Someemployers develop their own tests, but most buy them from oneof several dozen industrial psychologists and small companiesthat make up the $30 million integrity test industry. Reid,Stanton and London House are private concerns and refuse todivulge sales, but together they are believed to controlabout 70% of the market.   The tests typically include questions that ask how peoplefeel about crime and honesty. &quot;Do you always tell the truth?Were you ever tempted to take company merchandise withoutactually taking any? Do you think it is OK to get around thelaw if you don't actually break it?&quot; are sample questionscontained in a brochure promoting one of Reid's exams.   The publishers concede that the tests aren't perfect, butsay data prove that employers can benefit from using theinstruments. Reid, for instance, says studies it hasconducted show its tests can properly categorize potentialthieves and honest people an average of 85% of the time. Thatmeans, of course, that some people may be falselycharacterized and potentially denied jobs even if they'rehonest, while some potential thieves may slip through.   &quot;There is error with every test,&quot; insists Reid's Mr. Kuhn.   Critics agree that no method is perfect, but say notenough independent research has been done to verify thevalidity claims of test publishers. They say certain testquestions are overly intrusive, and that more study is alsoneeded on whether the tests discriminate disproportionatelyagainst minorities. Moreover, they charge test publishers areoverly zealous in their claims about what the tests canaccomplish, citing sales brochures that promise such resultsas increased productivity, lower turnover rates and higherprofits.   Some also say the tests don't account for the ways inwhich someone's propensity to steal might change depending oncircumstances. &quot;Something like honesty is an attribute thatis not hard and fast,&quot; says Walter M. Haney, a seniorresearcher with Boston College's Center for the Study ofTesting, Evaluation and Educational Policy. &quot;Honest versusdishonest behavior is affected by environment.&quot;   Even if the technology office's study doesn't sparkefforts in Congress to restrict integrity tests, it couldhave other consequences. Massachusetts already bans theexams, and moves to limit use of the tests on the state levelare said to be under consideration in Connecticut, Oregon andNew York. And while there have been few legal disputes overthe tests, a negative study could fuel a flood of challengesfrom people who claim their job chances were unfairlyaffected by the tests.   The report could also prompt a scramble among employers tofind alternative methods to gauge worker honesty. Already,there has been substantial growth in the use of creditreports, injury files, criminal records and background checksin pre-employment screening, though there is little researchto prove the value of such means to predict worker behavior.   Concern may also mount about &quot;psychological inventories,&quot;longer quizzes such as the popular Minnesota Multiphasictest, that many employers use to gain a broad reading oftheir workers' motivations, ambitions, skills and potential.In many companies, even candidates for executive positionstake such tests as a condition of promotion or hire. Some ofthese tests have also come under fire, but the technologyoffice's study isn't expected to address them.   However the study turns out, it won't be the last word onintegrity tests this fall. The American PsychologicalAssociation has also been studying the topic, and expects tounveil results and recommendations in November.</TEXT></DOC>