<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910710-0102</DOCNO><DOCID>910710-0102.</DOCID><HL>   The Postwar Scud Boom   ----   By Steven Emerson</HL><DATE>07/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EGYPT (EG)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH KOREA (KN)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)SYRIA (SY)UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   One of the most powerful images of the Gulf War was of theScud missile. As the world saw on the news every night,Israel was paralyzed by the threat of Scud attacks on urbanareas. More Americans died in a Scud attack on a U.S.barracks in Saudi Arabia than in combat.   The grim lesson of the Scud is that it is an effectiveweapon of terror. It is also relatively cheap, as weapons go.And so it shouldn't be surprising to learn that since the warsales of Scuds are proliferating in the Mideast. The selleris North Korea, which has engineered the Scud-C, a moredeadly generation of the Scud used in the Gulf War. SinceMarch, Syria has contracted for delivery of more than 150North Korean Scud-Cs at a estimated cost of $500 million. Themoney comes from Saudi Arabia, which gave Syria $2 billionfor contributing troops to the coalition forces in the GulfWar. The Syrian purchases come in the wake of Iranian andLibyan purchases of North Korean Scuds.</LP><TEXT>   The North Korean sales to Syria have been shrouded in morethan the usual amount of secrecy and deception that surroundsarms sales. One reason is that Pyongyang is trying to projecta moderate image in the West. A more important reason,however, is the potential for political embarrassment toSyria and Saudi Arabia. The elaborate effort to hide themissiles was apparently designed to shield Syria from chargesthat it was escalating the arms race and to protect SaudiArabia from charges that it had not really moderated itsviews on the Arab-Israeli conflict. According to Westernintelligence officials, Saudi Arabia gave Syria priorapproval for the purchase of the North Korean Scuds.   In early March, U.S. Defense Department officials whotrack the international transfer of technology were alertedto the existence of a ship about to dock in Syria. The5,300-ton ship, the Al-Yarmouk (co-owned by Jordan andSyria), was carrying a special cargo concealed under itstarpaulin: 24 advanced Scud-C missiles and mobile launchersfrom North Korea.   The Al-Yarmouk had left North Korea in January, afterdeclaring to Lloyds of London that its destination wasCyprus. Then, in an effort to avoid inspections by coalitionnaval forces stationed throughout the Persian Gulf, theAl-Yarmouk avoided what would have been a natural and muchshorter route -- through the Red Sea and Suez Canal. Instead,it sailed around the Cape of Good Hope, after having refueledat Singapore and Toamasina, Madagascar. At neither port werethe true contents declared to port authorities.   Through intelligence sources, Defense Department officialslearned of the Al-Yarmouk's real destination and cargo. TheScud-C is far superior to the Scud-B, the &quot;Al Hussein&quot;missile the Iraqis used in the Gulf War. Not only does ithave a vastly greater accuracy. Its range (400 miles) isdouble that of the Scud-B, it is capable of carrying awarhead (1,500 pounds) three times as heavy as that of theScud-B, and it can be configured to carry chemical warheadswithout any loss of accuracy.   The Al-Yarmouk, Defense Department officials learned, wasscheduled to dock in the Syrian port of Laztakia on March 13,the same day that U.S. Secretary of State James Baker wouldbe arriving in Damascus for his first-ever talks with SyrianPresident Hafez Assad. Defense Department officials urgedtheir State Department counterparts to use this as anopportunity for Mr. Baker to express to President AssadAmerican concern about Syria's escalation of the arms race.But State officials told Defense officials that this was &quot;notthe right time.&quot; According to administration officials, Mr.Baker raised the issue of Scuds in his talks with PresidentAssad only in the general context of how to bring peace tothe region. &quot;The discussions&quot; says one official, &quot;focused onthe fruits of peace -- North Korean Scud missiles was not aspecific agenda.&quot;   Since March, two more shipments of North Korean Scud-Cmissiles and launchers have arrived in Syria, bringing thetotal number of Scud-Cs supplied by North Korea to more than100. Military sources believe that Syria has negotiated topurchase at least 50 more Scud-Cs.   It is especially ominous that the Scud-Cs have beenspecially configured to carry chemical warheads withoutaffecting the missile's range or accuracy. With the defeat ofIraq, Syria's chemical warfare program is the most advancedin the Middle East.   Several years ago, Syria began producing chemical warheadsfor the shorter-range Soviet SS-21 missiles. In the past twoyears, say U.S. intelligence officials, Syria, with NorthKorean help, perfected a chemical warhead for the Scud-C.That warhead has been successfully test-fired in northernSyria. Armed with chemical warheads, the new Scud-Csrepresent a quantum leap in the Middle East arms race:Launched from anywhere in Syria, every city and military basein Israel can now be hit and at least partially immobilizedby the Syrian Scud-C.   The roots of North Korea's production of ballisticmissiles go back to the early 1980s when North Korea beganreverse-engineering Scud-B missiles obtained from Egypt. Iranwas North Korea's first purchaser of the Scud-Bs. Tehranbought 40 in early 1988 and used them between February andApril 1988 to attack Iraq. Since that time, North Koreansales to Iran have proliferated. In late 1988, a secret jointNorth Korean-Iranian military commission was established toaugment the military collaboration between the two countries.   Early last year, Iran purchased an additional 20 Scud-Bmissiles from North Korea. Sales of tanks, artillery,anti-aircraft and more missiles soon followed. TheKorean-Iran nexus became even stronger.   On Nov. 29, 1990, a top-level North Korean military teamvisited Tehran and met with senior Iranian officials,including the head of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards andAhmed Khomeini, the late ayatollah's son. According tointelligence officials, the meetings resulted in a secondseries of agreements between the two nations. Within weeks ofthe agreements, scores of North Korean military technicaladvisers arrived in Iran and went to work turning an Iranianmissile maintenance facility in eastern Iran into a missileproduction site. In turn, Iranian military officials went toNorth Korea to receive on-site training in the manufactureand launching of ballistic missiles.   Since January Western intelligence agencies have tracked aseries of shipments of Scud-C missile parts to Iran. In May,the first payoff in Iran's quest for ballistic missileself-sufficiency was realized. U.S. satellites tracked aScud-C missile launched by Iran from the batch of equipmentsupplied by North Korea.   North Korea's military advisers have expanded their rolein advising Iranian military officials. In March and April,they began helping Iran integrate into its Air Force its mostvaluable and cost-free military acquisition of OperationDesert Storm -- the more than 130 advanced Iraqi warplanesand fighter bombers that flew to Iranian airfields to escapedestruction from the allies. Western military officialsestimate North Korean weapons sales to Iran total more than$3 billion; Iran has arranged to repay North Korea in oil.   At the same time that Iran was acquiring its war bootyfrom Iraq, Iraqi officials were hastily trying to concludenew military agreements with North Korea. In February, whenIraq was being pummeled by allied airstrikes, Iraqi DeputyForeign Minister Saadoun Hamadi flew to Pyongyang, where hetried to expedite delivery of Scud-Bs and Scud-Cs, whichNorth Korea had agreed to sell Baghdad the previous December.But without cash or even oil, Iraq's plea fell on deaf ears.   One steady cash-paying North Korean customer has beenLibya, which over the past five years has bought nearly $1billion in Scud-Bs, Scud-Cs and other North Korean arms. Infact, until the Syrian deal this year, Libyan money andfinancing had been primarily responsible for the influx ofcapital that let North Korea expand its ballistic missileprogram.   And now, according to intelligence officials, Libya isabout to underwrite the latest North Korean breakthrough --an intermediate-range ballistic missile with a range of 600miles. The prototype system, sometimes referred to as theScud-D, may be only a year away from becoming fullyoperational. Western military officials say that Libya andNorth Korea have already concluded an agreement for theproduction of these missiles on Libyan soil.   Even Egypt, which has just triumphantly touted its ownplan to curb weapon sales in the Middle East, has quietlyjumped into the fray. According to a BBC documentarybroadcast last week and confirmed by American defenseofficials, North Korean advisers have been assisting Eqyptfor the past year in the creation of a Scud-C productionfacility outside Cairo. The facility is operated anddeveloped by Arab-British Dynamics Co., a consortium owned byEgypt, Saudi Arabia, Abu Dhabi and Britain. Experts say theplant will begin producing missiles within eight to 12 weeks.   In the wake of the allied victory over Iraq and the &quot;newworld order&quot; touted by President Bush, there is nothing morepotentially destabilizing than the proliferation of Scuds inthe Middle East. The silence of the internatonal communitymight be expected. What is not expected is the near totalsilence of the U.S. Asked for the most recent position on theNorth Korean sales to Middle East countries, a StateDepartment spokesman would refer only to a June 4 statement,which said that &quot;we have long been concerned about NorthKorean activities contributing to missile proliferation. . .. We have made clear our concerns on this issue in our directtalks with the North Korean.&quot; A House committee's query onthis matter has gone unanswered for nearly two months.   One of the lessons of the Gulf War was that by turning ablind eye to Iraq's massive military buildup and its supportfor terrorism, the West was partly responsible for the riseof the monstrous Iraqi regime. That tragic and avoidablemistake is now being repeated in regard to Syria, which hassimilarly embarked on a massive military buildup. In additionto the purchase of Scud-Cs, Syria is in the process ofconcluding a new $2 billion arms deal (largely with fundssupplied by Saudi Arabia) with Moscow, and it continues toprovide haven to international terrorists such as AhmedJabril, the man who orchestrated the bombing of Pan Am Flight103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988. Unless theU.S. speaks out, the Iraqi tragedy may very well be repeated.   ---   Mr. Emerson's most recent book is &quot;Terrorist: The InsideStory of the Highest-Ranking Iraqi Terrorist Ever to Defectto the West&quot; (Villard, 1991).</TEXT></DOC>