<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910417-0120</DOCNO><DOCID>910417-0120.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Critique:   Slouching Toward 1992   ----   By Raymond Sokolov</HL><DATE>04/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Yesterday, in a letter to the editor, Philip J. Gioia ofSan Francisco attacked Ruth Rudner for expressing regret forthe unhappy fate of the Northern Cheyenne Indians in an April4 travel piece about eastern Montana on this page. AlthoughMs. Rudner, who frequently writes about the Montanawilderness from her local base in Bozeman, discussed almosteverything under the sun in her leisurely traipse through aseldom-visited region of her state, it was her brief nod tothe Cheyenne that sent Mr. Gioia into a fury:   &quot;This is the same politically correct (and factuallyone-sided) historical revisionism brought to the screen byKevin Costner's recent &quot;Dances With Wolves&quot;: the nobleAmerican Indian, possessed of an almost mystical reverencefor nature, awash with respect for his fellow man, at themercy of the callous white Euro-American bumpkin invaderswith superior technology.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   I read this while fresh from an extended absence in Texasand north central Mexico that included stops at the Alamo andmany encounters with people in vivid touch with theirpre-Hispanic heritage, people eating many of the same foodsand speaking the same Indian languages their ancestors wouldhave spoken under Aztec domination. So I looked up Ms.Rudner's article with much interest. In the sole relevantpassage, she wrote:   &quot;As we drive through the Northern Cheyenne's beautifulTongue River Valley, my heart aches for what is past. In1878, after the Battle of the Little Big Horn, the tribe wasexiled to Oklahoma. Its members walked out of Oklahoma to gohome, but were captured and incarcerated in Nebraska. In 1884they came back, to the newly created Northern CheyenneReservation. One story about how the Tongue River was namedis that its course is as crooked as the white man's tongue.&quot;   To me, this is not a broadside attack on WesternCivilization, but I can understand why it provoked Mr. Gioia.Like him, I have grown impatient and ready to explode atpeople who condemn our history, our culture, our world as thecancerous result of an immoral destruction of native Americanpeoples. This supposedly enlightened attitude has found arich target now in the official preparations for the 500thanniversary of Columbus's first landfall in the New World.   Perhaps it is too late in a disillusioned century just toapplaud Columbus as the most influential single human beingof modern times. That was still possible in 1892, when theworld celebrated the 400th anniversary of Columbus Day withpomp and circumstance. Now, in a hemisphere utterly shaped bythe mixing of cultures after 1492, it has become fashionableto hold Columbus up as a symbol of all the evils wreaked onthe planet by White Male European Imperialism.   Most recently, this view of history has set its adherentsto snarling at Lynne V. Cheney, chairwoman of the NationalEndowment of the Humanities. It seems that NEH has quashed agrant for a television docudrama in which Columbus and theSpanish are shown in a bad light. In a letter overruling peerpanels that had supported the project, the endowment refusedto grant $500,000 of public money to &quot;1492: Clash of Visions&quot;because of &quot;distressing aspects of Aztec culture beingminimized while excesses of the Spanish are emphasized.&quot;   To put it crudely, Ms. Cheney thinks the film's producerswant to whitewash the Aztec enslavement of non-Aztecs andAztec cannibalism, while rubbing the viewer's nose in themurderous rapacity of the conquistadors. But would theappalling public ignorance about the 16th century be betterenlightened by a film that really did show what Montezuma'sminions really did with those obsidian knives one sees inanthropological museums? Is it the main business oftelevisual history, or any history, especially when supportedby government, to weigh the relative brutalities of earliergovernments?   The answer is simple. We must stop battling in a crudemoralistic way about whether Oct. 12, 1492, was a day ofinfamy or a dawn of great new things. Instead, we mightrecall what one observer said upon witnessing the first testof the atomic bomb in a part of the New Mexico desert thathad once belonged to the Spanish empire: &quot;Now we are all sonsof bitches.&quot;   He was only half right. We had always been sons ofbitches. And it is the job of history to chronicle in detailand with all nuances preserved just how we have been sons ofbitches. And how we have triumphed over ourselves and donegood and important things too.   The quincentenary is an opportunity for such historicaleducation that is slipping through our hands as we tightenthem into fists. Instead of letting the neo-Romantic Indianwannabes intimidate legitimate scholarship into politicizing1492, we should be pressing for complex accounts of theencounter between New and Old Worlds. If we think history canexplain the way we live now, we should be asking how theSpanish empire produced such different new civilizations asmodern Mexico, Peru and Cuba. If we truly value the cultureof the Aztecs, we should be demanding more information aboutthe specifics of their culture, not funding a docudrama abouta fictional Aztec merchant.   Ms. Cheney deserves a 21-gun salute for refusing to floatfilm makers who proposed to make Columbus a symbol ofgenocide. But what is needed still is a sober and informedview of the many strands of contact, positive and negative,between indigenous Americans and European immigrants.   It would be especially responsible if the anti-Columbusparasites would stop their bashing of Spanish Catholics justfor a minute to acknowledge that this country was primarilysettled 200 years after Columbus by Protestant Britishcolonists whose hands weren't always clean. They might alsovisit Arizona, where the largest population of Navajos inhistory govern an immense territory under tribal law andpractice &quot;native&quot; crafts such as silversmithing taught tothem by the Spanish.   Most of all, NEH and other public funders of thequincentenary should absolutely avoid helping neo-Romanticmalcontents whose program carries with it the subtext thatthis would be a better continent if the Indians still ran itin their own way. There is already a lot of federal fundingavailable for people who believe that. Let them apply for itat the National Institute for Mental Health.</TEXT></DOC>