<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911118-0128</DOCNO><DOCID>911118-0128.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:   The Road to Sarajevo   ----   By Paul Johnson</HL><DATE>11/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><LP>   The outbreak of the European War in 1914 was the greatestsingle catastrophe in the history of our civilization: Fromit many other evils sprang, and it is only now, after nearlyeight decades, that we can begin to return to the pattern ofmoral progress that was the outstanding feature of the 19thcentury.   The causes of the war were many. Perhaps the mostimportant was Germany's fear of Russia, whose growth rates,after the year 1900, accelerated to become the fastest in theworld. Germany's rulers feared this growing economic powermust eventually be translated into overwhelming militarypower, and they felt it prudent to fight a war sooner ratherthan later. The impending disintegration of Germany's weakerally, Austria, provided the pretext. Such a war, however,might have remained Continental; what turned it into a globalwar, eventually involving the U.S., was the antagonismbetween Britain and Germany over control of the sea.</LP><TEXT>   Robert K. Massie's &quot;Dreadnought: Britain, Germany and theComing of the Great War&quot; (Random House, $35) explains howthis antagonism came about. He tells it on a grand scale, injust over 1,000 pages, delving deep into the Victorian age toexamine its roots and parading an impressing list ofcharacters: Victoria herself, her grandson Kaiser Wilhelm II,her son Edward VII, the formidable Bismarck, as well as ahost of lesser German politicians and officials, Balfour andSalisbury, Joe Chamberlain and Winston Churchill, plus thearchitects of naval rivalry, Tirpitz and &quot;Jackie&quot; Fisher. Itis a strong case, and Mr. Massie, a master of historicalportraiture and anecdotage, makes the most of it. The tale istold well, but it is an old one, and personally I would havepreferred him to stick to its naval side and explain in moredetail the technical aspects of the rival naval programs, thestrategies and tactics of the two admiralties, and thebegining of high technology in naval warfareespeciallyundersea warfare and naval air power.   What makes the clash between Britain and Germany so tragic-- and perhaps Mr. Massie does not emphasize this pointstrongly enough -- is that they had been intermittent alliesover many centuries. The Anglo-Saxons came from Germany;their cultural affinities with the Germans were stillpalpable as late as the 1870s, so that many British peopleinstinctively sided with the Germans during theFranco-Prussian War. France was Britain's &quot;natural&quot; enemy, sothat alliance with whatever power held sway to the northeastof France has been almost a permanent feature of Englishforeign policy since at least the 12th century. It issignificant that in 1814-15, at the Congress of Vienna, itwas Castlereagh, the British foreign secretary, who insistedon bringing Prussia to the Rhine, to contain Frenchaggression. During the 19th century, British intellectuals --Carlyle, Arnold, George Eliot, Acton for instance -- lookedto German rather than French culture for inspiration.   With the relative decline of France, in population andeconomic power, during the 19th century, some readjustment oftraditional British attitudes was inevitable. But Britain hadno objection to Germany, rather than France, becoming theleading military power on the Continent: quite the reverse.Britain saw itself as a &quot;have&quot; nation, and understood theneed of both France and Germany to secure a reasonableportion of colonies -- indeed actively assisted Germancolonization at one stage. What Britain wanted was stability.An official of the British Foreign Office, Sir Eyre Crowe, ina famous memorandum drawn up in 1906 surveying the breakdownin Anglo-German relations, referred to what he called &quot;thegeneral tendency of British governments to take advantage ofevery opportunity to approach more closely to the idealcondition of living in honourable peace with all otherstates.&quot;   Such good will, however, is not enough, and this is apoint that the U.S., now the world's sole superpower, shouldtake on board today. What matters is not so much the facts ofpower, as perceptions of it. In the 1890s, Germany was seenby its neighbors as increasingly populous, rich, muscular andsuccessful. But that is not how Germany, or rather itsrulers, saw itself. To them, and especially to Wilhelm II, itremained a &quot;have not&quot; power, notably in relation to Britain.He had always in some sense felt inferior at the court of hisgrandmother Queen Victoria, especially in what might becalled maritime matters -- yachting at Cowes, reviewing thefleet at Spithead. So long as Bismarck was in power, Germanystuck to realities: military superiority and the Continentalparamountcy on land that went with it. With Bismarck gone,the kaiser soon found a man, Admiral Tirpitz, who wasprepared to assist him in the naval challenge to Britain thathe craved. The result was the German naval laws of the late1890s, which provided, as Tirpitz put it, for a &quot;German fleet. . . built against England.&quot;   These words of Tirpitz remained secret. But so far as theBritish were concerned, there was no need to utter them.Germany's intention was obvious, plain for all to see.British policy was to maintain a &quot;two-power standard&quot; -- thatis, a navy capable of overcoming the combined naval forces ofits two leading rivals. So long as this standard wasmaintained, &quot;splendid isolation&quot; was possible, and Britaincould ignore the buildup of land armies in Europe. ButGermany's construction of a large modern battle fleet couldbe aimed at no one else but Britain. Successive Britishgovernments, therefore, with great reluctance, feltthemselves obliged not merely to engage in a naval arms race-- of which the construction of a new superbattleship, theDreadnought, was one phase -- but to seek Continental allieswith large land forces; first France, then Russia. SoGermany, having heedlessly ventured into waters where itsinterests did not call it, soon began to complain of&quot;encirclement&quot; and to develop the national paranoia thatproduced the Great War.   There are, as I say, lessons for the U.S. in this sadstory. Japan is, by any material standards, a &quot;have&quot; power,as Germany was in the 1890s; but it feels itself ingeopolitical terms a &quot;have not&quot;; so, of course, does China.There is a risk, too, that a tattered, partly dismantled yetnonetheless still formidable Russia will also range itself inthe ranks of the disgruntled. For a country like the U.S.,reluctantly encumbered with all kinds of globalresponsibilities, managing the psychological perceptions ofthe other powers is almost as important -- perhaps even moreimportant -- as managing the geopolitical realities. TheU.S., helped by Community Europe -- when it finally managesto get its act together -- has to find a place and a role forJapan, China and Russia that makes them feel a vestedinterest in &quot;living in honourable peace with all otherstates.&quot; That is the moral of this readable and stimulatingbook.   ---   Mr. Johnson is the author most recently of &quot;Birth of theModern&quot; (HarperCollins).</TEXT></DOC>