<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900612-0108</DOCNO><DOCID>900612-0108.</DOCID><HL>   Business World:   Northwest Politicians Ply Environmental Protection-ism   ----   By Tim W. Ferguson</HL><DATE>06/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A21</SO><CO>   JAPAN</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Possibly this week, the nation is to have a new threatenedspecies in the spotted owl of the Pacific Northwest. Wheneverthe announcement comes from federal officials, it likely willovershadow another significant side issue in the logging warsraging on the West Coast: the always precarious state ofinternational trade.   How is the tiny, obscure bird tied into Japanese-U.S.relations? Because the attempt to shield it from thepredations of a harvested habitat cues another kind ofprotectionism: a legislative shuffle to save a domesticindustry. This time that familiar game has an unusual twist-- the barring not of imports but of raw-log exports.</LP><TEXT>   The &quot;old-growth&quot; region of the Northwest is one of therichest timber lodes on Earth -- the &quot;El Dorado ofsilvaculture,&quot; in environmental economist John Baden's words.Unlike some surrounding U.S. Forest Service areas, he says,these stands don't require implicit subsidies from the U.S.government to make cutting viable. A single tree might yieldenough wood for four homes.   The spotted-owl ruling will stop much of the cutting offirs, hemlocks and spruce from federal lands, which accountfor about a fifth of the Washington State's harvest, and mostof Oregon's. (Private parcels, a big part of Washington'syield and greater still of Northern California's redwoods,are indirectly hit because they're subject to lawsuits underthe statute.)   Timber mills in the region stand to be big losers fromthis. Since 1973, when exports of logs from federal lands inthe West were banned, the domestic mills have had the pick ofthat wood, which could no longer command the world price. Themills and their 56,000 workers rely on this indirect subsidyto keep their costs competitive. Now that wood is to belonginstead to the owls.   So the mill operators have turned to the logging on statelands, which is most significantly a factor in Washington.Efforts to restrict the export of this timber have beenresisted for years not only by growers but also by portinterests and by school districts, which rely on the salesfor funding.   The logjam is breaking -- but in Washington, D.C. There, aprovision of legislation by Sen. Robert Packwood, an OregonRepublican and normally a free trader, would seem to overrideWashington's Constitution to empower its governor to barexport of timber from state lands within two years. And Gov.Booth Gardner appears ready to do that.   Mr. Packwood has tied this measure to a priority CaribbeanBasin trade bill. He's got going for him not only the millsbut the environmental lobby, which figures that eliminatingmuch of the market for the wood can only save more trees. Italso helps that he's targeting Japan, where the preferencefor wood prepared in one of its own 18,000 sawmills isthought to reflect another of those non-tariff barriers thathamper American finished goods.   Further aiding the bill, the big-timber lobby has signedon to a Packwood compromise with Washington congressmen inthe hope of preventing an export-ban encroachment intoprivately owned forests. Such a step might seem a remarkableleap over property rights -- perhaps a &quot;taking&quot; under theU.S. Constitution -- but no one can be sure of any asset inthe volatile logging politics of the West. Scary newprojections of old-growth forest decline are fuelingenvironmental activism, as well as a rush by loggers to cutwhile the law still permits it. Summer strife looms in theCalifornia redwoods, where protesters may try physically tohalt operations, and voters in the state may use theinitiative ballot to saw the industry off at the knees inNovember.   So in Washington State, at least, Big Timber is content tocarve out some limits it can live with. Contract loggers whowork the public lands may not be so lucky. Also to beaffected are thousands of small timber growers who don't sellexport-quality logs; the price for their cuttings at thedomestic mills stands to be driven down again by an onrush offormally exportable supply. And the schools and other publicagencies that face a drop-off in revenues will have to lookfor alternatives. (At least that's a case of protectionistcosts being borne publicly, as they should be.)   It's hard to anticipate all of the derivative effects ofany intervention in the economy, but Nick Kirkmire, a onetimecommercial forester who serves as a reluctant lobbyist forBig Timber in this matter, offers another. He thinks that,just as Japanese companies moved their car assembly to theU.S. in order to get around import limits, so they will setup their own mills in the Northwest to produce lumber to theparticular standards of the home market and thus beat a logexport ban. Nothing wrong with that, but it's probably notwhat the promoters of this latest sop to a domestic industryhave in mind.   For the junior senator from Oregon, who faces apotentially tough re-election battle in 1992, this is achance to stake out both the &quot;jobs&quot; and &quot;trees&quot; vote. ForRep. John Miller, a conservative Republican, and other Housemembers from Washington who've been delicately negotiating adeal, the incentive is similar, with the added impetus ofheading off the more absolutist Oregon opposition toexporting.   Quiet in all of this is the U.S. Trade Representative'soffice. The bill's sponsors are confident that the GeneralAgreement on Tariffs and Trade would allow restrictions inthis special case.   GATT shouldn't. Packwood's Putsch is destined to give theterm &quot;environmental protection&quot; a new meaning. Thespotted-owl episode is a good example of how green politics,now flowering in much of the world, can be a cover for thesophisticated maneuvers by various interest groups thatbarely give a hoot about ecology. Elsewhere on Capitol Hill,the notorious Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., with itsself-interested championing of grain-based fuels, is apioneer at this.   The soundest way to obtain the environmental safeguardsthat the people want, free of third-party spoils, is to workto assign market values to natural resources. Where propertyrights can be established, pricing will take care of itself;a rougher estimation might suffice in less tangible ordemarcated situations. Then society can make straightforwarddecisions about whether to preserve resources by incurringthe costs directly, as the economist Mr. Baden happens tofavor doing in the old-growth timber case. (He considers thenorthern spotted owl a goner anyhow, but believes the hostecosystem to be precious.) Private interests that may havetheir contractural rights infringed on should be dulycompensated, just as they themselves would no longer be ableto take freely from a &quot;commons&quot; of clean air, water and thelike.   That would be honest environmentalism instead of politicalgamesmanship. It would be good news for the planet and ourprogeny, if not for congressmen and certain cozyconstituents.</TEXT></DOC>