<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911021-0027</DOCNO><DOCID>911021-0027.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>10/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   MIDEAST PEACE TALKS WERE SET to get under way next week inMadrid.   The Israeli cabinet voted 16-3 to accept Prime MinisterShamir's recommendation to attend the session, scheduled tobegin Oct. 30 and last about three days. U.S. officials alsoexpect Arab states and Palestinians to respond positivelybefore Wednesday's deadline for the invitations that wereissued jointly by the U.S. and Soviet Union. The Soviets onFriday restored full diplomatic relations with Israel, acondition that the Israelis insisted must precede any Mideasttalks.</LP><TEXT>   In southern Lebanon, three Israeli soldiers were killed ina guerrilla bomb ambush, raising fears of a possibleterrorist campaign by groups opposed to a regional peaceconference.   ---   AN EARTHQUAKE HIT northern India, and at least 500 peoplewere feared dead.   The quake rocked the Himalayan foothills in India's UttarPradesh state along the Indian-Tibetan border, flatteningtens of thousands of homes in about 400 villages andtriggering major landslides, police said. At least 2,000people were injured, according to a local news agency. The45-second temblor measured 7.1 on the Richter scale, U.S.officials said, and reportedly could be felt in some parts ofPakistan and Nepal.   Indian army and paramilitary troops were dispatched to thearea, but relief efforts were said to be hampered by therugged mountainous terrain.   ---   A fast-moving brush fire swept through a residential areain the hills above Oakland and Berkeley, Calif., killing fivepeople, engulfing hundreds of homes and destroying a 250-unitapartment complex, fire officials said. Flames as high as 100feet were whipped by 30-mph winds.   ---   Shiite Muslim kidnappers are expected to release anAmerican hostage by today and Israel plans to free some Arabprisoners in response, the U.N. information center in Beirutannounced. Later, the Islamic Jihad for the Liberation ofPalestine said it would release an American, either JesseTurner or Alann Steen, in 24 hours.   ---   The FBI will investigate the leak of sexual-harassmentallegations against Thomas during his Supreme Courtconfirmation process, Senate leaders said. The 43-year-oldconservative judge, who was sworn in at the White House onFriday, will take a separate, judicial oath on Nov. 1 beforeofficially assuming his duties on the court.   ---   Gates won approval of the Senate Intelligence Committee asthe new CIA chief. The panel voted 11-4 on Friday to send hisnomination to the full Senate with a favorablerecommendation, despite continued reservations by seniorDemocrats about his record as a top manager in theintelligence agency.   ---   A former Klan leader gained ground in Louisiana'sgubernatorial race. Voters rejected the re-election bid ofGov. Roemer, who finished third in Saturday's balloting.Former three-time Gov. Edwards, a Democrat, will run againstRepublican Duke, who once was a Ku Klux Klan leader, in aNov. 16 runoff.   ---   Israel threatened to use nuclear weapons in the 1973 YomKippur war, according to a new book. Seymour Hersh, aPulitzer Prize-winning investigative reporter, said Israelhas 300 or more nuclear weapons, far more than U.S.intelligence estimates.   ---   North rekindled debate about the Iran-Contra affair withhis fresh assertion that President Reagan knew &quot;everything.&quot;The former National Security Council staffer offers littlenew evidence to buttress his assertion, made in a book thatis being released this week.   ---   Turkish voters appeared to be putting an end to the reignof the conservative Motherland Party founded by PresidentTurgut Ozal. Early results in the general election showedSuleyman Demirel's opposition True Path Party leading. Thoughthat party was unlikely to win a majority, it was expected tohead a coalition government.   ---   Eight Soviet republics signed a landmark treaty Friday fora newly decentralized economic union. But the agreementfailed to win the support of the Ukraine and three otherrepublics, which will weaken Gorbachev's efforts to preventthe economic disintegration of the Soviet Union.   ---   The Pentagon has decided to remove all nuclear weaponsfrom South Korea after obtaining the Seoul government'sapproval for the policy change, U.S. officials said. The movewould reverse three decades of U.S.-South Korean insistencethat nuclear arms were an essential safeguard against NorthKorean aggression.   ---   Zaire's President Mobutu disavowed his archrivalTshisekedi as prime minister of the central African nation,plunging the country back into a political crisis. Mobutu hadappointed Tshisekedi to head the country's firstopposition-led government a week ago in the wake of riotsthat devastated the capital and other cities.   ---   Total crimes in the U.S. dropped by 4% in 1990, continuinga decade-long decline, but the number of violent crimesincreased, according to a Justice Department survey. Blacksand Hispanics were more likely to be victims than whites, thereport said.   ---   Switzerland chose a new federal Parliament in electionshighlighted by strong gains for a small rightist party thatis urging radical curbs on the admission of foreigners.However, projections based on early returns indicated nomajor political shifts in the country, which has beengoverned since 1959 by a four-party coalition.</TEXT></DOC>