<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900823-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>900823-0085.</DOCID><HL>   Californians on Edge at the Mexican Border   ----   By Tim W. Ferguson</HL><DATE>08/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><LP>   SAN DIEGO -- More than a thousand citizens are to gatheron a mesa here at nightfall today to shine their automobileheadlights across the border to Mexico. It is the latest suchsymbolic protest against what these Americans say is the U.S.government's failure to enforce its immigration laws.   Three years ago those statutes were tightened under theso-called Simpson-Rodino act. Yet for months, a former SanDiego mayor and the widow of a Border Patrol officer havebeen trying to embarrass U.S. authorities into beefing up theboundary between two ostensibly friendly peoples. MurielWatson is the leader of the Light Up the Border campaign, andRoger Hedgecock, who held the top job in the nation'ssixth-largest city from 1983 to 1985, is promoting her causeon his popular radio talk show.</LP><TEXT>   They say that Simpson-Rodino turned out to be a hoax, thatthe Border Patrol wasn't bolstered as promised, and thataliens are pouring across as never before and bringing crimeto nearby communities. The Border Patrol acknowledges that,after a dropoff in the wake of the new law, apprehensionswill rise 35% this fiscal year. It estimates that only athird of those crossing are caught. Mr. Hedgecock, alludingin an interview to this newspaper's editorial advocacy ofopen immigration, said, &quot;You have got your wish here in SanDiego.&quot;   Not quite, as a daytime tour of the hilly border area nearthe Pacific Ocean with Mrs. Watson shows. Watching dozens ofthe mostly male masses huddle to begin a cat-and-mouseroutine with the Border Patrol that will culminate aftersundown, it is clear that crossing isn't yet easy. We see afew dart through gaps in the coverage, running on into brushtoward the sewage-contaminated Tijuana River basin that stillseparates them from population centers. Patrol trucks passalong Dairy Mart Road, which parallels the border, every fewminutes, some carrying young men who didn't make it to thepromised land.   Mrs. Watson intersperses dread at each attempted crossingwith pity for immigrants who are raped or robbed by smugglersalong their nighttime escape path or run over, as ishappening increasingly, by cars as they race acrossInterstate 5 to evade an alien checkpoint along the routenorth. Many more women and small children are coming now,part of whole families planning to settle in the U.S. Asimple yellow sign warns motorists to watch for &quot;peoplecrossing&quot; the eight-lane expressway.   By associating this mayhem with the immigration itself,rather than with the laws that drive it underground, Mrs.Watson repeats a mistake often made with regard to thebloodshed that accompanies other forms of contraband. Sheassumes that a more secure border would stop trouble beforeit starts, as well as pressure the Mexican government, fromwhose historically bad policies most of the aliens arefleeing, into reforms that would alleviate the pressure.(Some of the migrants actually are from Central America,allegedly ushered through and out of Mexico with officialsanction.)   An evocative article in the August issue of Harper'sMagazine describes the terrifying trek to opportunity fromthe immigrant's view. On the U.S. side as well, Mr. Hedgecocksays, the always rough edges of life where rich fronts poorhave taken on new meanness. An upsurge in robberies and whatpolice call &quot;car prowls&quot; in the border areas -- plus drugsales and shipments, according to the former mayor --reflects a &quot;growing criminal undercurrent&quot; that he estimatesat 10% of the immigrant population. (Here it must be notedthat Mr. Hedgecock himself was forced from office whenconvicted of a felony campaign-law violation; his benefactorswere running a Ponzi scheme.)   Often the mere presence of groups of apparent illegals isenough to put the locals on edge. In communities such asEncinitas, north of San Diego, legal and extralegal roustingsof &quot;campesinos&quot; from their makeshift quarters in canyons andtheir parking-lot &quot;hiring halls&quot; have brought protests frompoverty-law groups. On the other hand, citizens andbusinesses (some of whom may be using the cheap labor)complain of trash, human waste and intimidation from theitinerants, and lament that the authorities duck enforcingthe law against them for fear of prompting civil-rightslitigation.   More than 40,000 illegals in the San Diego area signed upfor full-fledged amnesty under Simpson-Rodino, and anadditional 150,000 at least passed through the area under asection for migrant agricultural workers. Mrs. Watson and Mr.Hedgecock favor a controlled-entry program to fill jobs forwhich no American citizen is applying. This would seek tocombat the idleness of young laborers that they believefosters much of the crime. Yet it is predicated on abureaucratic arrangement contrary to what we know is key toeconomic dynamism. It would also, of course, shield U.S.workers whose services may be overpriced or of lower quality.   In some ways, their idea is in line with the philosophybehind proposed changes in the national immigration law. Ameasure coming out of the House would hike the legal quota bymore than 50% but link the increase to filling demonstratedvoids in the labor force. (The Senate, and the Bushadministration, won't even grant that much.)   Close to home, Light Up the Border has enjoyed mixedsuccess. It is accused of racism by some Mexican officialsand the local left, and shunned by much of the San Diegoestablishment. Yet something appears to have led the ArmyCorps of Engineers to enhance fencing and lighting. Still, noone has paid a political price for resisting tightercontrols. (Mrs. Watson is opposing an entrenched Democrat fora legislative seat, and is regarded as a gadfly.) Will theelectoral earth someday shake? Mr. Hedgecock, who still likesthe access-control idea -- quashed a few years ago -- of aBig Ditch along the border, expresses frustration toward theinertia of the governing elite he once was part of. &quot;Thefed-up middle class doesn't care what's `politicallyacceptable,'&quot; he says.   A movement like his is bound to attract elements that arexenophobic or worse. But Mr. Hedgecock and Mrs. Watson, forall a libertarian on the issue will disagree with them,represent instead a good body of Americans who aren't hatersbut feel besieged by forces that disturb their peace. In anearlier day they would have been part of the Silent Majoritythat &quot;pays the taxes and obeys the laws.&quot; Their powerlessrage is not so different from what fueled tax, busing anddirty-art revolts that conservative intellectuals haveembraced.   So add a political paradox to the fiscal and culturaleffects that proponents of open immigration must be preparedto deal with. Pondering these issues over some great cevicheat the Mariscos Hector storefront cafe in close-by ChulaVista after the tour of the front lines, one is left toregret the status quo and to find unappetizing the short-runalternatives.   ---   Mr. Ferguson is a Los Angeles-based member of theJournal's editorial board.</TEXT></DOC>