<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910719-0011</DOCNO><DOCID>910719-0011.</DOCID><HL>   Rights and Wrongs:   After Stock Debacle,   Some Ask; Will Hubris   Undo Time Warner?   ---   The Myth of Chairman Ross   Could Begin to Crumble;   He Still Vows a Mega-Deal   ---   Lots of Debt, Little Synergy   ----   By Laura Landro and Randall Smith   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   J.TOS TWX</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   For more than a decade as chief of Warner CommunicationsInc., Steven J. Ross survived disasters that might havetoppled most chief executives: huge losses from the collapseof Atari video games, a hostile raid by Rupert Murdoch, astormy partnership with Chris-Craft Industries, just forstarters.   He then consummated his biggest deal of all when Time Inc.turned down a $200 a share offer from ParamountCommunications Inc. and instead bought Warner for $14billion. Mr. Ross personally pocketed about $193 million andtook control of the merged Time Warner Inc.</LP><TEXT>   With each narrow escape and big success, Mr. Ross'sconfidence grew. He increasingly surrounded himself withcronies, bathed himself in luxury at company expense andcreated a corporate cult of personality of almost mythicproportions. No one else, it was said, had the genius, thecreativity and the Hollywood contacts to keep the companygoing.   But Mr. Ross's critics say confidence became arrogance andarrogance became hubris -- and one result was Time Warner'sill-fated coercive rights offering designed to raise $3.5billion to help pay the company's huge debt. A leader withhis feet more firmly planted on the ground -- or adviserswilling to break bad news -- would have seen that theproposal would depress the stock, infuriate stockholders andinvite regulatory curiosity, some of the more irateshareholders say.   So now that plan is dead, replaced with a revised, $2.7billion plan that stockholders find more palatable. But thebigger casualty may be the Ross myth. People now are lookingmore closely at Mr. Ross and his combined company -- and insome cases are not pleased with what they see. They areseeing gaping holes in Mr. Ross's much-vaunted strategy tobuild a global entertainment giant. And they are asking withincreasing pointedness: Where is the mega-deal with a foreignstrategic partner that he has been promising for a year?   Time Warner has one of the best collections ofentertainment and media assets in the business. Its magazines-- including Time, People and Sports Illustrated -- accountfor 40% of all industry profits. It is the second largestowner of cable television systems, with more than six millionsubscribers. Its Home Box Office dominates the pay TV marketwith more than 20 million subscribers. Warner Bros. is one ofthe top three producers of motion pictures and the topproducer of television shows. It owns the world's largestmusic business. All of Time Warner's units together had $2.25billion in operating cash flow last year.   Time Warner has continued to plow funds back into itsbusinesses. Last year, it bought Lane Publishing Co.,publisher of Sunset magazine and Sunset Books, for about $225million. It is helping to finance the start-up of two newcable channels, Court TV and the Comedy Channel. Warner Bros.has such hot prospects as the upcoming sequel to theblockbuster &quot;Batman.&quot; Its record company is soon expected tosign a deal with pop icon Madonna. And Warner Cable isbuilding a state-of-the-art, 150-channel cable system in theNew York borough of Queens.   But the merger left the company saddled with $17 billionin bank debt and preferred stock. So far, the promisedsynergies among divisions haven't yielded much fruit. And thecompany has done little to consolidate since the merger tocut costs. It still lavishes perquisites in some divisionsthat astonish even its most profligate Hollywood competitors.   Mr. Ross, 63, ranked by compensation experts as one of thenation's most highly paid executives, has continued to reaphuge personal benefits, while Time Warner shareholders havewatched their investment deteriorate. &quot;It just seems to methat management here has been overly well compensated,&quot; saysDeWitt Bowman, chief investment officer of the CaliforniaPublic Employees Retirement System, which owns a half-millionTime Warner shares. &quot;We are disappointed that pay leveldoesn't demonstrably bear any relationship to the company'sperformance.&quot;   The original rights plan was &quot;in keeping with what hasbeen happening to the management of this company ever sincethe Paramount deal,&quot; says Roger Kumler, senior vice presidentof INB Trust Co. of Indianapolis, trustee for a million TimeWarner shares. &quot;They have acted in their interests ratherthan the interests of the shareholders as we see it.&quot;   Mr. Ross strongly denies that. &quot;I have always consideredmyself accountable to shareholders,&quot; he says through aspokesman. &quot;If the definition of arrogance is beingundeterred from pursuing all courses, no matter howinnovative, to build value for our shareholders, I suppose wecan be considered arrogant.&quot;   Says long-time investor Mario Gabelli, who owns 240,000Time Warner common shares and also owns preferred stock:&quot;When we look at the total mosaic, where has the company gonein the last 20 years, this company is materially better offhaving Steve Ross at the helm with all the airplanes and theperks and the extravagances.&quot;   Mr. Ross almost single-handedly built Warner, startingwith the funeral parlor businesses of his first wife'sfather. During the 1960s and 1970s, he expanded intoentertainment, buying a talent agency and then Warner Bros.film studio and the Atari video game unit.   Though Mr. Ross is known to fly into screaming furies whenangered, one company executive says his general demeanor whencoddling stars and important people is warm and expansive.&quot;He ran funeral parlors, where he learned to act sincere andto comfort people in their worst moments,&quot; says thisexecutive. &quot;He carries that out to this day.&quot;   When Atari collapsed, it nearly took Warner with it, andthe stock sank low enough to attract a hostile run fromRupert Murdoch. To avoid losing his company, Mr. Ross pairedup with Chris-Craft Industries Inc. Chairman Herbert J.Siegel. Though Mr. Siegel came as a friend, acquiring 25% ofWarner, the partners quickly became adversaries as Mr. Siegelpressured Warner to cut back its lavish style, trim overheadand sell assets to bolster earnings.   Warner's Mr. Ross resisted virtually all of Mr. Siegel'sefforts, maintaining that Mr. Siegel was trying to hog-tiehis divisional management and interfere in the business.Though Chris-Craft was able to spur some changes at thecompany, the partnership disintegrated into lawsuits and badblood. Chris-Craft contended that Warner systematicallyignored or circumvented provisions in their shareholderagreement -- and Time Warner critics say that the Chris-Craftsaga should be a warning to any company that becomes apartner with Mr. Ross.   One thing that remained unchanged through even the worstof times at Warner during the 1980s was its high-living styleand its generous compensation packages. In 1990, Mr. Rossearned somewhere between $34.5 million (Fortune's estimate)and $78 million (Forbes's estimate). He has a hard core ofloyal executives, advisers and friends whom he has made richover the years.   But he doesn't like to hear bad news and is rarelyconfronted with any. Of the half-dozen investment bankers andthe army of attorneys advising Mr. Ross on the rightsoffering, the company says, none suggested it might not bethe best deal for shareholders or that it would spark anangry reaction. Mr. Ross, in turn, handed those advisersastonishingly high fees with no negotiations.   Mr. Ross still says the initial rights offering was goodfor investors. &quot;I recognize that people can disagree aboutour original pooled rights offering,&quot; he says through aspokesman. &quot;What is not subject to disagreement is that itwas designed in good faith with the assistance of experiencedinvestment bankers and legal advisers to strengthen thecompany for the benefit of its shareholders.&quot;   But he does admit one mistake -- the way he handled it.&quot;It is evident to me that I didn't do a good enough job atexplaining the rationale of the pooled rights offering,&quot; hesays.   In lavish offices in the old Warner building in New York,Mr. Ross's suite is manned by a small army of secretaries andassistants and his ever-present bodyguard. He uses thecompany's helicopter to shuttle between his Park Avenueduplex and a waterfront estate on fashionable Georgica Pondin East Hampton, Long Island. The company also maintains afleet of seven planes, saying it needs such perks to lure andkeep top Hollywood talent. For example, producers such asSteven Spielberg and Joel Silver often use the Warner planeto hop between their bicoastal homes. But the fleet is alsoused to ferry company executives all over the world, often onpersonal business.   Mr. Ross often charters the 158-foot, $115,500-per-weekKlementine yacht in the summer, when it is in theMediterranean, and in the winter in the Caribbean. He has areputation for always picking up the tab and lavishing giftson employees and stars, often paid for in cash.   Time acquired the legendary Warner estate overlookingAcapulco Bay in the merger and has also spent more than $5million on two additional resort homes in Aspen, Colo. -- onefor the record division and one for the movie company. TheAcapulco estate is still used liberally by company executivesfor annual retreats and vacations. Visitors to the lavishlydecorated houses in Aspen, filled daily with fresh flowers,have the use of two cars and the services of a staff thatincludes a cook and a driver.   Time Warner says that entertaining stars and other talentis part of its business, and that such expenditures arejustified when each of its businesses -- cable, movies,records, magazines -- earns more operating income than any ofits competitors. &quot;No company could achieve the kind ofoperating results and operating margins that we have year inand year out if management were free-spending and didn't keepits eye on the bottom line,&quot; Mr. Ross says through aspokesman.   The company also notes that all but one of the sevenplanes are owned by divisions, including cable and magazines.Moreover, the company says Mr. Ross and other executivesreimburse the company for the personal use of planes andhelicopter and Mr. Ross pays for the yacht out of his ownpocket.   Mr. Ross is particularly generous with certain stars andcreative people who are also friends, even though many ofthem, such as Mr. Spielberg, Clint Eastwood and BarbaraStreisand, haven't produced a hit for the company in years.For example, Mr. Ross and his third wife, Courtney, havebecome fast friends with music producer Quincy Jones. Lastyear, Warner financed a documentary on Mr. Jones called&quot;Listen Up,&quot; produced by Mr. Ross's wife, spending anestimated $5 million to $6 million to produce and market it.The box office take: less than $200,000.   At Warner, Mr. Ross's generosity with company funds wonhim eternal fealty from the executives he has made rich.Still standing on Time Warner's receivables account are adozen low-interest loans, some between $1 million and $2million, to Warner executives.   One top company official acknowledges that Mr. Ross'sstyle &quot;sends a message through the company.&quot; Top divisionexecutives rarely take a commercial flight, he notes, and theattitude is, &quot;Why kill myself? Look at what the top guys arespending.&quot;   But if the company can't bolster its share price and buildits businesses, Time Warner may never shake the reputation asthe management that turned down a $200 per share offer fromParamount, promising Time Warner stock would trade well overthat amount in no time. In fact, Mr. Ross made huge profitsfor many Warner holders, and his supporters argue he can't beheld responsible for Time's decision to turn down Paramount'soffer. &quot;Steve Ross keeps thinking of himself as the head ofWarner Communications, as somebody who has made people a lotof money,&quot; says one large institutional shareholder. &quot;But heforgets the Time Inc. shareholders are not Warnershareholders. He underestimated the residual anger of the oldTime shareholder base.&quot;   N.J. Nicholas Jr., the Time president who is now co-chiefexecutive of Time Warner and Mr. Ross's designated successor,still grouses that the Paramount offer wasn't &quot;real,&quot; eventhough a syndicate of banks was ready to provide $20 billionin financing for it. He also maintains that Time Warner can'tbe held to its promise to get the share price above $200because of the unexpected changes in the market for all mediastocks and the unpopularity of leveraged companies ingeneral. Mr. Nicholas also insists the merger of Time andWarner formed a much stronger company than a Time-Paramountcombination.   The merger created two classes of corporate citizens: theformer Warner executives, who pocketed a total of $677million in the merger and got new stock and options, and theTime executives, whose stock and options are under water.Since the merger, notes compensation expert Graef S. Crystal,the salaries, bonuses and stock option grants of topexecutives from the Time side have risen sharply. (Mr.Crystal used to prepare the list of highpaid seniorexecutives for Time Warner's Fortune magazine, but quit thisyear after claiming corporate interference concerning thevaluation of Mr. Ross's compensation, a charge that Fortune'seditor denies.)   Mr. Nicholas was awarded salary and options Mr. Crystalvalued at $7.6 million last year; his salary and bonuses aspresident of Time in 1987 totaled less than $700,000. &quot;Thevirus is spreading,&quot; says Mr. Crystal. Former Time executivesare &quot;all testing greed-positive,&quot; he says.   But to many long-time Warner holders, the pay packages,perks and planes just come with the territory. Al Harrison,executive vice president of Alliance Capital Management,which owns about 6% of Time Warner and ranks as its secondlargest holder, says of Mr. Ross: &quot;There are certainmanagements around the business that look after themselveswell along with looking after shareholders, and this is oneof them.&quot; He adds, &quot;I'm not going to get particularly upsetabout how much salary he's being paid as long as he's comingthrough.&quot;   Indeed, in current presentations to investors, Time Warnerpulls out charts and graphs pointing to a decade ofdouble-digit growth in operating results in movies, filmedentertainment and magazines. The cable division, for example,has reported a 26.4% annual compound growth rate in operatingresults, while filmed entertainment has grown 18.2% annuallyover the period.   Though analysts expect some of that growth to continue andcash flow to remain healthy, there are some trouble spots.The record business, for example, accounted for about $558million in operating cash flow last year. But Warner lostdistribution of important labels including Geffen Records.And the entire industry is flattening out as the compact diskboom ends.   Time Warner still might be able to bolster its businessprospects and its share price by aligning with a partner thatbrings both cash and new business opportunities to thecompany. Time Warner has repeatedly hinted that a strategicalliance was near with a big foreign company. Mr. Rosspublicly said that partners were beating down Time Warner'sdoors, and it was simply a matter of finding the right ones.In an interview last fall, he suggested that five or sixmultinational giants might soon be partners with Time Warner.   The company talks enthusiastically about the technologicaladvances and global opportunities in cable television,pay-per-view movies and technological advances. But it isthin on specifics about how alliances in those businesseswill translate into bottom-line profits for Time Warner. Andwhen the company announced the rights offering, it admittedits huge debt was preventing it from closing any importantdeal.   Mr. Ross and other Time Warner executives still insist anumber of deals are percolating. Though Time Warner has neverpublicly acknowledged talks with Toshiba, company executiveshave privately named the Japanese electronics giant as itshottest prospect. One source familiar with the talks,however, indicates the talks haven't gotten far, saying,&quot;It's not over but it's not progressing.&quot;   For now, at least, Mr. Ross has some breathing room. Therevised rights offering has calmed irate holders and takenthe pressure off on the debt front for now. The offeringenables the company to meet the $3.3 billion payment due onits debt in 1993. &quot;It reduces the debt and the interestburden, and from our perspective that's nothing but goodnews,&quot; says Gerald Hassell, director of corporate finance atone Time Warner lender, Bank of New York. &quot;And if Time Warnerwants a strategic alliance, they are in a much betterbargaining position&quot; with reduced debt, he adds.   At the current stock price, new investors are being luredto Time Warner as a bargain. Even big holders like Alliancesay now is the time to load up on more stock because, as Mr.Harrison puts it, &quot;they have a fantastic bag of properties.&quot;   But others remain unconvinced. &quot;Certainly we're pleasedthat management did respond to the critics and are hopefulthat this is truly a watershed in the relationships with theshareholders,&quot; says Mr. Kumler of INB Trust. But as for TimeWarner management, &quot;I think there's still an element ofdistrust,&quot; he says. &quot;There appears to be a certain arroganceon management's part which just doesn't {reflect} the factthat the shareholders own the company.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>