<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910628-0157</DOCNO><DOCID>910628-0157.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS:   The Bride Wore Lemon and Other Colors Too   ----   By Karen Swenson</HL><DATE>06/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><LP>   Khao I Dang Camp, Thailand -- Looking up I could see largeblack initials spelling out UNBRO (United Nations BorderRelief Organization) across the canvas that formed thewedding tent. The bride, in a brilliant orange dress ofWestern cut spangled with gold, stood outside under a stripedumbrella beside the groom, in a black suit, a blindinglywhite shirt and a red tie. The two were welcoming theirguests and handing each a corsage of yellow fabric rosesadorned with pearls. In Cambodia, the flowers would have beenreal, but this scene was taking place at a refugee camp onthe Thai-Cambodian border, where life isn't quite real.   More complex than the bride's dress was her hairdo. Inback she had a gleaming black coil of hair decorated with redflowers and dancing gold ornaments. In front there wereschools of sausage curls bouncing about her ears and acoronet of pearls. Her bridesmaids were more traditionallyclothed, their hips tightly encased in skirts of stiff Khmersilk gleaming with the sheen of dragonfly wings below daintytops of brilliantly colored laces to match their skirts.</LP><TEXT>   Khao I Dang, named for the mountain it sprawls under, is aCambodian refugee camp of woven bamboo houses lining laneswhere children play in the omnipresent red dust, women inthatched sun-shelters sell sugar cane grown in their yards,and signs posted in front of houses advertise that you canlearn English or French or Spanish within. The U.N. andinternational nongovernmental organizations provideeverything from health care to canned fish to these people,who are recovering from the trauma of war but are not yetable to proceed with their normal lives. Learning a newlanguage provides distraction; a birth or a wedding offersthem a chance to affirm the continuity of traditions in anartificial situation. All are a welcome interruption in theterrible boredom of refugee-camp life, which combines theennui of living in prison and living on welfare.   In the tent's shade tables were arranged on the dirtfloor, each set with bowls, chopsticks, spoons and a varietyof things to drink -- whiskey, soda water, Pepsi, Seven Up,and that Southeast Asian staple, Miranda Orange. The guestscame in their best, whether new blue jeans or a fineCambodian skirt and a frilly blouse. Throughout the partyyoung men drifted between the tables with glasses and bottlesof whiskey, joking, talking and urging friends to have alittle nip.   My party was seated next to the band, which consisted oftwo chest-high drums, two electric guitars and an electrickeyboard run off a car battery. There were three singers, twowomen and a man, who switched off with each other singingplaintive Cambodian songs. All was amplified by a pair ofgiant speakers. This was actually an advantage, since wedidn't have to pretend to talk to each other across thelanguage barriers and could concentrate on eating.   We started with peanuts and a pickled salad. This was asevere test, since the polite way to consume the peanuts wasone at a time with chopsticks. These were also handed out todusty, barefoot children, who formed an outer gawking circlearound the wedding guests -- lucky the ones with an indulgentgrandparent on hand. Next, waitresses in traditionalCambodian dress and dangling gold earrings brought to eachtable a steaming hot pot for cooking slices of beef, and anassortment of vegetables displayed artistically on a platter.This was followed by a cold chicken salad not much differentfrom the one Aunt Sally used to make on a hot day in Omaha.The piece de resistance, however, was a whole duck stuffedwith cellophane noodles, peanuts, rice and wild mushrooms.Even the bare carcass was sucked on to get out the last sweetjuices and flavors of soy and garlic.   At this point in the eating orgy, I looked up and noticedthat the bride was no longer in orange but in vivid yellowsilk with spangles. During the next hot pot, which containedcloud ears, Chinese cabbage, scallions and what one findslisted ominously on bilingual Thai menus as &quot;pig's offal,&quot; Itook a rest and found the bride was now in lemon lace withpuffy tulle epaulettes. Over the amplification I inquiredfrom my neighbor the reason for the changes in dress. Heyelled back that it was to show off the wealth of the bride'sfamily. Later I found out that the dresses are rented out.The dressmaker's assistant slits the bride out of one dressand sews her into the next in a back room as the receptionprogresses. When dessert arrived, water chestnuts in coconutmilk, the lucky girl was in kelly green satin with a bustle.   Discretely, as guests finished their dessert, thewaitresses in Khmer skirts came around with envelopes for thewedding guests to deposit their wedding presents into. I wasinstructed as to the appropriate amount -- 100 baht, or about$5 -- and as we left I handed it to the groom with thecustomary bow called a &quot;wai.&quot; As I looked back through thedust our Jeep spewed up, I could see the bride in lavenderlace, smiling under her umbrella.   ---   Ms. Swenson, a Brooklyn, N.Y., poet, travels frequently toSoutheast Asia.</TEXT></DOC>