<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900823-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>900823-0081.</DOCID><HL>   The Nuclear Energy Weapon   ----   By John O. Sillin</HL><DATE>08/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)PETROLEUM (PET)COAL PRODUCERS (COA)</IN><GV>ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)</GV><LP>   Iraq's invasion of Kuwait has brought into sharp focus theneed by the U.S. to limit its dependence on Mideast oil. Ifthe U.S. is to continue electrifying the nontransportationenergy sector and insulating itself from the vagaries ofpolitics in the Persian Gulf and other hot spots, rapidgrowth in applying nuclear energy, an economically andenvironmentally sound alternative threatened by domesticpolitics, must continue. This is particularly true if theClean Air Act is signed into law.   Over the past 20 years, the increased use of nuclearenergy and coal in the production of electricity hasgradually weaned Americans from over-dependence on oil in thenon-transportation sector. (Unfortunately, the transportationsector is liquid-fuel-dependent and has increased itspetroleum consumption by more than 20% since the first oilembargo in 1973.) While total energy requirements haveincreased 13.6% since 1973, oil consumption has decreased 40%in homes and small businesses and 10% in factories -- despitean increase in economic output of more than 50%.</LP><TEXT>   While petroleum use was declining in these sectors,electricity usage increased by 67% and 33%, respectively.This improved life styles, spurred economic growth, increasedenergy efficiency, and decreased exposure to the SaddamHusseins of the world.   And where was this electricity coming from? Between 1973and 1989, electricity production from nuclear power increased525% and from coal 84%. Though petroleum usage by utilitieshas recently turned up, it is still less than half its 1973level.   With economic growth in the 1990s generally forecast toaverage between 2.5% and 3% a year, the Department of Energy,Edison Electric Institute and other recognized authoritiesare forecasting electricity demand to increase at similarrates. At 3% growth, approximately 180,000 megawatts of newgenerating capacity are required in addition to that which isunder construction and for which firm planning commitmentsexist; if growth averages 2.5%, 140,000 megawatts arerequired. This is equivalent to 140 to 180 large powerplants. These needs exclude the possibility that some 60,000megawatts of aging fossil-fired plants may need to beretired. If we are not to increase the use of oil, thisleaves coal, natural gas, and solar and nuclear power asalternatives.   The Clean Air bill (now in conference committee, versionshaving passed the Senate and the House) would sharply cutcoal's ability to meet these increased power needs. Accordingto the act, sulfur dioxide emissions must be reduced by morethan half, to 8.9 million tons a year by the year 2001.Nitrogen oxides are also to be halved, to 2.5 million tons ayear.   The Edison Electric Institute estimates the annual cost ofcompliance to be $5 billion to $7 billion. This will increaseelectricity rates by about 6%; but in regions that burn highsulfur coal, the increase could be as high as 20%. Some 250existing power plants will be affected. Operating costs atsome plants could increase by as much as 50%, leading toclosure of the plants. Other plants will see degradedoperations and lower efficiency. Also, new clean coal powerproduction technologies may not be available until around theyear 2000. Thus, maintaining electricity output from coalpower plants will be a daunting task, much less increasingproduction to meet growth in electricity use.   Natural gas is the cleanest-burning fossil fuel, andexcept for modest imports from Canada, it is produceddomestically. But, until now, natural gas has been used byelectric utilities in power plants that operate only duringperiods of peak power demand. Only where natural gas could bereliably accessed in large quantities, such as on the GulfCoast, is it used to meet day in, day out electricity needs.In the rest of the country, obtaining a natural gas contractthat guarantees firm delivery at a stable price for periodsof 10 years or more is difficult to nearly impossible. Thus,using natural gas to meet the bulk of the electricity needsidentified earlier entails significant business risks.   These risks will probably increase, in part due to theClean Air Act. First, the demand for natural gas amongindustrial customers will increase as they reduce their useof dirtier-burning oil and coal. Second, natural gas and oilprices are aligned because of their direct substitutability.If oil prices continue their recent rise, gas prices willfollow. Third, there is a delivery problem because pipelinecapacity needs to be expanded, to move gas farther and todeliver it to power plants.   Solar, biomass and other renewable forms of energy are notyet practical on the scale needed to satisfy the increasedelectricity needs the U.S. will experience in the 1990s. In1989 these forms of energy satisfied less than 0.5% of totalU.S. electricity requirements, and, according to EnergyDepartment figures, no growth in output has occurred since1985.   Therefore, by the process of elimination, the U.S. shouldbe headed down the path of increased use of nuclear power.Last year, nuclear power plants generated 19.1% of U.S.electricity requirements. If these plants had not beenoperating, an additional 275 million tons of coal or 800million barrels of oil would have been burned. Sulfur dioxideand nitrogen oxides emissions would have been five milliontons and two million tons higher, respectively, and our oilimport bill would bave been some $5 billion higher.   The U.S. has realized significant benefits from itsinvestment in nuclear energy. Cumulative cost savings fromoperating nuclear vs. fossil power plants exceed $40 billionsince about 1970. Also, using cost assumptions contained inthe proposed Clean Air Act, the cumulative value of reducedemissions resulting from nuclear plant operations isestimated to be more than $80 billion. In addition, accordingto the U.S. Council for Energy Awareness, since 1973 nuclearenergy has displaced four billion barrels of oil, saving $115billion on our import bill.   Other unquantified benefits include the fact that nuclearpower plants emit no particulates. They do not produce noise.They do not require large numbers of wells or mines toproduce fuel or barges, pipelines or trains to transport it.Also, nuclear fuel wastes can be stored at compact locations.Given concerns over oil spills, refinery explosions anddespoiled lands, these are benefits worth acknowledging.   But perhaps the largest benefit is that a vibrant nuclearpower program helps provide us with the will to deal withthugs like Saddam Hussein. The U.S. has taken the lead inorganizing the world to thwart additional acts of aggressionand butchery by him. The leadership might have been lessforthcoming if our non-transportation sectors were dependenton Persian Gulf oil.   Unfortunately, just as a new wave of nuclear power plantconstruction should be starting, it is stagnant. As a result,oil consumption by the utilities, which had been decliningfor years, recently turned up -- increasing by 32% since1987.   Much of the blame for this resides with short-sightedfederal and state regulatory policies. Of greatest immediacy,state rate regulators must encourage, not thwart, utilityinvestment in nuclear energy (the Shoreham plant's experiencein New York state is perhaps the most egregious example);federal regulators must stop dawdling with regard tolicensing new nuclear plant designs; and the EnergyDepartment must effectively manage the nuclear fuel wastestorage program, for which it is responsible (a programfunded by the nuclear utility industry).   The commercial nuclear industry must also take agressiveaction, including improving the industry's spotty operatingrecord. While all U.S. nuclear plants are safe and operationsimproved dramatically in the 1980s, there are still plantsthat under-perform, and they always make the headlines. Thenuclear industry must also be more aggressive in stating theneed for new plants and planning for their installation. In aword, leadership is required.   In the late 1970s, Carter administration policy called fornuclear power to be &quot;the energy option of last resort.&quot; Thisunfortunate and inept policy still manifests itself in howthe nuclear industry is regulated and perceived. It must beimmediately reversed. Failure to do so risks undermining ourmost fundamental political values.   ---   Mr. Sillin is with Management Analysis Co., a consultingfirm that works extensively for the power industry and theDepartment of Energy.</TEXT></DOC>