<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900531-0142</DOCNO><DOCID>900531-0142.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   As the World Whizzes On By, Washington Goes `Uh...'   ----   By Hodding Carter III</HL><DATE>05/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Let us start with a self-evident proposition. What mattersmost when you face a new situation or perplexing problem isnot the identity of the people who come up with a solution,nor the &quot;correctness&quot; of its ideological underpinnings, butthe fact of the solution itself.   Add a second proposition. The U.S. faces a dramaticallynew situation abroad and a large handful of seeminglyintractable problems at home.</LP><TEXT>   Put the two together and you come up with a thirdproposition. There is a tremendous political payoff foranyone who manufactures a package of workable ideas forrefashioning American domestic and foreign policies over thenext decade.   All of this is a truism, you say. But it is a truism thatdoes not seem to have led enough people to draw theappropriate conclusions as of this late spring. The need foragonizing reappraisals is much discussed. Actualreappraisals, and subsequent political repositioning, arerare.   There is some ferment. On the right, which has held anear-monopoly on intellectual vigor and muscular politics (ifnot intelligent policies) for almost 20 years, there is agrowing call for new thinking. High priests of the Cold Warsay it is time to close the temple and worship new gods.While this threatens schism -- old believers still being inthe majority among conservatives and visceral anti-communismnot easily abandoned -- what is noteworthy is that the debateis fully joined.   So, too, is the debate among conservatives on how toconfront the unavoidable realities of persistent poverty,anemic public education, a tattered social safety net andenvironmental degradation. Rep. Newt Gingrich of Georgia,half partisan Cro-Magnon, half brilliant strategist, keepsmachine-gunning ideas at the GOP and the nation in the hopethat some will take. In a satellite TV show the other day, hehighlighted a smorgasbord of ideas on how to apply localanswers to social problems. Former Rep. Jack Kemp, now HUDsecretary, suggests a mix of activist government and lessgovernment. Right-wing think tanks are mass-producingmanifestoes and &quot;new paradigms&quot; beyond count.   On the left, creative thinkers from Cambridge toCalifornia are writing scores of books designed to move thenation into a new progressive era. Individual Democrats inCongress offer pieces of a new approach, some of themstartling in innovation and complexity. Sen. Daniel Moynihan(D., N.Y.) makes an offer no liberal should be able to refusewhen it comes to cutting Social Security taxes. Profoundlyrevolutionary proposals for creating a peace dividend ofimmediate impact and breathtaking scope have been tabled, allrequiring that our defense establishment be downsized toreflect more accurately the substantially reducedinternational threat.   But for all the verbal fireworks and press-release gloss,monographs and mass mailings, little is actually happening.It seems even less when compared with the bumper crop ofchange and difficulties being harvested inside and outsideU.S. borders. While yeasty ferment is a good sign, bubblesalone won't do. There must be translation into concreteprograms.   Examine for a moment the rationale for new thinking andpolicies. The revolution and disintegration that haveimploded the Soviet empire and undermined the stability ofthe Soviet state are major realities of our time. Anothermajor reality is the re-emergence of a truly competitiveinternational economic system, (say the words Japan andEurope), coupled with growing disparities in the economichealth of the haves and have-nots of the world.   And here at home there is a neck-and-neck race to seewhose pet ideological theories will turn out to have beenmost disastrously wrong. To offer but a handful of thepossible illustrations, there are the squalid shambles of HUDand the financial black hole created by the savings-and-loanscandal to prove that government regulation and oversight arethe sine qua non of the good society in the modern industrialworld. Political fecklessness and failed economic theorieshave created an explosion of public debt and a long string ofthus-far intransigent deficits, with enough blame to goaround several times over. Each day's headlines bring newindicators of trouble. This week's included the decliningfinancial relevance of private pension plans, once hailed asthe nongovernmental alternative to Social Security.   But in Washington, there is a collective failure to act onthe basis of changed circumstances. It's politics pretty muchas usual. Amid the throaty roars of change, what arenoteworthy are the dogs that have not barked. Intellectualand political arteriosclerosis seems to have set in,occasional spasms of production such as the Clean Air Act tothe contrary.   Consider the Bush administration's approach. Wheninitially confronted, deny anything has really changed. Thengrudgingly begin to admit something is different. Next,having acknowledged the nature of change in let us say,Mikhail Gorbachev's U.S.S.R. or the federal budgetarysituation, claim there is no need for radical alteration indefense or tax policy. Finally, tiptoe into a new stance withone leg while straddling the old one with the other.   As for the Democrats, their problem is that their mostarticulate voices find little resonance on Capitol Hill. Theparty's congressional wing achieves consensus most often withpatchwork quilts that cover almost every interest but have nodiscernible design. There is no overarching theory or set ofcommon goals around which the party unites or toward which itaims.   Conservatives are fond of saying there are no new ideas.Perhaps, but a combination of old ideas offered with newintensity would make sense for the Democrats -- or a newparty. It would stress the creation of what a spokesman forthe Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commercerecently referred to as Germany's &quot;social marketplaceeconomy.&quot; How the objectives were achieved would matter lessthan their achievement. The Three E's -- environment,education and equity -- would be treated as basic to nationalsecurity. So would universal health insurance, common toevery other industrial democracy. National tax policy wouldbe progressive in fact, rather than regressive as it now isin overall impact.   The military defense component of national security wouldfinally be placed within parameters of clearly definedmission and unexaggerated threat all within the context of acommunity of nations infinitely better able to defendthemselves than 30 years ago. Recognizing thatinterdependence is an unavoidable reality on most matters,whether environmental, military or economic, Washington wouldrecommit itself to breathing new life into existinginternational organizations.   All of this is as familiar as it sounds. It is the stuffof which the democratic left has historically been made, butfrom which it has been steadily retreating. The time has cometo reassert the tradition with imagination and persistence.The conservatives are already in the field. Taking the longview, it hardly matters which side wins, so long as thewinner is committed to engaging the world and nation as theyare and proposing solutions to what is there. What would beunforgivable, and possibly disastrous, would be to allowtoday's drift to become tomorrow's inertia.   ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads atelevision production firm.</TEXT></DOC>