<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900423-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>900423-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Fog Shrouds Death of an Arms Salesman   ---   Killer's Pistol Ends Gerald   Bull's `Supergun' Dream   ----   A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DATE>04/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><LP>   LONDON -- As a specialist in bailing out problemcompanies, David James is used to looking for trouble. On themorning of March 27, he knew he'd found it.   Mr. James, chairman of U.K. conglomerate Eagle Trust PLC,phoned Peter Mitchell, the manager of his company'sengineering unit. &quot;He sounded odd,&quot; recalls Mr. James. &quot;Isaid, `Are you all right, Peter?'&quot; His employee replied: &quot;Achap called Gerald Bull has been murdered. His company ishandling our orders to Iraq.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Jesus Christ]&quot; Mr. James responded.   Mr. James knew from media reports that Mr. Bull was anAmerican ballistics expert with strong ties to the arms trade-- a man described by colleagues as both a dark genius in themold of Dr. Strangelove and a meek, rumpled theorist withspace-age dreams. For 30 years, he had collaborated onadvanced weapons research with the U.S., South Africa,Israel, China and most recently, Iraq.   What Mr. James says he hadn't realized was that his owncompany had become an unwitting player in Mr. Bull's globalarms game. British officials confirmed Mr. James's fears lastweek, announcing that huge steel tubes supplied by Britishmanufacturers -- ostensibly for an Iraqi petrochemicalproject -- were in fact pieces of the world's biggest gun.   Police are still searching for the professional killer whoused a silenced pistol to shoot Mr. Bull five times outsidehis Brussels apartment. Robbery has been ruled out as amotive; the scientist was found carrying $20,000. Seizingsteel pipes still on British docks and stopping trucks inGreece and near Turkey's border with Iraq, British officialsappear to have stymied Mr. Bull's grand project.   But while the scientist and his &quot;supergun&quot; dream are gone,Mr. Bull's death leaves a trail of mystery and militarydebris stretching from an abandoned missile range in Vermontto the arid hills of Iraq. Arms experts are baffled by theprecise purpose and workings of Mr. Bull's &quot;Doomsday Gun.&quot;Strong evidence suggests that Margaret Thatcher's governmentwinked at the gun's manufacture, breaking its own rules onweapons shipments. And there is widespread suspicion thatagents for Israel, or possibly Iran, killed Mr. Bull.   &quot;The only man with the answers was last seen with fivebullets in his head and his pockets stuffed with cash,&quot; saysChristopher Foss, a U.K. weapons expert and military editorof Jane's Defense Weekly.   The strange career of Mr. Bull was as fast and high-flyingas the weapons he created. Born in Ontario in 1928, he becameat the age of 20 one of Canada's youngest-ever Ph.D.graduates. Four years later, Maclean's magazine dubbed himCanada's &quot;Boy Rocket Scientist.&quot; In 1966, Mr. Bull's work ona joint U.S.-Canadian ballistics project lofted him into theGuinness Book of World Records, which cites the High AltitudeResearch Project (HARP) for &quot;the greatest range ever attainedby a gun.&quot; The 112 mile-high firing hasn't been surpassed.Mr. Bull's work was considered so vital that Sen. BarryGoldwater helped push through a special act of Congress togrant U.S. citizenship to the Canadian.   &quot;He was a very intense, very charismatic, very charmingperson,&quot; says Charles Murphy, who worked with Mr. Bull onHARP and is now chief of the launch and flight division ofthe U.S. Army's ballistic research laboratory at Aberdeen,Md. He was a &quot;von Braun type, who would work for anybody,&quot;says Mr. Murphy, noting that Wernher von Braun worked onrocket programs for the Germans during World War II and laterfor the Americans to achieve his goal of sending a rocket tothe moon. Mr. Bull's dream was to use guns rather thanrockets to launch payloads cheaply into space.   The stocky, temperamental scientist's obsession with hisspace gun -- and his willingness to work with anybody --eventually got him into trouble. The U.S. and Canada cutfunding for HARP in the late 1960s, in part because of adecision to pursue conventional rocketry. Embittered, Mr.Bull continued testing at a missile range straddling theVermont-Quebec border, with venture capital provided byToronto financiers Peter and Edward Bronfman, and theBoston-based research and consulting firm Arthur D. Little.The occasional cannon blasts &quot;sounded like a littleroadwork,&quot; recalls Harold Haynes, a real-estate agent inNorth Troy, Vt.   To the South Africans and Israelis, it sounded like apromising way to boost the range and accuracy of their fieldartillery. In the 1970s, the Israelis integrated his researchinto their own designs, which had proved inferior in the 1973Yom Kippur War. South Africa brought Mr. Bull to Pretoria tohelp develop a new cannon. The G5 howitzer is stillconsidered the world's best and proved decisive duringfighting in Angola, as well as becoming a major export earnerfor South Africa.   &quot;Bull was a man who could carry around all these intricatecalculations in his brain -- just the man we were after,&quot;says Piet Marais, who met often with Mr. Bull as head of theArmaments Corp. of South Africa, a government agency. Heremembers the scientist as an &quot;absent-minded professor&quot; whohad &quot;absolutely no ability at managing a business or actuallyputting his theories into practice.&quot;   Mr. Marais says the South Africans often advanced Mr. Bullmoney to overcome personal financial problems. They alsolistened politely to &quot;his endless fantasies about big guns.You could only use 25% of what he said. The rest was dreams.&quot;His biggest vision: a giant gun that could destroy satellitesby exploding projectiles in their path. From what he's heardof the Iraqi supergun, Mr. Marais says, &quot;it sounds like GerryBull never let go of his dream.&quot;   In 1980, Mr. Bull pleaded guilty in a federal court inVermont to smuggling arms, shells and testing equipment toSouth Africa between 1976 and 1978. The material was acquiredfrom the U.S. Army under the authority of a letter from theState Department's Office of Munitions Control, andintermediaries in the deal included an agent of the CentralIntelligence Agency and a state-owned Israeli weaponsproducer. From congressional inquiries and the accounts ofMr. Bull's colleagues, it appears that the scientist wastrying to finance his research through arms deals that hethought had the tacit approval of the U.S.   Before serving four months in a Pennsylvania prison, Mr.Bull spent eight weeks in a Connecticut psychiatric facility.&quot;His world just collapsed on him,&quot; says Mr. Murphy, his HARPcolleague. &quot;He had four or five companies that went down thetubes.&quot;   Mr. Bull's imprisonment intensified the disillusionment heexperienced after the abandonment of his HARP research.Colleagues say the mild-mannered professor emerged from jailan enraged man who felt he had been betrayed and made ascapegoat. &quot;I would call him two different people,&quot; says aMontreal scientist who worked closely with Mr. Bull for manyyears. &quot;In the 60s his goal was scientific and technical. Inthe later years it's hard to tell what was driving him --revenge, bitterness.&quot;   Released from prison, Mr. Bull set up shop in Belgium andbegan peddling his expertise to anyone willing to bankrollresearch and buy arms. He became scathingly critical of theU.S., believing that it was on the wrong side in most of itsforeign policy, which he once reportedly termed &quot;gutless andconfused.&quot; And increasingly, he turned to Third World clientssuch as China and Iraq.   Although the details of Mr. Bull's work with Baghdadremain murky, he is believed to have helped Iraq developlong-range artillery in the closing stages of its war withIran -- work which may have culminated in the launch lastDecember of a missile with a range of 1,200 miles. IraqiPresident Saddam Hussein recently hailed Mr. Bull as ascientist &quot;sympathetic to Arab causes,&quot; adding crypticallythat he had &quot;helped Iraq in one thing or another.&quot;   The two men's interests meshed perfectly; Mr. Bull, withhis lifetime dream of a big gun, and Mr. Hussein, a dictatorwith big bucks, a Babylon-sized ego and enemies on threeflanks: Iran, Israel and Syria. The world's biggest gun --immobile, easy to spot and difficult to fire -- wouldnonetheless represent another impressive arrow in Iraq'sbulging quiver.   &quot;If you're looking for a logical rationale here, I don'tthink you're going to find it,&quot; says Martin Navias, an expertin missile proliferation at King's College in London. Hesays, though, that the development of such a weapon fits&quot;Iraq's shotgun approach to arming itself -- an `I'll tryanything' attitude.&quot;   April 1988 was the turning point for Iraq in the longPersian Gulf war, as Baghdad began to push the Iranians backfrom territory they had earlier overrun. Meanwhile, far awayin the British midlands, independent steel companies such asEagle Trust's Walter Somers Ltd. unit were fighting battlesjust to stay in business. It was also in April 1988, whiletrying to drum up new contracts, that the company put anadvertisment in a trade magazine, Metals and Materials,showing off its high-pressure presses.   A response came almost immediately from a Brussels-basedbusinessman then working for Mr. Bull's Space Research Corp.He told Somers that he wanted heavy-duty steel tubes for anIraqi petrochemicals plant. Somers didn't have the capacityto fill the large order, so another plant, SheffieldForgemasters, took on the lion's share.   In June, specifications for the tubes arrived, and RexBayliss, then Somers's managing director, didn't like what hesaw. An expert metallurgist who had served in the Royal Navyand filled numerous contracts for the British Ministry ofDefence, he felt that the toughness required in the steeljibed more with military jobs than with a standardoil-industry specification. British law bans arms sales toIraq and Iran and requires licensing for any &quot;large calibrearmament&quot; export.   Mr. Bayliss called a local member of Parliament, Sir HalMiller, who immediately alerted the Department of Trade andIndustry, the Ministry of Defence and a third party, which heidentifies only as &quot;a security agency.&quot; The company offeredthree options: It would withdraw from the order, undertake itand allow the pipes to be traced, or simply carry on. Thegovernment said to go ahead.   In 1989, the company received orders for hydraulicequipment, supposedly destined for the same petrochemicalsplant. &quot;No use was identified for it, but that isn'tunusual,&quot; says Mr. James, the Eagle Trust chairman.&quot;Engineers just work from specifications. If you gave them aspecification for a monster garden gnome, they'd fill thespec,&quot; he says. Now, Mr. James thinks the equipment may havebeen part of a gun's recoil mechanism.   Late in 1989, Somers received inquiries about a metaldevice capable of swinging a pipe through a wide arc. Theweek of Mr. Bull's murder, the company got an urgentcommunication from the Iraqis saying they wanted the newdevice manufactured as soon as possible.   In the wake of the killing, an alarmed Mr. James onceagain outlined the company's concerns to the Britishgovernment. Two days later, customs officers raided thepremises of Somers and Sheffield Forgemasters, as part of&quot;Operation Bertha,&quot; named for the huge World War I guns usedby the Germans to shell Paris. British officials say 44 ofthe 52 pipes ordered by Iraq already have been delivered. Asmaller-bore prototype of the supergun may have beentest-fired in Iraq, though officials are unsure whichcountries have provided the breech and other parts.   Sheffield Forgemasters never seems to have been troubledby the doubts that beset Somers. The company continues toassert that to the best of its knowledge, the pipes for Iraqwere to be used in making polyethylene. It even made a15-minute promotional video entitled &quot;Technology in TubeMaking&quot; to show off its work on the giant pipes.   Parliamentarians are now questioning whether Mrs.Thatcher's government knowingly broke its own arms embargo.Just as the U.S. government tilted toward Iraq in the finalstages of the war to fend off an Iranian victory, the Britishgovernment may have allowed the shipments to proceed as aback-door way of helping Iraq's war effort. Now, with anincreasingly belligerent Mr. Hussein threatening to &quot;scorchhalf of Israel,&quot; shoring up Iraq's military with a giant gunmight not seem such a good idea.   &quot;There is no artillery piece in the world like this.Period,&quot; says Mr. Foss at Jane's Defense Weekly. Thecompleted weapon would be 130 feet long with a barreldiameter of 39 inches -- four to five times the size of anygun in the arsenal of either NATO or the Warsaw Pact. Itcould deliver conventional, chemical or nuclear warheads overa distance of 1,000 miles, or possibly launch a satellite oranti-satellite device into space.   Mr. Foss, like most arms experts, isn't exactly sure howthe gun would be used, or whether it would work at all. But,he adds: &quot;Gerry Bull was a pioneer, and he came up with veryfew losers.&quot;   As it turned out, Mr. Bull never got the chance to see ifhis supergun would have been a winner. On March 22, anassassin shot him as he stood at the door of his apartment ina fancy Brussels suburb. Neighbors heard nothing, and thepolice don't appear to have any strong leads. Agents forIsrael, Iran or possibly Syria -- all foes of Iraq -- are theleading suspects.   Avraham Bar-David, an Israeli artillery specialist who metseveral times with Mr. Bull while Israel was assessing thescientist's work, expressed sadness but no surprise at newsof his death. &quot;This is the way this business works,&quot; he saysof the scientist's turn to arms-dealing with the Arabs andeventual assassination. He added that the murder wasundoubtedly &quot;correlated to the Iraqi gun.&quot; As to allegationsby Mr. Bull's son that Israeli intelligence carried out thekilling, Mr. Bar-David responds: &quot;Maybe he knows what he'stalking about. I don't know.&quot;   Whoever the killer may be, the murder achieved itsapparent purpose of ending Mr. Bull's work. Last Thursday,Space Research Corp. closed its doors, citing the death ofMr. Bull and &quot;security reasons.&quot; Company sources say everyengineer at the Brussels-based firm has received deaththreats in recent weeks.   Michael Bull, the scientist's son and a managing directorof the company, continues to deny any link to the Iraqi gun,adding that the British are using the company as an &quot;alibi&quot;in its anti-Iraq campaign. &quot;We're just a little pawn in thatgame,&quot; he fumed. &quot;Our reputation has been tarnished by theBritish in a disgusting way. They are the worst scum thatever existed on earth.&quot;   Iraq also continues to deny the existence of the supergun.But by comparing calculations made by British officials withthose of Mr. Bull, the mysterious weapon bears a strikingresemblance to the one he began developing almost 30 yearsago.   A piece of that dream can still be found in North Troy,Vt., hard by the Canadian border, on the site of the missilerange Mr. Bull abandoned in 1980. A 106-foot-long cylinderlies beside a snow-fed brook. Six smaller gun barrels arestrewn nearby, amid alder and scrub maple trees. All thatremains as evidence of its potentially deadly use is a fadedred sign warning: &quot;Danger Explosif.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>