<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910522-0083</DOCNO><DOCID>910522-0083.</DOCID><HL>   Tragic Turn:   Assassination of Gandhi   Ends Political Dynasty   That Shaped India   ---   With Elections in Turmoil,   Troubled Nation Faces   New Wave of Uncertainty   ---   The Latest Violent Outbreak   ----   By Anthony Spaeth and Robert S. Greenberger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>INDIA (II)</RE><LP>   NEW DELHI, India -- With the assassination of RajivGandhi, India has lost another generation of the only moderndynastic family that ever managed to impose a semblance ofstability on this land.   It has also brought the formerly idealistic realm ofMohandas K. Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru to a new brink ofuncertainty. The latest political tragedy strikes at a timewhen Indian democracy is under unprecedented strain.</LP><TEXT>   For the past two years, India has seen new levels ofinstability, with a succession of central governments thatcould barely rule, law and order crumbling in the povertysubmerged states, and raging separatist movements in Punjab,Kashmir and Assam. The economy too is spiralling out ofcontrol, with prices rising, default on external debtlooming, and the government unable to submit a budget plan.Further exacerbating the situation has been the decline ofthe country's historic sponsor, the Soviet Union.   Mr. Gandhi, who became prime minister at the age of 40 in1984, after the assassination of his mother, Indira, waskilled yesterday by a bomb blast just as he stepped from acar in Sriperumpudur, 25 miles southwest of Madras. There wasno immediate claim of responsibility. But India's officialnews agency, Press Trust, said that law enforcementauthorities suspected that Sri Lankan Tamil separatists wereinvolved, because Mr. Gandhi had sent troops there to crushan uprising in 1987.   At the time of the killing, Mr. Gandhi was campaigning onhis longtime platform: that India should modernize and jointhe outside world. He had also spoken out pointedly yesterdayagainst the rising violence that had marred the election.   India's elections, which began on Monday and were tocontinue this Thursday and Sunday, have now been postponeduntil June 12 and June 15, according to the United News ofIndia. But without Mr. Gandhi, who was thought to be on theverge of a successful political comeback following his ousterfrom power in 1989, the outcome is up in the air. Indianpolitics without him -- without a strong leader of hisCongress Party -- is unimaginable to many political analystsand most Indians.   &quot;The situation was already uncertain,&quot; says Arun Kumar, aneconomist in New Delhi. &quot;Now, who knows?&quot;   Polls showed that Mr. Gandhi's Congress Party, which invarious forms has governed India for all but four of its 43years of independence, would gain the largest number of seatsin the lower house of the Indian Parliament. But it might nothave been enough to form a government. The Congress Party hasdeteriorated in recent years and two parties have rushed tofill the vacuum, including a pro-Hindu party, which couldalter India's long-standing nondiscriminatory, nonsectarianrule. With Mr. Gandhi's death, the election prospects areeven more clouded. Some analysts say a wave of sympathy couldsweep the Congress to power, if a credible leader steps intoMr. Gandhi's shoes. Several have been standing in the wingsfor years. Possible candidates include Congress veterans N.D.Tiwari, Vasant Sathe, and P.V. Narasimha Rao. But they willinherit a deteriorating party and a country with intractableproblems. Unless a truly popular leader emerges, many believethe Congress Party is finished.   &quot;There's no obvious heir apparent and no family memberripe for stepping in,&quot; says a U.S. official. The only directheirs are young children, and as for other political leaders,a U.S. expert says, &quot;There are only a lot of important localfigures, but they haven't coalesced thus far into a clearpecking order.&quot; John Kenneth Galbraith, ambassador to Indiaduring John F. Kennedy's administration, observed that, atleast for now, Mr. Gandhi's death marks the end of apolitical dynasty. &quot;The great grandfather, grandfather,mother and now Rajiv were the dynasty. At least for the shortrun, this is the end.&quot;   Rajiv's great grandfather was Motilal Nehru, a closeassociate of Mohandas Gandhi (not a relative), and hisgrandfather, Jawaharlal Nehru, was prime minister from1947-64.   U.S. analysts believe that the deep roots of Indiandemocracy will nonetheless hold. As Sen. Daniel PatrickMoynihan, (D., N.Y.), a former ambassador to India put it,&quot;You can blow up a leader; you cannot blow up a democracy.&quot;Yet U.S. analysts worry that a weak coalition government willbe even less able to get a grip on the increasingly urgentproblems that face the country.   On top of this, India now confronts the specter of thekind of violence that erupted after then-Prime MinisterIndira Gandhi's 1984 assassination by Sikh bodyguards. Afterthat killing, Hindus retaliated against the Sikhs, killingthousands. A senior U.S. official says that whether there isa similar outburst this time may depend on who takesresponsibility-or who is blamedfor Mr. Gandhi's killing.   Yesterday President Bush called the killing &quot;justappalling,&quot; and added that &quot;I just don't know what the worldis coming to.&quot;   For a period after he took over in 1984, Mr. Gandhi wasviewed as the possible savior of the country. He was young,modern and idealistic; he was a reluctant politician, havingabdicated political ambitions to his younger brother, Sanjay,who was killed in a plane crash in 1981. Mr. Gandhi's wife,Sonia, born in Italy, pleaded with him to reject the primeministership and once even wept in public.   But Mr. Gandhi chose to lead the Congress Party in the1984 elections and won the largest majority in Indianhistory. After gaining power, he set India's hopes soaring.He talked about the need to bring high-technology to India.He boldly criticized the laziness and corruption of India'sbureaucracy and promised a clean government that &quot;works.&quot; Tothe astonishment of the entire country, he also criticizedhis own party, which had led the struggle for independencefrom the British.   &quot;Instead of a party that fired the imagination of themasses, we have shrunk, losing touch with the toilingmillions,&quot; he said in a speech in 1985. He admittedcorruption in Indian politics, as no Indian leader had everdone before. He talked about &quot;the brokers of power andinfluence who dispense patronage to convert a mass movementinto a feudal oligarchy.&quot;   Yet Mr. Gandhi didn't promise unrealistic feats. He didn'tclaim that he could bring an end to poverty, a promise thatIndian politicians had made for decades. Instead he promisedtwo things: to end pervasive, low-level corruption and badadministration. On top of that, the middle and upper classeswere electrified by the notion of India modernizing, aconcept no Indian politician had ever deemed important to itspolitical base: the poor.   The early days of the Rajiv Gandhi administration werethrilling on both political and economic fronts. He signedagreements with the Sikhs, whose battle for an independentstate had led to his mother's murder, and with separatists inAssam. He pushed through groundbreaking economicliberalizations, which cut income taxes and started aderegulation of India's creaking, heavily state-controlledindustries. But in 1987, to win a round of state elections,Mr. Gandhi went back on some of the promises he'd made theSikhs. His economic liberalizations got mired in bureaucratictangles and he decided to delay new ones until he got a freshmandate. Then, an arms scandal arose in which he was accusedof taking kickbacks. No proof was ever produced, but itruined his reputation as &quot;Mr. Clean.&quot;   His sidestepping of the Indian game of politics ended. Heeven re-employed some of his mother's most disreputablepolitical agents. The middle class immediately turned againsthim. In the elections of 1989, the masses showed theirdisenchantment. Local corruption and brutality hadn'tchanged, as Mr. Gandhi had promised. They voted the CongressParty out of power. It won the largest number of seats in theparliament but couldn't form a government.   Mr. Gandhi's failure in 1989 was a watershed. He managedto keep the party under his control, against widespreadexpectations that it would split. But political analystssuggest that the average Indian, who respects strongleadership, lost respect for the party and for him.   In Asalatnagar, a village 45 miles from New Delhi, thevillagers sat on string beds last weekend, drinking tea andnibbling biscuits, talking about the deterioration of theCongress Party. &quot;We'd vote for Mrs. Gandhi, or even SanjayGandhi, if he was around,&quot; said Khenchand, a 70-year-oldfarmer. &quot;They knew how to get things done. But Rajiv is apawn in the hands of a certain structure that doesn't let himfunction. He's a good guy, but he's a puppet. He doesn't havethe brains.&quot;   It's an unfair evaluation: by many estimations, Mr. Gandhiwas intelligent, charming, hard-working and knew how to leadthe highly complex government. He was clumsy at times. Butmore important, he lacked the ruthlessness of his mother instriking down competitors. In India, this is considered asign of weakness. And the popular perception is that thepolitical instability of the past two years, much of itprovoked by former allies of Mr. Gandhi from within theCongress Party, would not have been allowed to occur underhis mother.   In the current campaign, the Congress Party was hoping toget votes on a &quot;stability&quot; platform. In a break from pastpractices, no party ran on an anti-Congress platform.Instead, two major parties offered new, and possiblydangerous ideologies, to win voters, hoping they wouldreplace the Congress's ideological position of promoting asecular, nondiscriminatory state.   The Bharatiya Janata Party, or BJP, called for a looselydefined &quot;Hunduvta,&quot; or Hindu state, trying to appeal to themajority group in India, the Hindus. The Janata Dal Party,led by former Gandhi ally V.P. Singh, championed a new kindof social justice, as embodied in an affirmative action planfor lower-caste Hindus. Both parties, some fear, couldinflame ethnic and class antagonisms.   Paul Kreisberg, an expert on India at Washington'sCarnegie Endowment for International Peace, warns that Mr.Gandhi's demise, and the instability that may follow, willmake it more difficult to unite India behind any cleareconomic or social platform. He notes that problems such asIndia's huge debt and mounting inflation &quot;intensifyresentments and political antagonisms. That doesn't meanrevolution and civil war,&quot; he adds, &quot;but it will be harderthan before to get the country moving again.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>