<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920122-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>920122-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Closed Market:   Laws of Economics   Often Don't Apply   In Health-Care Field   ---   Prices, Quality Vary Widely,   Yet Patients and Insurers   Rarely Comparison Shop   ---   Trying to Get Data Isn't Easy   ----   By David Wessel and Walt Bogdanich   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/22/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)LIFE INSURANCE (INL)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   HARRISBURG, Pa. -- James Martz never thought twice aboutwhich hospital to go to when doctors told him one of hiscoronary arteries was so badly clogged he needed a new one.   &quot;There really wasn't any question as to where we would begoing,&quot; says Mr. Martz, a 54-year-old retired telephoneinstaller. &quot;Our family physician is associated withHarrisburg Hospital.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   What Mr. Martz didn't know is that public figures compiledby the government show the death rate for bypass surgery atHarrisburg Hospital is substantially higher than at LancasterGeneral Hospital, only 38 miles away. Moreover, HarrisburgHospital charges 50% more than Lancaster, the stateestimates.   In a conventional market, a high-cost, low-qualityproducer would be doomed, or, at the very least, worried. Butthe laws of economics have been repealed in the healthbusiness. Consumers don't comparison-shop and often lack theinformation to do so. Many hospitals compete to buy thelatest technology rather than provide the lowest-cost qualitycare. And providers resist outsiders' attempts to gaugequality. The result: a seemingly unstoppable increase in thecost of health care.   Coronary artery bypass surgery is a good example, thoughthe same holds true for any number of procedures, from gallbladder operations to organ transplants. Bypass surgery is anexpensive, complicated procedure that uses a vessel fromelsewhere in the body to circumvent clogged arteries near theheart. The odds of surviving it are high, particularly forotherwise healthy, middle-aged people. On average, fewer than4% die. But the mortality rate varies substantially among the898 U.S. hospitals where the procedure is done. And fewpatients, employers or insurers take that into account.   In fact, most Americans do far more research before buyinga car than before allowing a surgeon to cut open theirchests. Mr. Martz was sent by his family doctor to acardiologist who practices exclusively at HarrisburgHospital. He attempted to clear the blocked artery byinserting a catheter tipped with a tiny balloon. When thatfailed, Mr. Martz's family physician referred him toHarrisburg's largest cardiac surgery practice, a seven-manteam headed by Frank J. Travisano. Dr. Travisano and hispartners operate both at Harrisburg and its local competitor,Polyclinic Medical Center.   If the referring doctor is associated with a particularhospital, then the surgery is done at that facility, explainsDr. Travisano. Mr. Martz's family doctor is connected toHarrisburg, so Mr. Martz was operated on there. He is doingfine. Since his insurance paid the bill, cost wasn't anissue.   Mr. Martz is hardly exceptional. Even the governor ofPennsylvania chose a hospital for bypass surgery simplybecause he happened to have a physical there, a spokesmansays. Gov. Robert Casey, who lives here in Harrisburg,avoided Harrisburg Hospital because his heart problem wasdiscovered during an exam at nearby Hershey Medical Center'sUniversity Hospital.   &quot;It's intriguing to me how difficult it is to breakestablished lines of referral,&quot; says Lawrence Bonchek, chiefbypass surgeon at Lancaster General Hospital. Few of Dr.Bonchek's patients come from Harrisburg. And few patientsfrom Lancaster go to Harrisburg. &quot;Our mortality rate iscertainly low. Why aren't we doing more {cases}? Becausehealth care is an inefficient market,&quot; he says.   Michael Young, Lancaster General's administrator, findsthis downright maddening. The list price for a simple bypassat Lancaster General in 1989 was $17,490, according toPennsylvania's Health Care Cost Containment Council; atHarrisburg Hospital, it was $28,059. &quot;I am clearly thelow-cost provider,&quot; Mr. Young says. But employers, whogenerally pay for most of their employees' health care,&quot;won't give employees incentives to come here.&quot;   Harrisburg Hospital correctly points out that few peoplepay the list price because many health insurers, includingthe government, insist on discounts. But the list price isall that's publicly available. Ted Ackroyd, former researchdirector of the Hospital Association of Pennsylvania, saysthe link between the list price and what insurers pay isclose enough to use for comparisons.   A few patients do shop around, but most rely on theirfamily doctor or cardiologist to pick a surgeon or hospital.And those doctors often aren't familiar with the comparativestatistics either. Doctors refer patients to specifichospitals &quot;because that's where they can work. They'll takewhatever quality they can get there. That's the sad truth,&quot;says David Blazer, a Lebanon, Pa., cardiologist.   Harrisburg physicians insist they are keenly concernedabout the quality of care. &quot;The cardiologists are not, on thewhole, going to send patients to surgeons they know are goingto knock them off,&quot; says Carolyn Shaffer, a local heartsurgeon. Still, the success rates of hospitals and cardiacsurgeons vary widely. And there's little evidence that manydoctors take that into account when making referrals.   Harrisburg Hospital isn't the only U.S. hospital whosetrack record compares unfavorably to neighboring hospitals.In Chicago, the agency that manages Medicare found that thefour city hospitals with the busiest cardiac-bypass units hadnoticeably higher mortality rates than four nearby suburbanhospitals, even after adjusting for differences in theirpatients' ages and health. In Maine, New Hampshire andVermont, a two-year study that took into account all sorts ofdifferences among patients found the death rate at thehospital with the worst record was 2 1/2 times the rate atthe best. The surgeon with the worst record had a death ratefour times higher than the best. A Philadelphia study turnedup changes in hospital mortality rates when heart surgeonsshifted hospitals. The study stirred controversy locallybecause the authors refused to name the surgeons or hospitalsinvolved.   While such information is sometimes available, it isn'teasy to find. There is no Consumer Reports for hospitals.There is no toll-free number to call for the latest deathrates. Although the government compiles statistics onmortality and other indicators of quality, Medicare andprivate insurers rarely, if ever, put a coronary bypassprogram off limits to its patients because of high deathrates.   A few employers and insurers are beginning to useobjective measures of quality to try to steer patients tobetter hospitals. Prudential Insurance Co. of America, forinstance, designates certain hospitals as &quot;institutes ofquality&quot; for organ transplants and is in the process of doingthe same for bypass surgery. It negotiates a fixed fee upfront and then pays travel expenses for patients who usethose institutes.   But Prudential finds some state insurance regulatorsresistant to its program and very few employers willing togive employees significant financial incentives to take itsadvice. In Hershey, Pa., Hershey Foods Corp. is using newlyavailable state data to assemble its own network ofbetter-quality doctors and hospitals. Other companies havesimilar networks, but usually pick doctors and hospitalsprimarily because they offer discounts, not because of goodquality.   If they want it, Pennsylvania residents can get far moreinformation about their hospitals than most Americans. Thestate Health Care Cost Containment Council publishescomparisons of mortality rates for every hospital in thestate, procedure by procedure. Using data gathered from morethan 100 hospitals, the council also calculates how manydeaths it expects will occur given the age of a hospital'spatients and how sick they were when admitted.   The goal is to give prospective patients the sort ofinformation they need to ask educated questions of doctorsand hospitals and to make more informed choices. Or, as thecouncil's T-shirts put it, &quot;Check it out before you checkin.&quot;   In 1989, using the latest available data, the Pennsylvaniacouncil counted 12 deaths at Harrisburg Hospital in 368bypass operations; it predicted only 5.78 based on the ageand health of the patients. In contrast, it counted sixdeaths in 447 bypass cases at Lancaster General; it predictedfinding 10.94, based on age and health.   A similar pattern is seen in the federal Health CareFinancing Administration's analysis of Medicare patients whodied within 30 days after bypass surgery. For 1989, HCFAcalculated a 13% death rate from bypass surgery at HarrisburgHospital, much higher than the 6% rate it expected. Incontrast, HCFA put the 1989 death rate at Lancaster Generalat 3.7%; it expected 6.1%. A similar pattern, though notquite as sharp, is seen in data for 1988. Data for 1990aren't out yet.   Harrisburg Hospital administrators dismiss the figures,questioning both their accuracy and their statisticalvalidity. They say the state council misclassified somedeaths in 1989. The council denies that and says the hospitalfailed to provide documentary proof of the allegedmisclassification. Harrisburg administrators also say thefederal HCFA numbers aren't statistically significant. HCFAsays there are 90 chances in 100 that Harrisburg Hospital's1989 death rate is truly worse than those of other hospitalsrather than being a statistical fluke; the hospital insistsonly a higher standard -- 95 chances in 100 -- is valid.   &quot;I don't know how a person could make a decision based onthis data,&quot; says Ernest McDowell, Harrisburg Hospital'ssenior vice president for marketing.   At the request of this newspaper, Michael Pine, aphysician and consultant to hospitals and employers onhealth-care quality measurement, reviewed the state andfederal statistics for the HarrisburgLancaster area. &quot;Youcome up with striking and statistically significantdifferences among the hospitals with Harrisburg looking quitebad and Lancaster looking fairly good,&quot; Mr. Pine says.Polyclinic is somewhere in between.   The government statistics don't explain why the mortalityrate at Harrisburg Hospital is higher than at LancasterGeneral, and it's nearly impossible for an outsider to drawany firm conclusions. Success rates in bypass surgery dependon the health of the patients, the skill of the surgeons, theability of the anesthesiologists and nurses, the cleanlinessof the hospital, the attentiveness of nurses and many otherfactors.   Hospitals with disappointing results often blame theirpatients for being sicker, and Harrisburg Hospital is noexception. Jesse Weigel, senior vice president for medicalaffairs at the hospital, says a review of the deaths in statestatistics shows they involve &quot;more severely ill people,&quot;including one that Dr. Weigel says was turned away fromLancaster General.   But the state council's data indicate Lancaster's patientsseem to be sicker on admission than Harrisburg's. &quot;Everyhospital says it has the sickest people, the oldest people,the fattest people,&quot; says Joseph Martin, the council'sspokesman. &quot;We had one hospital with a high rate of Caesareansections, and the hospital said, `Well, everyone knows wehave larger babies.' &quot;   At one point in an interview, Dr. Travisano, theHarrisburg heart surgeon, says, &quot;The difference betweenHarrisburg and Lancaster is that we do more difficult casesthan Dr. Bonchek does. He's in better control over there toturn down cases.&quot; Dr. Bonchek denies that, and state databack him up.   Administrators at Harrisburg Hospital also question thepublic's ability to interpret these statistics. &quot;The problemwe've had with the Health Care Cost Containment Council datais that they publish in the newspaper the summary data. Doesthat mislead the public?&quot; asks Eric Weis, the hospital'schief operating officer.   Some surgeons additionally say that, if mortality ratesare published, some of their colleagues might stop acceptingsicker patients to enhance their performance records. Butcomputer programs now produce survival rates adjusted forseverity of illness, meaning that surgeons and hospitals canbe compared reasonably fairly. And as for the belief that thepublic can't properly interpret the data, a New York SupremeCourt judge last year disagreed. In ordering New York stateto release the mortality rates of every cardiac surgeon inthe state, Justice Harold J. Hughes wrote: &quot;The duty ofadministrators to release {the data} cannot be dependent onthe administrators' assessment of the population'sintelligence.&quot; That ruling allowed Newsday, the Long Islandnewspaper, to publish the figures.   The Pennsylvania state council plans to begin releasingindividual physicians' track records next year. The council'sbackers say that making such information public andencouraging employers and patients to use it is essential ifthe healthcare market is to work without major governmentintervention.   &quot;It's hard for {patients} to get information -- they canbe swayed by a very nice bedside manner and many times theyare,&quot; says surgeon R. Robert Tyson, a former head of thestate medical society, who helped create the council. &quot;It'sappropriate for patients to ask their physicians forinformation about the value of what is being done, about therisk and potential benefit. If a doctor refuses or getsangry, people should change their doctor.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>