<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910809-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>910809-0088.</DOCID><HL>   McCarthy's Free -- We're Still Hostage   ----   By William McGurn</HL><DATE>08/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>IRAN (IR)IRAQ (IZ)LEBANON (LBN)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SYRIA (SY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   On a snowy Christmas eve in Lebanon, I once missed ascheduled interview with the Maronite bishop of Zahle when mydriver was forced to turn back because of mountain roads madeimpassable by the weather. I was disappointed, of course. Butmy disappointment waned when I learned that Islamic gunmenhad forced their way into the bishop's office andpistol-whipped him in an unsuccessful kidnapping attempt --this at the very moment we would have been talking. Iwondered whether I would have been a nice consolation prize,to go along with hostages like the Beirut bureau chief forthe Associated Press, Terry Anderson. Mr. Anderson had beentaken nine months earlier.   Today, as freed British hostage John McCarthy takes in hisfirst sweet breaths of freedom, we are rightly thankful thatthe unceasing prayers of his family have been heard. But amidthe cheer we must not forget the 12 other Western hostageswho remain, presumably, inside Lebanon. And amid theoptimistic talk about what Mr. McCarthy's release after morethan five years might say about the &quot;changes&quot; in IslamicJihad, Iran, or Syria, we owe it to ourselves to be clear whywe are in this fix in the first place.</LP><TEXT>   Since the taking of our embassy in Tehran in 1979, themost important hostage in the Middle East has been U.S.policy. Despite State Department lists, White House taskforces, and even a successful bombing raid on Libya, we haveforgotten that we are dealing with outlaws.   By this I mean that they operate outside all theconventions of warfare, particularly the ones regarding theinviolability of civilians. In formal terms these rest on twopillars: a legitimate reason to resort to force (&quot;jus adbellum&quot;) and the limits we observe once hostilities havebegun (&quot;jus in bello&quot;). They are equally important, but in apoliticized century it has somehow come to be accepted thathaving a legitimate cause entitles one to disregard any senseof proportion and discrimination in conducting the war.   To be sure, there are gray areas. But terrorists' actionsare rarely within them. Only the most extreme and abstractconception of &quot;complicity,&quot; for example, could make alegitimate target out of Leon Klinghoffer, the crippled,elderly American murdered while on a cruise in theMediterranean, or the passengers aboard Pan Am Flight 103,blown up over Lockerbie, Scotland.   Much the same must be said about the state sponsors ofsuch deeds. Our State Department list of terrorist stateshas, from the outset, been more a scorecard of momentaryfavoritism than a firm barometer of terrorist involvement.Iraq's name, for example, was deleted in 1983 when the Reaganadministration was tilting toward Baghdad in the Iran-Iraqwar. Does anyone doubt that in a Lebanon whose land isoccupied by Syrian troops and whose Shiite militants arebacked by Iran, American hostages could be held without thetacit approval of Damascus and Tehran? Yet we still take atface value the &quot;independence&quot; of groups with such names as&quot;the Organization for the Oppressed of the World&quot; (which tookcredit for the death of Lt. Col. William Higgins, whosehanging it videotaped and released to the press).   The point is, terrorists are important for what they do,not for why they say they do it. Of all the hostages taken inLebanon, only two have had U.S. government connections: CIAstation chief William Buckley (whose death-by-torture wasrecorded on videotape) and Lt. Col. Higgins (who was on dutywith the United Nations). The rest of those nabbed were allcivilians: American professors, British journalists, anItalian businessman, a U.S. book salesman, a Catholic priest,a Presbyterian minister, and so on, including even theArchbishop of Canterbury's own envoy, Terry Waite. What makesthem different from civilians, say, killed during the U.S.bombing raids on Iraq is that these are not folks caught inthe crossfire. These people were targets.   Until recently, Western nations knew precisely how to dealwith those who harm their citizens abroad. Jefferson sent theMarines to put down the Barbary pirates; the British andFrench sent a combined expedition to China after the murderthere of a French missionary; the U.S. even used the safetyof U.S. medical students to justify the invasion of Grenada.Back when force was a certainty, few citizens of the GreatPowers were in fact molested when abroad, even those livingin precarious circumstances.   By the same yardstick, even if all the Western hostages inLebanon should be released, America's policy will be adjudgeda failure. It will have shown that taking hostages getsresults. Not the results these groups proclaim in theirsophomoric missives (the release of all prisoners in Israel,recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization, etc.),mind you. But the political results they are really after:the undivided attention of the U.S. president, covertnegotiations through intermediaries, and the generalparalysis of the American government.   In fairness to President Bush, this was an inheritancefrom Ronald Reagan. The arms-for-hostages deal-making withIran helped discredit the tough line the U.S. had takenearlier when it answered Col. Moammar Gadhafi's terrorismwith a raid on Tripoli.   President Bush's failure was hinted at two years ago whenhe canceled a regional trip to devote himself to the hostage&quot;crisis&quot; brought about by the hanging of Lt. Col. Higgins; itwas guaranteed when instead of punishing those responsiblefor the murder, the commander in chief found himselfdesperately trying to prevent the execution of another U.S.hostage, Joseph Cicippio. By linking any military action tothe fate of Mr. Cicippio, the White House inadvertentlyestablished a threshold of American life: The execution ofone is permissible; the execution of two is not. In adangerous part of the world this was a dangerous precedent.   In a world with an endless supply of potential hostages,it was also folly. We ought to have learned from previousbouts of selective hostage releases. Soon after FatherLawrence Jenco was released, for example, two more Americanswere kidnapped. Harsh though it is to say, there is a greaterdanger than the murder of existing hostages: namely, fortheir freedom to be gained by a deal that leaves thekidnappers unpunished and makes other Americans morevulnerable in the future. The goal of terrorists is to freezenations into inaction, drive a wedge between allies, andforce governments to negotiate with them or their surrogates.On all these scores Islamic Jihad has already beensuccessful.   The point about our inaction is not that it indicates alack of policy; it is policy. The evidence lies in theFebruary 1986 report on terrorism issued by the task forceGeorge Bush chaired while vice president. In the sectioncalled &quot;Managing Terrorist Incidents,&quot; the report takes thewraps off the secret weapon in the presidential arsenal:delay. &quot;Sometimes,&quot; it says, &quot;avoiding specific reactionsuntil the circumstances are favorable is the best course.&quot;   That is the policy we have been following since theseizure of our embassy in Tehran in 1979, and it is theprimary reason Americans are still deprived of their freedomin Lebanon today. In the wake of Mr. McCarthy's release, weare already hearing talk about &quot;new signals&quot; coming from Iranand Syria, both of which are known sponsors of groups holdingAmerican citizens. In this kind of climate, let us hope theWhite House sees its first task as sending signals and notreceiving them.   ---   Mr. McGurn is Washington bureau chief of the NationalReview.</TEXT></DOC>