<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910930-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>910930-0122.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Remember the Bastille, but Get It Right   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>09/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)GROUP OF SEVEN, G-7 (GGG)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TAXES (TAX)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>CANADA (CN)EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)ITALY (ITA)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   Perhaps it is no wonder that French politicians fearFrench farmers. A misconceived food policy -- price controlsthat discouraged peasants from supplying Paris with theingredients for bread -- helped trigger the FrenchRevolution.   Nor is it any wonder that the French government doesn'twant to annoy any constituency, especially now. The economyis wheezing. In one poll, 61% of the respondents thoughtFrancois Mitterrand was over the hill and should retire. Hisprime minister, Edith Cresson, is not a big hit with voterseither. The normal reaction of a weak government is to circlethe wagons and do nothing to cause the natives to become evenmore restless.</LP><TEXT>   Finally, there is the fact that French farmers when upsetturn to mass demonstrations, as they did yesterday when some150,000 descended on Paris to object to any European farmpolicy reform. It was a largely peaceful protest for a changebut in few nations is there greater paranoia among farmersover illusions that they are somehow being cheated. Somewell-to-do French farmers vote Communist, not because theywould like the state to take their farms, but because theCommunists, with no chance of coming to power, offer aconvenient way for farmers to display their alienation.   While all these things are understandable -- given thehard past of the French and European peasantry -- a questionremains: How long can European governments, especiallyFrance, continue to cower in fear of their farmers withoutdoing serious damage to themselves and to their relationswith the rest of the world? The European Community (EC), forits own protection and advancement, needs to do several veryimportant things. It needs to open its doors to the rest ofEurope, especially the politically and economically shakyEuropean countries newly liberated from communism. It needsto reduce drastically the economic burden caused bysubsidies, which boost taxes and government deficits anddisrupt markets. It needs to show some give in the UruguayRound multilateral trade negotiations or risk seeing theworld broken up into regional trading blocks -- somethingthat could be harmful for Europe's big trading nations.   There is one simple thing preventing the EC from doing allthese things, the unwillingness of its politicians to reformthe community's Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in anymeaningful way. By coddling 10 million farmers, the EC isdamaging the interests of hundreds of millions of Europeans.And the remarkable thing about all this is that the farmers'claims that a reform will put them out of business are justanother one of those rural illusions. The U.S. already hasdemonstrated that an agricultural policy can be reformedwithout any economic damage to farmers.   The U.S. has been through the same nightmare of highmarket supports and protectionism that now afflicts Europe.In 1981, the U.S. Congress, to protect farmers from theimpact of anti-inflation measures, jacked up price supports.What that mainly did was price American farmers out of worldmarkets, thus making the plight of U.S. agriculture worse,not better. So in the 1985 farm bill Congress began aphase-down of supports, substituting direct incomesupplements to keep farmers whole. Farmers also were paid toset aside land.   This didn't fully solve the problem of overfarming,because the government still was paying people to farm. Butit was a successful political solution in that it beganreducing government market interference without causing unduehardship among farmers. The costs of government agriculturalpolicy, in budgetary terms and to consumers, have beenreduced.   The EC, by contrast, has for many years faced the sameproblem that confronted the U.S. Congress in 1985. The EC, tosupport prices, buys enormous quantities of farm productsthat, because of the price supports, cannot be sold in worldmarkets. It then dumps them where it can for a fraction oftheir cost, or stores them, which is also costly.   But whereas the U.S. responded to the problem, at least inpart, the EC has done nothing. The Journal's Philip Revzin,in a page-one article in May on French farming, quotedOrganization for Economic Cooperation and Development figuresshowing that EC taxpayers paid $50 billion in directsubsidies to farmers last year and an additional $85 billionin excess food costs brought about by price supports. Bycontrast, Americans -- even though giving direct incomesupplements to farmers -- paid $47 billion in subsidies andtheir excess food costs were only $28 billion, or less than athird of what their European brethren paid.   More to the point, the U.S. system has helped return U.S.farmers to the world market to recover some of the enormousmarket losses during their absence. It has reduced damage tofarmers in other countries brought about by the dumping ofproducts bought with U.S. taxpayer money. It has reducedincentives for the U.S. to protect its markets againstforeign imports, since there is less need for protection whenprices are no longer supported at artificially high levels. ANorth American trade agreement including both Canada andMexico probably would not be possible had the U.S. kept itssupport levels high.   Given the improvements brought about by the 1985 revisionsin U.S. farm policy it was not at all arrogant for the U.S.to suggest during the Uruguay Round that the EC follow asimilar path. But some EC farm ministers complainednonetheless. German Farm Minister Ignaz Kiechleself-righteously proclaims that EC farmers don't want aU.S.-type dole but prefer to make their living in the market.That's a ludicrous statement, given the value of the marketsubsidies EC farmers get. As The Economist commented, ECfarmers &quot;haven't been near a real market for years.&quot;   Reform of the CAP and an opening of Europe to moreagricultural products was one of the things less-developedcountries asked as the price for their own Uruguay Roundconcessions on such issues as more liberal rules for foreigninvestments. Without the EC yielding on CAP reform, it ishard to see how the benefits of a Uruguay Round or even of amore open greater Europe can be realized.   Indeed, something similar to the U.S. plan is what ECAgriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry now is proposing --and EC farm ministers resisting. Group of Seven heads ofstate, at their July summit, included reduced farm supportsas one key to a successful Uruguay Round -- which they gave ahigh priority -- and agreed to intervene personally if&quot;differences can only be resolved at the highest level.&quot;   So far there has been no such intervention. If thatintervention has to come from sleepy Paris, there may not be.Perhaps Mr. Mitterrand should be reminded that the FrenchRevolution was brought on by rigging markets, not byderigging them.</TEXT></DOC>