<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900627-0141</DOCNO><DOCID>900627-0141.</DOCID><HL>   Beware Soviet-German Friendship   ----   By Eugene V. Rostow</HL><DATE>06/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   One of the most revealing meetings in the current flurryof consultations to remap Europe took place at Brest-Litovsk.Mikhail Gorbachev's foreign minister, Eduard Shevardnadze,conducted a long and private discussion there on the futureof Germany with the West German foreign minister,Hans-Dietrich Genscher. That the Soviet statesman chose thisparticular site to host his colleague is an ominous sign. In1918, Brest-Litovsk was the place where Russia and Germanydesigned the separate peace that laid the foundation for moreviolence in this century. A new &quot;Brest-Litovsk&quot; portends anew -- and dangerous -- Soviet-German relationship.   The visible collapse of communism and American concernabout &quot;helping&quot; President Gorbachev in his hour of need seemto have caused us to forget some important history. We areoverlooking the long story of Russian -- and then Soviet --expansion, the special relationship between Russia andPrussia, and, after 1871, with united Germany. Russia and theSoviet Union have been major factors in the European and theworld balance of power since the time of Peter the Great.Like Britain, Russia often changed allies. Bismarck saidRussia was a &quot;mastodon&quot; and had to be handled carefully.While Germany was Austria's ally, Bismarck cultivated a&quot;Reinsurance Treaty&quot; with Russia in order to protectGermany's rear in case of trouble with Britain or France.After Bismarck was dismissed by Wilhelm II in 1890, theKaiser let the Reinsurance Treaty lapse. The Kaiser'sdecision was an important factor in the tragedy of 1914.</LP><TEXT>   The ambivalent connection between Russia and Prussia wasmanifest at many other critical moments. The Hitler-StalinPact, which set off World War II, was not an aberration. Thefirst agreement concluded at Brest-Litovsk had theseconsequences: Russia made a separate peace with Germany atthe expense of its allies. Seventy German divisions were thenshipped to the Western front for the great German offensiveof 1918 -- if America had not entered the war, Germany surelywould have won. After the war, Lenin invited the Germans totrain officers and build planes and produce other munitionssecretly in Russia. Mr. Shevardnadze even had the gallpublicly to underline the significance of the meeting place,in case any Western foreign office missed the point.   Against this background, how should we view Mr.Gorbachev's unresolved difference with President Bush aboutthe future of Germany? Is Mr. Gorbachev really driven byanxiety about a possible attack by a non-nuclear Germanyagainst the Soviet Union, a nuclear superpower?   Mr. Gorbachev's effort to neutralize Germany is consistentwith another and far more plausible hypothesis: That whateverhis subjective intentions may be, the natural consequences ofthe policy he proposes would enable the Soviet Union tosnatch victory from the jaws of defeat. It would give Mr.Gorbachev what NATO, for the past 40 years, has prevented: Aneutral and indefensible Central Europe open to Sovietdomination. Such an outcome would soon prove an irresistibletemptation to an ambitious Soviet ruler. What is at stake inMr. Gorbachev's bold gamble is nothing less than the futureof the world balance of power and the outcome of the ColdWar.   For more than 40 years, this has been the principal goalof Soviet strategy. Soviet proposals of this kind have beenput forward with depressing regularity ever since the Sovietleaders rejected America's Baruch Plan for the internationalcontrol of nuclear energy in 1946. The Rapacki Plan is thebest known of Soviet &quot;peace&quot; plans. It was offered in 1957and is often revived. It proposed to establish a nuclear-freezone comprising both Germanies, Poland and Czechoslovakia --a zone where nuclear weapons could not be manufactured,stored or used.   Sometimes the Soviet Union offers the Western Allies anon-aggression pact as well as a proposal fordenuclearization and neutrality. Secretary of State DeanAcheson said about one early ploy, &quot;we already have anon-aggression pact with the Soviet Union. It is called theCharter of the United Nations and nothing should be done toqualify the force of its generality.&quot; The non-aggression pactMr. Gorbachev has recently dangled before Western eyes hardlyrepresents new thinking. It should be rejected out of hand.   The most striking change Mr. Gorbachev has brought aboutin Soviet foreign policy is to make European neutrality animmediate and urgent objective, rather than a distant andtheoretical hope. In this perspective, Mr. Gorbachev'sdecision not to use force to suppress the revolutions inEastern Europe becomes intelligible. Such an attempt wouldhave postponed and perhaps ruined his efforts to obtaineconomic help from the West. And it might well have provokedcivil disorder at home; desertions and mutiny by his owntroops on a much larger scale than the defections of Soviettroops in Hungary in 1956; and even NATO intervention. Was itperhaps Mr. Gorbachev's conclusion that it was better for himto allow East Europe to go free, and then trump the Westernace by neutralizing the whole of Europe, East and Westtogether?   A neutral Germany, a country of 85 million people, woulddestroy NATO, force the U.S. to withdraw from Europe toFortress America, and leave Britain, France, Italy, Spain,Turkey and the smaller countries of Europe incapable ofself-defense. The American nuclear guaranty would lose allcredibility. Without American backing, the British and Frenchnuclear forces would remain too small to deter the SovietUnion, which would then be the only major nuclear power inEurope. Western Europe would be &quot;Finlandized&quot; -- a neuter inworld politics. The U.S. could no longer mobilize alliedcoalitions to help deal with crises like those in Korea, thePersian Gulf or the Middle East.   With or without Japan, a helot Western Europe would be theinevitable milch-cow of Soviet economic recovery. No scenariofor the future could be more threatening to the U.S. than themodernization of the Soviet Union in partnership only withGermany or with Western Europe as a whole rather than withthe Western nations as a group.   Given Mr. Gorbachev's overwhelming need for Westerneconomic help and the turbulence of Soviet society, no sucheventuality can materialize if Western policies are evenmoderately rational. But concerted and active allieddiplomacy will be required to counter Mr. Gorbachev's bid.But there is no sign as yet that the West has evencontemplated a policy commensurate with the situation.Instead, the Western nations seem willing to help the SovietUnion piecemeal, without obtaining any quid pro quo inreturn.   Many believe that the problem isn't serious because if theSoviet Union becomes capitalist, it will no longer beexpansionist. But capitalism doesn't always bring peacefuldemocracy. Take Germany, which was extremely capitalist bothin 1914 and in 1939. So was Japan. Popular governments inpluralist societies have committed aggression in the past,and dictatorships have been peaceful neighbors. Arms controlagreements, improvements in human rights, the adoption ofmultiparty elections and a market economy, however desirablein themselves, should not be regarded as a sufficientconsideration for Western economic cooperation on the scalethat will be required. Peace is a separate matter.   At the moment, the key question is whether a unitedGermany should continue to be a member of NATO or withdraw.If Mr. Gorbachev's goal is peace, it is as much in Moscow'sinterest as ours that Germany remain firmly anchored in theWest. This is not a subject on which Mr. Bush can compromise.   After what we had to endure since 1945, it would beunimaginably foolish for the U.S. and its allies to helpRussia modernize and enlarge its fantastic militarycapabilities without insisting on a clear end of the Cold Warand the achievement of real peace -- not a new detente, a&quot;modus vivendi&quot;, or a wary cooling off period, but a regimeof genuine peace.   ---   Mr. Rostow, a visiting professor of law and diplomacy atthe National Defense University, is chairman of the Committeeon the Present Danger.</TEXT></DOC>