<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910301-0184</DOCNO><DOCID>910301-0184.</DOCID><HL>   Into His Own:   How President Bush   Deftly Orchestrated   Swift Victory Over Iraq   ---   A Hard-Liner From the Start,   He Seized the Initiative   And Kept Allies Together   ---   Poll Shows Record Approval   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BANKS (BNK)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)CONGRESS (CNG)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- After months of diplomatic drama anddomestic fervor over the question of going to war, the pointof no return for George Bush arrived incongruously enough onthe afternoon of Jan. 16.   The president sat in the somber and windowless RooseveltRoom, holding a mundane discussion about education policywith a panel of outside experts. As the conversation dronedon, the educators remained utterly unaware of what was reallygoing on in Mr. Bush's mind: He was resolving to send thecountry to war.</LP><TEXT>   Immediately after that meeting, aides say, Mr. Bush sentthe signal to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney to begin bombingIraqi troops to force them out of Kuwait. Four hours later,U.S. and allied warplanes unleashed one of the most violentair attacks in military history.   And Wednesday -- six weeks to the day after hiding hisintentions from those educators, precisely four days after heordered the climactic ground attack -- Mr. Bush was able tosit in the Oval Office and declare victory. The allies hadliberated Kuwait, and a cease-fire could begin.   &quot;This is not a time of euphoria, certainly not a time togloat,&quot; Mr. Bush told the nation. But in fact the presidentand his aides are going to find it hard not to gloat as theyreap the rewards of Mr. Bush's personal success.   Just months after he was under political fire for fumblingthrough budget negotiations with Congress, Mr. Bush is beinghailed for handling almost flawlessly the war that willdefine his presidency. He constructed and held together oneof the most cumbersome international coalitions ever seen,gave his military commanders enough time to build up theirforces, avoided the trap of moving too quickly into a groundwar and deftly kept the Soviet Union from giving SaddamHussein a diplomatic way out of a military trap.   Now, a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll indicatesthat Mr. Bush's job-approval rating is not only the highesthe's ever had -- it's the highest any president has had innearly half a century and the second-highest attained sincepolls have been conducted in this country.   In sampling conducted Tuesday and Wednesday night, 85% ofAmerican voters approved of Mr. Bush's performance aspresident, while only 11% disapproved. It is the highestpresidential job-approval rating since Harry Truman receiveda record 87% approval in a Gallup Poll in June 1945, shortlyafter he assumed the presidency and the war in Europe hadended.   In this postwar glow, the approval of Mr. Bush'sperformance is across the board. It totals 76% amongDemocrats and an astonishing 96% among Republicans. Blacks,in a sharp reversal from recent polls, approve of his jobperformance by better than two to one -- 66% to 30%. There isno gender gap to speak of: The president's performance isapproved of by 88% of men and 82% of women.   There is a question, however, whether the president cantransfer his success abroad to the daunting array of problemson the home front. He now must face a record budget deficit,a fragile banking system, a crisis in health-care costs,concern over low educational attainment -- problems that haveworsened while he was riveted on events in the Gulf.   And even the greatest popularity can be ephemeral. WinstonChurchill had similar ratings among Britons in the earlyyears of World War II, peaking at 93% in 1943, only to findhimself unceremoniously dumped from power two years later.   For Mr. Bush, the last seven months held plenty ofopportunity for things to go wrong in the Gulf, as an insidelook shows.   Mr. Bush's top aides at one point urged him to cool hisrhetorical broadsides against Saddam Hussein, which theyfeared were scaring the U.S. and its allies as much as theIraqi leader. There was a difficult vote to win congressionalauthorization for war -- won in large part through apreviously undisclosed strategy of focusing on three keypairs of wavering Democratic senators from three states.   Mr. Bush spent hours on the phone with Mikhail Gorbachevin the closing days of the war to prevent the Soviets fromhanding Saddam Hussein a diplomatic victory. But he also wasdiverted by such matters as having to calm comedian Bob Hope,who was worried about bureaucratic glitches in his plans tohold a show for U.S. troops.   Through it all, there was one constant, administrationaides say. Mr. Bush was always the most hard-line of allsenior officials on the subject of Saddam Hussein. He wasn'turged on to war so much as he chose the course himself andwas encouraged in his inclination by his advisers.   &quot;I don't think he was ever eager to go into militaryaction,&quot; says White House Chief of Staff John Sununu, whospoke with Mr. Bush almost daily over the last seven months.&quot;But I can tell you I don't think he was ever reluctant to gointo military action.&quot;   The drama began unfolding at about 6 p.m. on Aug. 1, whennational security adviser Brent Scowcroft and NationalSecurity Council aide Richard Haass walked into thepresidential residence to tell Mr. Bush of mounting signsthat Iraq was preparing to invade Kuwait in the pre-dawndarkness half a world away.   At about 8:45 p.m. Mr. Scowcroft called the president backto confirm that a full-fledged invasion was under way. Thatset off a fevered process in which the broad lines of policythat led directly to war in the desert unfolded in just a fewdays.   The U.S. immediately froze Kuwaiti assets to keep them outof Iraqi hands, and helped draft the crucial first UnitedNations Security Council resolution -- Number 660 --condemning the invasion and demanding that Iraq withdraw. Theprecise terms of that resolution were to be the key forpushing the war effort ahead more than six months later.   Two other events in the first few days also served togalvanize Mr. Bush's will in ways that were to remainimportant for months to come. The day after the invasion, heflew to Colorado for a previously planned speech and ameeting with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, whoalso was visiting. Mrs. Thatcher, administration aides say,was in her finest Iron Lady mode, stressing that SaddamHussein had to be stopped.   The second steeling event came on Aug. 5, as Mr. Bush wasreturning by helicopter to the White House from a weekend atCamp David. Iraq had promised to withdraw from Kuwait by thatday. But as Mr. Bush stepped from his helicopter, Mr. Haass,the NSC aide, appeared at his side with a note summarizingintelligence indications that a few Iraqi trucks withsoldiers had left Kuwait, but that there hadn't been anywithdrawal. Mr. Bush's jaw hardened, and he stepped tomicrophones to say for the first time that the occupation ofKuwait &quot;will not stand.&quot;   By then, he had dispatched three top aides -- DefenseSecretary Dick Cheney, Deputy National Security AdviserRobert Gates and Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the JointChiefs of Staff -- to Saudi Arabia to discuss with King Fahda large-scale deployment of American troops. King Fahdquickly agreed.   But a bizarre course awaited the three senior U.S.officials as they left Saudi Arabia. They were directedquickly to Egypt to meet President Hosni Mubarak and recruitEgyptian participation in the multinational military force.   Mr. Mubarak, it turned out, was in the Mediterranean portcity of Alexandria, meeting with Iraqi officials who weretrying to explain away their invasion.   Compounding the situation, Mr. Cheney, Mr. Gates and Gen.Powell quickly learned that their big U.S. Air Force jetcouldn't land at the small airport in Alexandria. It had toland in Cairo, where the U.S. Embassy scrambled to find asmall jet used by the military attache. As the small planepulled up to the terminal at Alexandria, the Americanofficials were bemused to note that they were directed into aparking place immediately next to a bigger Iraqi jet used bythe delegation from Baghdad -- perhaps the last moment thatIraq would enjoy any air superiority over the U.S.   Then, as the U.S. delegation was in the air heading homefrom Cairo, Mr. Gates got a call from Mr. Scowcroft, thenational security adviser back in Washington. He warned thatMr. Bush might want them to do a U-turn as they flew over theMediterranean and head to Morocco to sound out King Hassanabout contributing to the multinational force.   When, Mr. Scowcroft asked, was the last possible momentthe plane could change course and still make it to Moroccowithout running out of fuel? One hour, the flight crewquickly calculated. Mr. Scowcroft signed off to consult withMr. Bush -- and called back 50 minutes later withinstructions to turn and head to Morocco. They landed withjust minutes to spare.   Soon the military deployment was under way, and more U.N.resolutions began tumbling out. Something else importanthappened in those early days to set Mr. Bush's mind: &quot;Hehimself identified the parallel between Saddam and Hitler inthe 1930s,&quot; Mr. Sununu recalls. &quot;That served as an analog forhim all along that helped him resolve any question in hismind -- if there was any question.&quot;   Over the next few months, subtle changes emerged in thecircle of advisers Mr. Bush came to rely upon. The formalNational Security Council gave way to a less-formal groupthat became known around the White House as the Big Eight:Mr. Bush; Vice President Dan Quayle; Secretary of State JamesBaker; Messrs. Scowcroft and Gates; Mr. Cheney; Mr. Sununu,and Gen. Powell. That is the group that has come to meetcasually, often on sofas and casual chairs in thepresidential residence, to plot war strategy. Like Mr. Bush,they work informally, without a lot of decision memos.   &quot;This group doesn't do paperwork,&quot; one senior officialsays.   Within the Big Eight, though, four officials became Mr.Bush's inner War Cabinet: Mr. Scowcroft, Mr. Baker, Mr.Cheney and Gen. Powell.   Mr. Scowcroft emerged as the sounding board Mr. Bush usedmost, though. It was he, officials say, whom the presidenthas frequently called for war updates, often beginning withno more than, &quot;What's happening?&quot;   This group has been remarkably cohesive -- thoughoccasional tensions showed as the crisis dragged to the endof last year. At one point as Mr. Bush was speaking on thecampaign trail in the fall, Mr. Baker and Mr. Scowcroftbecame concerned at how he was carrying out a broad decisionto step up war rhetoric. They worried that his declarationsthat &quot;I've had it&quot; and that Saddam Hussein is &quot;worse thanHitler&quot; might cost him support at home and in Europe whilesounding like bluffs to Arabs. They gently suggested he toneit down.   By late last year the administration had to decide whetherto seek a new U.N. resolution explicitly authorizing militaryaction. Mr. Scowcroft was skeptical that one was needed; Mr.Baker favored going for one. Mr. Scowcroft gave way, and Mr.Baker spearheaded the drive to secure the resolution.   As the crisis hit the stretch run toward war, Mr. Bushclearly was shaping his own policy. Officials say he alonecame up with the idea of offering to send Mr. Baker toBaghdad to confront Saddam Hussein, unveiling the idea to Mr.Sununu and Mr. Scowcroft as they stood in the courtyard ofthe home of Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortariduring a visit there.   But the Baghdad mission fizzled amid diplomatic wrangling.And as the year drew to a close -- and with the U.N.'s newlyestablished Jan. 15 withdrawal deadline following closelybehind -- Mr. Bush headed off to Camp David for a 12-dayChristmas break. Upon his return, he finally decided to seeka congressional resolution authorizing the use of force toexpel Iraq from Kuwait. The administration knew it could winone easily in the House -- but the Senate was too close tocall.   That led to a lobbying strategy in which the White Housefocused on six Democratic Senators from three states: JohnBreaux and Bennett Johnston of Louisiana; Howell Heflin andRichard Shelby of Alabama;and Richard Bryan and Harry Reid ofNevada. The White House calculated that each senator would bemore likely to vote for war if he knew his home-state partnerwas going to do the same. That way, they could provide eachother political cover back home. If the White House could getthem to stick with each other, and keep most Republicans inline, it could obtain a thin majority.   Mr. Sununu led an intensive sales effort, in whichbusiness and civic allies in those states were enlisted tolobby those key Senators. In the end all six went Mr. Bush'sway, and he won his resolution by a 52-47 vote on Jan. 12.   After a meeting between Mr. Baker and Iraqi ForeignMinister Tariq Aziz in Switzerland failed to produce anyprogress, Mr. Bush moved resolutely to military action. Onthe morning of Jan. 15 -- the day the U.N. deadline expired-- he gathered the Big Eight in the Oval Office and signedthe presidential directive ordering hostilities to start.   Action was set to begin the next day, though Mr. Bushcould have called it off up till a short time after hismeeting with the education experts.   He didn't, of course, and the bombing began. Aides saythat, from the outset, Mr. Bush had signed an order thatauthorized both the immediate air war and the ground attack,at some unspecified point.   To complete the crucial decision of when to launch aground attack, Mr. Bush dispatched Mr. Cheney and Gen. Powellto Saudi Arabia in the second week of February forconsultations with Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of U.S.and Western forces in the war. They returned on Feb. 11 andmet Mr. Bush privately in the White House, after which theother members of the Big Eight joined in.   Mr. Bush made his final big decision of the war. The aircampaign would continue for a short time longer, but Gen.Schwarzkopf would be given several optional times forbeginning the ground war. About a week later, administrationofficials say, Gen. Schwarzkopf picked his time: 8 p.m.Washington time on Saturday Feb. 23.   That left Mr. Bush to deal with the war's final twist. AsG-Day approached, Iraq and the Soviets began issuing highlyconditional Iraqi offers to withdraw from Kuwait. Mr. Bushadopted a two-pronged strategy: He would publicly expressgratitude for the Soviet diplomacy, while privately tellingMr. Gorbachev in gentle terms that the coalition would insiston much tougher terms for ending the war.   And at the suggestion of Gen. Powell, he cut short thediplomatic minuet by issuing a clear-cut ultimatum that Iraqwithdraw under allied conditions and set a deadline that heknew was just eight hours before Gen. Schwarzkopf planned tomove -- guaranteeing himself a free hand to start the finalattack as soon as Iraq failed to comply.   Finally, just two days ago, allied forces were wrapping uptheir last tank battle against Iraq's Republican Guard. Wordbegan to seep in that Iraq was about to send a letter to theU.N. finally accepting all of its conditions. But Mr. Bushagain beat Saddam Hussein to the punch: He had decided to goon national TV to announce victory and a cease-fire, which hedid before Iraq's final acquiescence was widely known. Mr.Bush thus managed not only to start the war on his timetable,but to end it on his terms as well.</TEXT></DOC>