<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900601-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>900601-0107.</DOCID><HL>   Unlikely Leader:   Taiwan, Long Noted   For Cheap Imitations,   Becomes an Innovator   ---   Rising Costs Force a Shift   From Toys to High-Tech,   With Government Help   ---   The Japanese Chase MICE   ----   By Damon Darlin   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST JAPAN NSM TXN</CO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><LP>   HSINCHU, Taiwan -- Bobo Wang was a rising young star atXerox Corp. when he decided to pick up his computer chips andstart a company here. The Taiwanese government was happy tooblige.   It gave him low-interest financing and tax incentives. Italso set him up in a Silicon Valley-clone industrial parkbetween the capital city of Taipei and the two bestengineering schools. The park has cheap rent, clean water,dependable electricity and even a bilingual school forchildren, on winding streets with names like Innovation Roadand Randamp;D Road.</LP><TEXT>   The help paid off. Several months ago, the company Mr.Wang founded, Microtek International Inc., scored a coup. Ithit the market with a device that feeds both black-and-whiteand color photographs into a computer -- a boon for desktoppublishers because it's almost like getting two machines forthe price of one. Not only did it get to the market ahead ofthe Japanese, but the scanner sells for less than half theprice of a comparable Japanese product.   By the time Japan's Sharp Corp. scrambled its version ontothe market, Microtek was far ahead. The result: In about sixmonths, little Microtek sold 11,000 of the $2,700 scanners --more than Sharp will probably sell in a year.   Microtek is an example of the new Taiwanese economy --moving from imitation to innovation. The past generation ofTaiwanese businessmen were content to copy existing productsof the West and Japan. With cheap labor, a weak currency andan export-or-die philosophy, they made Taiwan famous forcheap knock-off electronics, toys and tennis shoes. Now thateconomic conditions are shifting, Taiwan's industry isquickly pushing into high-technology products that sellbecause of their sophisticated features, not just lowerprices.   Its move is being closely watched in the Pacific Rim.Newly industrialized nations such as South Korea haveneglected innovation -- and now they fear they won't be ableto make the transition. They are examining the Taiwanesemodel of government support for entrepreneurs andengineering.   At Microtek, Robert Hsieh, head of office automationproducts, spends much time traveling abroad to industryconferences and workshops, where he listens for new-productideas in the conversations and complaints of computerhobbyists, newsletter editors and office managers. He alsoencourages his staff to leave Taiwan and find new things. AnAmerican-educated image-processing expert, Mr. Hsieh keeps asmall staff of technical people in the U.S. to watch trendsin research and consumer behavior. &quot;We feel it when somethingexciting comes along,&quot; he says.   And they're prepared to take advantage of those feelings.&quot;We move fast,&quot; says Mr. Hsieh. &quot;Japan has committees,committees and committees to decide something. We can jumpright on things because all I need is one signature.&quot;   Taiwan's new attitude was the result of some brutalrealities. Wages are up 40% since 1986, and the New Taiwandollar has been up as much as 50% against the U.S. dollar. Nolonger low-cost producers, companies were faced with raisingprices overseas or cutting profit margins.   But the Taiwanese have turned the situation to theiradvantage, forcing themselves to change the way they dobusiness. They are moving toward high technology andhigher-value products. &quot;The only solution is to add value toour products,&quot; says Stan Shih, chairman and chief executiveof Acer Group, Taiwan's leading computer maker.   Microelectronics Technology Inc. was making components formicrowave receiving equipment; now it makes complete systemsfor ships -- and a portable unit that weighs just 65 pounds.Inventa Electronics Co., which made almost-disposablecalculators, now builds personal computers as well as clocksand telephones. Kennex International Corp. is designinghigh-end sporting goods. And Vidar-Sun Moon Star Co., whichused to produce electronic parts, now makes mobile phones anddigital microwave radios.   Taiwan's governmental and private Randamp;D spending has doubledin just five years, to about 50 billion New Taiwan dollars($1.8 billion). About half of that is spending by thegovernment, which often funnels money to research projectsthat can be shared by many small companies, such asartificial intelligence software or computer chip design.   The government encourages the substitution of machines forworkers; that costs about $35,000 an employee initially, butthe government estimates the payback comes in two years. Itis also letting labor-intensive and low-tech factories closeor move offshore. &quot;We are responding to the reality,&quot; saysFrederick F. Chien, chairman of the Council for EconomicPlanning and Development, a cabinet-level post. &quot;Thehigh-growth days are over.&quot;   That's relative, of course. Taiwan still expects annualgrowth of about 7% -- down from an average of 7.9% in the1980s, but more than double a level that would be consideredexcellent in the U.S. Exports are expanding vigorously, 9.3%last year and probably more than 8% this year, thanks to theshift to higher-value products. Per capita gross nationalproduct will hit $8,500 this year, making Taiwan one of themost affluent Asian lands.   Taiwanese companies also are starting to buy into the U.S.A Taiwanese business and government consortium recentlybought Wyse Technology Inc. for $156.7 million. Companiesthat hardly anyone outside Taiwan has heard of are buyingsmall Silicon Valley concerns, as well as hotels like theMandarin Oriental in San Francisco (for $60 million) and eveneight insolvent Texas savings and loans ($37 million).   The movement of investment offshore, about $4 billion inthe last two years, is invigorating the economies ofMalaysia, Indonesia and Thailand. An additional $1 billionhas leaked to mainland China, which is still officially atwar with the Nationalist government on Taiwan.   Korea, impressed with the Taiwan model, is setting up ascience park for entrepreneurs and is studying ways toattract engineers, particularly Koreans in the U.S., to starttheir own small companies in Korea. Seoul says it will invest$5.89 billion over three years in Randamp;D. &quot;We have to developthe tendencies such as you find in Taiwan,&quot; says KimChong-In, the Korean president's top economic adviser.&quot;Korean entrepreneurs are not so good at adapting totechnological change. We have to become more flexible andadaptive.&quot;   Taiwan isn't out of the woods yet. With a population ofnearly 20 million and small, albeit rich, companies, Taiwanwill find it hard to compete against giants in the U.S.,Europe and Japan. Its companies lack experience and namerecognition. Revenues and profits are soft during thetransition. Says Mr. Chien: &quot;This is a very exciting period,but it is also a very dangerous period.&quot;   One advantage for Taiwan is that its economy has beenbuilt largely by small entrepreneurial companies that canchange quickly. &quot;To be successful you don't have to be thebiggest, you have to be the fastest,&quot; says Klaus C. Wiemer,president of TSMC, Taiwan's largest computer-chip maker.   That is certainly Microtek's strategy as it finds nicheproducts to exploit. And how this company has succeeded showshow Taiwan's policies jump-started its high technology.   Mr. Wang, a Taiwanese immigrant to the U.S., developed adevice called a micro in-circuit emulator (MICE). It enableda computer programmer to debug a program at the same time thebasic instructions for the program were displayed.   He could have started a company in the U.S. to develop andmarket the MICE, but following the trend of thousands ofeducated Chinese-Americans, he and four other young engineersand entrepreneurs headed for Taiwan in 1980.   The Microtek MICE -- smaller and cheaper than any otherdebugger -- got to the market before U.S. or Japanesecompetition. It proved a hit and the company was profitablewithin two years. Mr. Wang plowed 35% of the first year's$200,000 in revenue into Randamp;D. Since then, the level ofinvestment has never dropped below 10%. He started hiringengineers from Taiwan and the U.S., many of themChinese-Americans who once worked for Xerox.   In Taiwan, the company had a ready pool of engineers tochoose from. Taiwanese are well-educated. Some estimates sayalmost 10% of Taiwan's work force has engineering training;Taiwanese schools turn out about 10,000 engineers a year.   With 30% of Microtek's 435 employees assigned to Randamp;D, thecompany came up with other niche products. It makescomputer-controlled machine tools and the software to runthem. And it now is building its scanners in the U.S. for theU.S. military. Slip a special board of computer chips in thecomputer -- Microtek makes that, too -- and you can shootdocuments from one office to another, bypassing photocopierand facsimile machines. Next up: Multi-function machines thatwill be able to copy, scan, print and fax.   Smallness can help innovation, but it has its decideddisadvantages. With sales of only $38.39 million last year,Microtek can't possibly invest like a Xerox or Canon, whichare aiming at the same objective. So it recently formed jointventures with small U.S. and Japanese companies to developnew products, such as a new kind of printer called a photonpage printer, which uses light to print. Another jointventure will work on an optical &quot;mouse&quot; for computer control.Yet another will develop software for processing images andtechnology that compresses the data of images into smallerspace.   Acer, Taiwan's premier personal computer maker, is takinga similar tack. With sales of slightly less than $1 billion ayear, Acer can easily be muscled by competitors andsuppliers. So it teamed with National Semiconductor toco-design and sell devices to build processors for personalcomputers. It joined Texas Instruments to build dynamicrandom access memory chips so neither company is at the mercyof the Japanese and Koreans, who control most of the world'schip supply. Acer is also buying companies in the U.S. andEurope to expand its sales network.   A steady stream of merger and acquisition specialiststroop into the office of Mr. Shih, the CEO. Their proposalsnow sit in a foot-high stack on his desk. &quot;Merger andacquisition activity is on the increase,&quot; says Alvin H. Tong,executive vice president of Acer and a former IBM executive.&quot;People are starting to realize that we have money.&quot;   That's good, because Taiwan still needs a lot of outsidehelp. &quot;They don't have the sophistication to be a player inthe world market,&quot; says Mr. Wiemer of TSMC, the chip maker.It doesn't help that few people outside Taiwan have everheard of any Taiwanese company -- and even inside Taiwan onlyabout 35 companies say they have recognizable brand names.   Acer, which shipped about 400,000 personal computersaround the world last year, is probably the best known nameof all the Taiwanese companies. But even then, maybe a fewthousand Americans and Europeans recognize it. Mr. Shih,Acer's founder, changed the name in 1988 from theundistinctive Multitech in hopes of building recognition.&quot;The big limitation is brand recognition and marketingexpertise,&quot; he says.   That said, there is an air of optimism now in Taiwan.&quot;Every industrialized country has encountered these problemsand overcome them. I don't think that we will have any reasonnot to overcome them, too,&quot; says Yang Shih-Chien, an economicministry official. &quot;Maybe it is more cost-effective to solveall the problems at the same time.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>