<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0006</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0006.</DOCID><HL>   REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):   The Cambodian Dilemma</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   FREST CCB</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><LP>   American policy toward Indochina was pretty much sweptunder the national rug with the fall of Saigon, but thebeginnings of a new debate have been stirred by the ongoingcontroversy over an ABC News documentary on Cambodia. For thelatest installment in TV criticism see the accompanyingletter by Stephen Morris and the editorial below (See:Letters to the Editor:  Cambodia vs. Vietnam's Colonialismand Review andamp; Outlook (Editorial): ABC's Documentary -- WSJMay 14, 1990). But to think about Cambodian policy, start byrecalling that this is not a conflict that conveniently pitsbad guys against good guys. There are communist forces onboth sides.   The Khmer Rouge, the communists who took over Cambodiawhen America lost in Vietnam, are currently waging aguerrilla war against the Hanoi-backed government in PhnomPenh. Before being evicted from power by the Vietnamese, theycompiled a ghastly record, and they would probably wreakfurther horrors given the chance. It's also true that the twonon-communist resistance factions are an unpromising lot,likely to lose out to their erstwhile allies, the KhmerRouge, in a grab for Phnom Penh.</LP><TEXT>   The non-communists -- who do receive aid from the U.S. --are renowned for their corruption, especially in their owncamps. They are headed by Prince Sihanouk, who has nevershown himself much of a friend to the West. Indeed, beforeSihanouk's falling out with the Vietnamese, he produced sucheffusions as &quot;My War With the CIA,&quot; a memoir in which hedetailed his dealings with Hanoi and the communist factionsthat eventually helped topple the dominoes of Laos andCambodia.   It is entirely possible, though, that the Khmer Rougestand a good chance of retaking Cambodia with or without theefforts of the non-communist resistance. In our own inquiriesin Thailand and the Far East generally we have never heard ofany proof that the U.S. provides direct military aid to theKhmer Rouge. It is of course true that both thenon-communists and the Khmer Rouge are fighting the sameenemy, and it is probably true that the Khmer Rouge -- withtheir better organization, superior numbers and clearer goals-- would probably swallow up the other resistance factions inthe end.   The odd leap made by many commentators, however, is thatif the U.S. doesn't go on backing the Cambodian resistance,it should start backing the Vietnamese-installed regime ofHun Sen in Cambodia as well as Vietnam's government in Hanoi.But both the Phnom Penh and the Hanoi regimes are stillruthless governments (see Amnesty International's report onVietnam, February 1990).   Indeed, as Mr. Morris points out, a major reason the KhmerRouge are able to gather any support inside Cambodia is thatthey play to the hatred with which many Cambodians regardtheir Vietnamese overlords. The Khmer Rouge may indeed havecaptured the powerful force of nationalism, unless thenon-communist resistance is more viable than it looks.   Vietnam last September put on a show of pulling its troopsout of Cambodia. But journalists who have traveled inCambodia and Western diplomats in Bangkok say there is clearevidence that Vietnamese troops have since returned toCambodia -- if indeed they ever left -- to support the HunSen government which most Cambodians hate.   Even institutions as eager to return to Vietnam as theAsian Development Bank have had to back off on Hanoi's wordthat it is out of Cambodia. A source at the ADB tells us thatit had laid the ground for renewal of aid to Vietnam pendingwithdrawal from Cambodia; last September its then-president,Masao Fujioka, had the Bank put together a confidentialreport on the Vietnamese economy and then went there himself.But aid resumption was put on hold because there was too muchreason to believe the withdrawal was bogus.   Also, there are reports leaking out of Laos these past fewmonths that the Lao government -- possibly with Vietnamese oreven Soviet backing -- has been using chemical warfareagainst resistance fighters along the Thai-Lao border, andagainst rebellious civilians further inside Laos, around thePlain of Jars. Surely such reports should at least beinvestigated before the U.S. decides to place its trust inVietnam, or provide anything in the way of aid or recognitionto Hanoi.   Vietnam keeps trying to present itself to the West as asort of Third World waif. But Hanoi's politburo runs a hugearmy equipped with Soviet weapons, and it plays host to ahuge Soviet base at Cam Ranh Bay and an airfield at Da Nang.This does not reflect a harmless Vietnam.   With regard to Cambodia, this leaves U.S. policy makers ina painful dilemma. Should they send enough aid to keep thenon-communist resistance alive, hoping for the kind oflong-shot lurch we've seen in other parts of the worldlately? It's worth noting that there indeed has been talk ofholding a U.N.-sponsored election in Cambodia. Or should theU.S. abandon the non-communists to their fate, to avoidindirect help to one side or the other in the strugglebetween the Khmer Rouge and Hanoi? Our view is that as amatter of morality, the U.S. should aid non-communistswilling to fight. But as a matter of realpolitik, we suspectthat the Cambodian non-communists are simply too weak.   America's mission is certainly not to sort out thequarrels of two vile and competing communist groups. Thewisest course at this juncture is for the U.S. to send thebasic messages that we oppose communism and where possible weactively support freedom. This would mean, for instance,taking more Vietnamese refugees into the U.S.   The bottom line is, having lost the war in Indochina, theU.S. doesn't have enough clout right now to sway any outcomein Cambodia. In all likelihood it will have to wait, as itdid in Eastern Europe, until a decent and geniune optionsomehow manages to arise from the awful brew that began withthe arrival of communism in Southeast Asia.</TEXT></DOC>