<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900605-0109</DOCNO><DOCID>900605-0109.</DOCID><HL>   In East Europe, Only Poland Makes Hard Decisions   ----   By Karen Elliott House</HL><DATE>06/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A24</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   WARSAW -- If, as an Italian Communist Party leader oncesaid, &quot;there are many roads to socialism,&quot; these days thereare at least as many roads back from it. All of them are fullof potholes and other pitfalls.   Every country in East Europe has now embarked on such ajourney -- or is at least discussing what bags to pack. Thedesired destination in each case is some nebulous mix ofdemocratic institutions, the alluring but confusing benefitsof capitalism, and the social safety net to which they've allbecome accustomed during more than 40 years of Marxiststagnation. They start, however, from very different stagesof political sophistication and economic development and havesignificantly different chances of success.</LP><TEXT>   Recent travel in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland leadsto the perhaps surprising conclusion that it is Poland -- thecountry starting from farthest behind and traveling therockiest road -- that stands the best chance of actuallymaking the transition to genuine capitalism. Poland alreadyhas packed its bags and set off while its wealthier neighborsare still planning their voyage.   In any analysis of East Europe these days, one must setaside East Germany. Though it shares the past miseries ofMarxism, it has a unique future as an integral part of anenlarged German nation. At the other extreme, Bulgaria andRomania, despite recent and enormous change, start from sofar back that they are destined to remain laggards. Thus, thefocus on problems and potential for Czechoslovakia, Hungaryand Poland.   Clearly there are commonalities. All three have theburdensome legacy of ossified, uncompetitive economies. Allthree have also been chained to the rigid Soviet economy. Toa degree generally overlooked by Americans, all three stillcount the Soviets as their largest trading &quot;partner.&quot; TheLilliputians in this case remain tightly tied down byGulliver. There simply isn't any quick way out of dependencyon Soviet raw materials, nor an immediate alternative to theSoviet market, which, unlike the West, is willing to barterfor frequently shoddy goods made by unmotivated workers inantiquated factories.   &quot;We trade our stray dog for their blind cat,&quot; says PeterBod, a youthful, market-oriented economic adviser toHungary's new prime minister.   The three countries also share officials mostly new togovernment and overwhelmed by the challenge of creatingcapitalism. A visit to the finance ministry in Czechoslovakiais typical. &quot;Czechoslovakia is a madhouse,&quot; says DusanTriska, a frantic, fortyish economist with an Einstein-likecoiffure. He is responsible for privatization programs. &quot;Weare trying to do everything at once. New laws are beingintroduced every day; we can't keep up with it all.&quot;   All three countries covet German markets and money. Yet,on the one hand, they fear it won't materialize as Germanresources pour into East Germany; on the other hand, theyfear becoming German economic satellites.   Also, to a degree that ought to concern Americans,officials in all three countries are surprisingly reconciledto the general irrelevance of America to their immediateeconomic futures. They may look to America as a source ofinspiration, but they have reluctantly concluded that itisn't going to supply much practical financial support. Thesurprising thing to an American visitor is how infrequentlyAmerica is even mentioned in the offices or coffee houses ofEastern Europe.   If such similarities cut across all three ex-satellites,there also are significant differences in atmospherics andsubstance.   Czechoslovakia, which statistically enjoys a per-capitastandard of living well beyond Poland's $1,100, still is sodesperate for foreign currency that all visitors are forcedupon arrival to exchange $16 for every day they will be inthe country. While Poland is coping with the consequences oflast January's sudden conversion to market, rather thancentrally administered, prices, Czechoslovakia's officialscontinue to meet weekly to debate what economic reforms topursue. Its president seems more interested in making peacebetween Arabs and Israelis than in resolving economic policydisputes among his own ministers. Debate drags on ingovernment while Parliament busies itself changing streetnames and discussing whether the name Czechoslovakia shouldbe hyphenated -- or whether Czechs and Slovaks should inhabitthe same nation at all.   Some Czechs already are suggesting that perhaps socialisteconomics, absent Soviet overlords, isn't so bad after all.Since the Czechs have more to start with, they fear they havemore to lose. With a degree of comfort has come a higherdegree of complacency.   The Czechs are searching for a route to risk-freecapitalism. For example, they continue to debate a nationalvoucher system whereby citizens each would receive a paper&quot;right&quot; to buy equity in various state enterprises. Among theproblems with this paper privatization, however, is thatvouchers couldn't be freely traded, meaning that bothvouchers and enterprises will lack real market value. Whatshould happen to uneconomic enterprises in which no Czechchooses to invest vouchers? &quot;We can sell those to theJapanese,&quot; says Mr. Triska.   Vladimir Dlouhy, Czechoslovakia's new minister ofplanning, who really would like to become the country'sminister of unplanning, sits in Prague's largest bastion ofbureaucracy, and says with a smile, &quot;welcome to the heartbeatof communist planning.&quot;   Increasingly frustrated by political indecisiveness, Mr.Dlouhy says, &quot;We know what steps we have to take, but thepoliticians aren't ready to take them.&quot; Optimists herebelieve Czechoslovakia's direction will be set followingnational elections Friday. But it's far from clear that muchwill really change.   At this point, Czechoslovakia, with its prewar industrialbase, its artistic and intellectual tradition and itstelegenic president, is quite clearly the world's darling.But the world's darling risks ending up one of the world'seconomic orphans if it continues to delay hard decisions.   In Hungary's capital of Budapest a different kind ofdisillusionment is setting in. Hungary over the last decademanaged to move significantly further toward a mix of Marxismand market economics than any other state in East Europe. Itoperated on a looser leash from Moscow, established moretrade with Western Europe, and built a reputation withWestern banks.   Hungary is perplexed by several paradoxes. Preciselybecause they managed to advance under communism, externalexpectations these days are higher for the Hungarians.Westerners arrive expecting a functioning market economy.Hungary, however, was never a highly industrialized nationand it never was willing or able genuinely to privatize itseconomy. Hungarians are reluctant to yield elements of theirsocialist safety net for the risks of greater economicfreedom.   Frustrations exist in daily Hungarian life, like asix-year wait to take title to an automobile. But thefrustrations aren't so great as to prompt strong publicdemand for sharp change. The winners of this spring'sdivisive election pledged to move the country&quot;compassionately&quot; toward capitalism. The party promising moreeconomic pain en route decisively lost.   &quot;We've gone halfway on economic reform for 20 years and ithasn't worked,&quot; says Ferenc Bartha, chairman of the HungarianNational Bank.   Indeed, if complacency is the problem in Czechoslovakia,gradualism is the difficulty in Hungary. &quot;I warn against thephilosophy of gradualism,&quot; says a senior executive ofGermany's Deutsche Bank. &quot;Gradualism nourishes the illusionyou can avoid pain.&quot;   Prime Minister Jozsef Antall recently sought to reassureWestern bankers who have financed Hungary's $20 billionforeign debt. &quot;Our mandate of election means we have themoral trust to make the public accept hard decisions.&quot; But,he added, &quot;Harsh measures can be executed only in parallelwith the creation of a social safety net.&quot;   It's not surprising that Hungarian officials want it bothways. Genuine economic change would require harsh measuresfor which there could be a political price. Any politicalinstability would scare off creditors and investors, leavingHungary bereft of external private support. One furthercomplication: Hungarians are engaged in divisive politicsover minorities in neighboring countries. To foreignerslooking in on East Europe, there are a number of distinctcountries with defined borders. But to many in East Europe,there are rather a number of distinct nationalities whotranscend post-war borders. The issue of Romanian treatmentof Hungarian minorities dominates Hungarian politics morethan issues of socialism and capitalism.   While the Czechs and Hungarians are seeking painless pathsto prosperity, the Poles are accepting genuine economicsacrifice.   In January, Poland's new Solidarity government launchedwhat it calls its &quot;leap to the market.&quot; The governmentslashed the budget, including a wide range of subsidies. Ittightened the money supply. It radically devalued the zloty.It largely decontrolled prices, though not -- yet -- wages.It encouraged foreign competition at the risk of bankruptingstate enterprises.   The effects were predictably quick and traumatic. Costs ofsuch basic necessities as electricity rose by more than 300%within a matter of weeks, and even the price of a bottle ofvodka doubled. Inflation soared -- to 80% in January -- buthas subsided since to roughly 5% a month. Wages, deindexedfrom price increases, dropped sharply in real terms. Polishunemployment rose to roughly 300,000 (still less than 2%) andis predicted to rise to one million by year-end; by contrast,the Hungarians fret about 4,000 jobless.   As the money supply shrank, the monthly interest rate shotto 40% in January -- though it, too, has since fallen to 8%in April and 5.5% in May. The zloty was devalued 35% but theresult is a freely convertible currency that enables Poland'seconomy to engage in internationally competitive commerce.Indeed, few Poles any longer demand payment in dollars, asthe zloty is readily redeemable by any citizen at a localbank for hard currency. Six months ago a hotel maitre d'would chase down patrons offering to tear up the zlotyequivalent of a $50 dinner check in exchange for a $10 bill.   The immediate downside of this high-stakes program hasbeen a significant decline in industrial production and fearsof a major recession. &quot;We expected a drop of production,&quot;says Wojciech Misiag, deputy finance minister and anarchitect of the economic reform plan. &quot;Once you create areal market, a lot of production here isn't salable; somePolish products are too costly to produce.&quot; Industrialproduction fell 30% in January and February but hasstabilized, and Mr. Misiag believes the downward trend isreversing.   The signs of robust commerce on Warsaw's main streets seemto support Mr. Misiag's optimism. If some old enterprises arefoundering in the newly competitive marketplace, newentrepreneurial activity is flourishing. This city now teemswith sidewalk sellers offering everything from formerlyunattainable fresh fruit to fashionable Italian footwear.   Typical is Jan Kulibab, a sidewalk shoe salesman, peddlinghis total inventory of two dozen pairs of Italian shoes frombehind a table on a Warsaw street corner. Mr. Kulibab isselling the shoes for $19 a pair; he buys them at $16 a pairfrom a wholesaler who travels back and forth by bus toGermany, where he buys the shoes for $12 a pair. Mr. Kulibab,however, doesn't intend to remain a sidewalk shoe salesman.His ambition is to save enough zlotys to rent a vacantsausage shop where he can display a wider range of shoes andundercut the shoddy merchandise at the state-owned departmentstore down the street. &quot;Last month I made an 800,000 zlotyprofit {about $80} but with a shop I could do much better,&quot;he says.   In addition to the enterprise of its Kulibabs, Poland alsobenefits from a degree of political unity still unknownelsewhere in East Europe. In Hungary and Czechoslovakia --and even more so in Romania and Bulgaria -- the &quot;new&quot;political leadership consists of at best a handful of formeropposition politicians who sit atop layer upon layer ofpoliticians and bureaucrats, who may have changed their partyaffiliation but not necessarily their Marxist mentality. Inthe rest of East Europe political reformation runs only skindeep. But in Poland there is genuine political revolution.   That revolution, of course, has been under way for nearlya decade -- since Lech Walesa and his Solidarity movementfirst challenged the monolithic power of the Polish CommunistParty. Here the pressure for political change has come frombelow -- from shipyard workers rather than playwrights.   Skeptics, and there are many, still argue that there islittle in Poland's long history of division to justify muchoptimism about transition to long-term democracy andprosperity. But the facts support some optimism. Fewoutsiders believed back in the dark days of martial lawsuppression of Solidarity that the movement could rise againto challenge communist control. More recently, many doubtedwhether the Solidarity government would have the guts to takewhat amounts to a free fall into market economics. In eachcase, Poles confounded skeptics.   With all they've been through, Poles are not dreamersabout the future, but neither are they whiners or worriersabout the present. The clear impression is that they haveresolutely embarked on a rocky road back from communism andthat they mean to see the journey through.   ---   Ms. House is vice president, international, of Dow Jones andamp;Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal.</TEXT></DOC>