<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900816-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>900816-0070.</DOCID><HL>   Privatize Deposit Insurance   ----   By Peter J. Wallison</HL><DATE>08/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>BANKS (BNK)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   The root cause of the Sandamp;L mess is the deposit insurancesystem itself. While permitting private institutions to usethe federal government's credit without limit, it relies ongovernment supervision and regulation to correct for the factthat depositors have no incentive to control how their fundsare used. Last week, Federal Deposit Insurance CorporationChairman William Seidman announced that his agency, whichinsures bank deposits, may lose an additional $2 billion thisyear. There is, unfortunately, reason to believe that this isnot the last FDIC loss we will see. Nor are the banksthemselves the beneficiaries of this flawed system. This weekthe FDIC announced that it would raise premiums by 63% -- anenormous charge to bank earnings. More increases are inprospect.   As shown by the Sandamp;L debacle, the deposit insurance systemtends to make disasters out of difficulties. In the realeconomy there is a clearly understood relationship betweenrisk and reward, and for every category of investment --commercial loans, home mortgages, junk bonds -- there is aspectrum of return in which the riskiest investments areperceived to produce the greatest rewards. Althoughregulators can make rules limiting the kinds of loansfederally insured institutions can make, and supervisors caninspect bank portfolios to assure that these rules areobserved, a loan committee or a board of directors that isunder pressure to produce high yields will almost alwaysprefer risky investments in the permissible categories toprudent ones with lower yields.</LP><TEXT>   This would not be a serious problem if the federal depositinsurance system did not suppress natural market forces. In anormally functioning credit market, investors deny funds toinstitutions that have dim prospects for using themprudently.   As long as the incentives for taking risks are small, thefederal deposit insurance system functions satisfactorily, asindeed it did for 50 years. But when the Sandamp;Ls began to sufferlosses or diminished earnings, high-yield investments becamenecessary for their continued prosperity or even survival. Atthis point, the incentives to take risks overwhelmed the weakrestraints of regulation.   Now many banks may be in a similar predicament. And if sothe engines of speculation -- fueled by federally insureddollars -- may be revving up. Under these circumstances, theonly thing standing between the taxpayers and anotherSandamp;L-type bailout is the willingness and ability of governmentregulators to take tough and politically unattractivemeasures when the chips are down. FSLIC blinked at thechallenge. We can only hope that bank regulators will behavedifferently.   But all this raises deeper questions. Should the taxpayershave to gamble at such high stakes on the judgments of a fewbank regulators? Is it necessary for the government to be thefront-line insurer of banks? The answer to these questions isno. The risks taken on by banks and Sandamp;Ls can be controlledand disciplined not by government regulators but by themarket itself -- that is, by giving someone other than thegovernment an incentive to assure that depositoryinstitutions are investing prudently.   But market discipline is easier to conceive than toachieve. Although federal deposit insurance makes depositorsindifferent to how their funds are used, it does notnecessarily follow that making depositors worry a little willaddress the system's problems. Proposals have been advancedby some, including the American Bankers Association, torequire depositors to suffer some minimum loss in any bank orthrift failure. This, it is thought, will force depositors tolook carefully at the banks in which they invest and place alimit on the resources they make available to managementsunlikely to use them profitably.   Depositors, however, are an inherently poor source ofmarket discipline. It is unlikely they are treating theirdeposits as investments, subject to the usual risk/rewardanalysis. Instead, they expect to take no risks with theirfunds, and, if there are rumors of instability or possibleloss, will simply withdraw their deposits -- causing a &quot;run.&quot;Moreover, depositors have little effective power todiscipline management. They can withhold or withdraw funds tobe sure, but they lack the shareholders' power to removemanagement and alter its policies.   The most promising form of market discipline is privateinsurance, where the premiums are related to risk. This is adirect and effective form of market discipline since riskybehavior by management results in higher insurance costs --directly affecting management's risk/reward calculation. Asmanagement seeks higher profitability through greater risk,increasing insurance premiums tax away larger and largerportions of the benefits management is seeking. Eventually,decreasing profitability causes the company's equity capitalto lose value, stimulating a takeover or a recapitalizationin which the management is replaced or its policiessubstantially altered.   Risk-based deposit insurance won't work, however, if it isadministered by the government. An effective system willrequire the insurer to impose widely varying premiums oninstitutions competing in the same market. Only if premiumsare modest at the low end and truly painful at the high endwill they have the intended effect of discipliningmanagement.   The history of the Sandamp;L crisis shows clearly thatregulators cannot impose differential treatment oninstitutions without generating strong opposition inCongress. When all of the current hoopla over the KeatingFive and Jim Wright blows over, we may be sure that membersof Congress will be back to putting pressure on governmentagencies on behalf of constituents.   Risk-based deposit insurance -- if administered by thegovernment -- would be an inevitable victim of this process.The government insurer that assessed significantly higherdeposit insurance premiums against Bank X than against Bank Ywould face the displeasure of Bank X's congressionalsupporters. Since a differential premium is essentially amatter of an insurer's judgment, it will inevitably appeararbitrary. Add the complications that would arise if the CEOof Bank X were a Republican and the CEO of Bank Y were aDemocrat.   Instead, any system of risk-based deposit insurance shouldbe left to the private sector, and administered throughnegotiated contractual arrangements without the interferenceof government. Indeed, the banking system could insureitself, with associations or syndicates of banks formed toguarantee the deposits of other banks in return for arisk-based premium. The competition among syndicates -- whichwould bid for the opportunity to insure particular banks at aspecified initial premium -- would assure that the premium isbased on the market's assessment of the insured institution'sinherent risk.   The premium would be reset frequently, according to aformula established by contract between the guarantor and theguaranteed institutions, and would be enforced by acomprehensive monitoring system in which the day-to-day riskstaken on by the insured institution would be incorporated inthe premium rate. Management would be able to `price' itsrisk-taking, because its decisions to take on or shed riskwould have predictable consequences in terms of premium cost.   Insurance is an option on the capital of the insurer, andthere is ample capital available in the banking system toprovide 100% insurance coverage for the deposits and otherliabilities of participating banks. The 550 largest banks andSandamp;Ls -- those with assets in excess of $1 billion -- haveaggregate capital of approximately $165 billion. This is morethan 10 times the reserves in the FDIC and 150% of all thecapital in the property and casualty insurance industry.Placing this aggregate capitalization behind the deposits andother liabilities of U.S. banks and Sandamp;Ls would increase theirstability and creditworthiness, lower their cost of funds,and enhance their international competitiveness.   Moreover, once the banking industry itself has takenresponsibility for the solvency of its individual members,the government can function as back-up insurer. In this case,there would be little risk to the government or the taxpayersand the ordinary depositor would continue to have the peaceof mind conveyed by the FDIC sticker on the door.   Thus, it is possible to design a system of real marketdiscipline that eliminates the current incentives formanagement risk-taking, and places the risk of bankinsolvency on the private sector and not on the taxpayers.Washington policy makers will have to understand, however,that the federal deposit insurance system is inherentlyunstable. No amount of tinkering with the current system willeliminate the risk of a taxpayer bailout of the FDIC.   ---   Mr. Wallison, White House counsel and the TreasuryDepartment counsel during the Reagan administration, is anattorney in Washington.</TEXT></DOC>