<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910109-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>910109-0116.</DOCID><HL>   Political Cowardice, Financial Panic   ----   By Ron Chernow</HL><DATE>01/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><IN>BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   Suddenly, the American financial system has slipped intocrisis. It started with the savings and loans, but hasspilled over into commercial banks, insurance companies,brokerage houses and even credit unions. What seemed likeisolated fiascoes now look like the grim acts of a singleunfolding drama. For the first time since Herbert Hoover,mattresses are back in style as safe places to stash cash.Runs at the Bank of New England and in Rhode Island evokefaded newsreel images of Depression panics.   As they lurch from crisis to crisis, financial regulatorscan barely stem the tide of disaster, much less fathom itseerie, surging force. They are forced to mouth the platitudesof reassurance that become &quot;de rigueur&quot; in hard times. Butany attempt to solve the crisis must start with some analysisof its source. Why is this crisis so deep and so pervasive?Why did its symptoms erupt with such frightening speed? Whathas gone wrong?</LP><TEXT>   The sequence of economic events from the last days ofWoodrow Wilson to the early New Deal provide a mightyparallel to the past 15 years. The severe recession of1920-21, which curbed the post-World War I inflation, shiftedresources massively from real assets into financial assets.As thousands of Southern and Western banks tied to the farmor energy business toppled, banks in the urban Northeastthrived on loans made on real estate and securitiescollateral. But when the 1929 crash dragged down the value ofsuch collateral, the urban banks foundered in turn.   Similarly, the current crisis has its roots in theinflation of the 1970s. Investors fled financial markets,salting away their money in gold, collectibles and othertangible assets. When Paul Volcker's Federal Reserve tamedinflation with high interest rates, it lured money away fromthe assets that had prospered in the 1970s. Rural areas andthe oil patch suffered, but the stock and bond marketsfloated up. Interest rates tumbled, and easy money financedboth growth and speculation.   During the liquidity booms of the 1920s and 1980s,consumers and companies accumulated debt in a wild, giddyspree. A cocky self-confidence infected markets, making eventhe most dubious deals seem like small miracles of financialengineering. Instead of rationing credit, bankers conspiredto remove restraints. But the buoyant growth of the financialservices industry only camouflaged the reality of decliningprofitability. In the end, too much cash chased too manydeals; risk grossly outstripped any conceivable reward.   In 1930, the inflation-disinflation sequence ended inoutright deflation. Unrestrained credit expansionartificially buoyed stock and real estate prices; creditretraction drove down prices with equally shattering speed.1990's swift transition to tight money may revive thisancient pattern.   The recessions that have occurred at three- or four-yearintervals since World War II have been crises of insufficientcapacity. The stresses of economic growth create laborshortages and production bottlenecks, leading to inflationand rising interest rates. The recession we are now slidinginto, marked by commodity gluts and overbuilding in criticalsectors, is a crisis of excess capacity, marked by trouble infinance and real estate.   Because such recessions have been unknown in the postwarera, their dynamics are poorly understood by policy makers.The Federal Reserve continues to scan the landscape forworrisome signs of inflation, even as deflation stalks theland. Businesses are now slashing prices and selling assetsto service debt, while banks are auctioning off foreclosedproperties, feeding a potentially vicious deflationaryspiral. The giddy spirit of boom yields to the paralyticgloom of bust.   The world of a speculative boom is easy to describe andhard to resist; it has its own beguiling, if insidious logic.Business errors are magically redeemed by rising prices,inducing illusions of invulnerability. In the 1920s, New Erapundits believed in limitless prosperity, just as someeconomic commentators in the 1980s consigned the businesscycle to the historic junk heap. The sustained prosperity ofboth decades meant that the economy was deprived of thosebrief recessions that, like small tremors, can ease economicstress. Long booms often end with earthquakes.   The current perilous state of American finance cannot,however, be entirely blamed on the boom-and-bust saga. Italso represents a massive failure by policy makers to grapplewith the problems that have bedeviled the financial industryfor over a decade. It is a shameful commentary on theAmerican political system that only now -- as the depositinsurance fund runs dry and the country stands on the edge ofa precipice -- are we even starting to debate reform of thebanking system.   If the banking crisis seems to laymen to have sprung upsuddenly, politicians and regulators can profess no suchinnocence. They have watched 1,100 commercial banks failsince 1980 without batting an eyelash. (By contrast, Japan,Britain and Germany have had scarcely any bank failures inthe past decade.) Like somber orderlies in some undeclaredwar, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. has soldiered on,carrying casualties from the battlefield without sounding analarm about the carnage.   The fundamental, long-evaded policy problem is that themarketplace has steadily blurred lines between financialsectors, creating a single, unified marketplace, not justhere, but abroad. Meanwhile, an antiquated regulatorystructure still treats banks, thrifts, insurance companies,investment banks and brokerage houses as if they existed onseparate planets. These institutions are engulfed insimultaneous crises because they operate in the same businessand respond to the same competitive pressures. The speed withwhich the current crisis has spread across sectors powerfullyattests to the growing interconnectedness of the financialsystem. We have one big crisis, and it requires one bigsolution.   This growing overlap of financial product has beenglaringly evident at least since the advent of money-marketfunds in the 1970s. Consumers were suddenly free to shiftfunds across financial sectors, but regulated institutionscouldn't follow them. In a piecemeal political response tothis situation, some sectors, notably thrifts, werederegulated, while others, notably commercial banks, werebound by the old rules. The winners in the game were lessthose who operated most efficiently than those who had themost favorable regulatory climate. Either uniform regulationor deregulation would have been preferable to the dangerous,inequitable hodgepodge that resulted instead.   Unfortunately, those sectors that enjoyed the greatestfreedom -- brokerage houses and thrifts -- had the leastclaim to political favoritism. Far more Americans havedeposits in commercial banks or pension programs withinsurance companies than have brokerage accounts. Yet banksand insurance companies were forced to resort to increasinglyrisky investments to recoup the money that flowed tobrokerage houses and thrifts. Throughout the 1980s, they bidfuriously for investors' money, loosening lending standardsto earn the profits to pay these higher interest rates. Nowthey are reaping the consequences.   Most regulators turned a blind eye to these growing risks.In the Carter administration, they permitted banks to makeLatin American loans well in excess of their capital. In theReagan years, they condoned similarly excessive commercialproperty and leveraged buy-out loans. Why did regulatorstolerate such wholesale speculation? In part, because riskylending allowed banks to book good profits for several years;the embalming fluid of risky loans gave the corpse a rosyhue.   But deeper political cowardice was also at work. Ask thisquestion: What would have happened if regulators hadforbidden banks from making a rash of property and leveragedbuy-out loans when their corporate clients defected to thecommercial paper market? Bank profits and bank stock priceswould have plunged, bank dividends would have been slashedand Washington would have been forced to overhaul thefinancial regulatory system immediately. But the prospect ofdealing with hordes of angry insurance agents, real estateagents, bankers, and brokers wasn't one that politiciansrelished, and as a result, we must now deal with the bankingmess amid a full-blown crisis.   An equivalent abdication of responsibility can be seenwith deposit insurance. In 1984, the federal governmentrescued Continental Illinois, paying 100 cents on the dollareven on deposits above the legal limit of $100,000, thusenshrining the &quot;too-big-to-fall&quot; doctrine. Whatever thewisdom of that move, the unarguable point is that thegovernment has had more than six years since then toreintroduce the concept of depositor risk in largeinstitutions. This could have been done easily in the fattimes of the 1980s. Some large institutional depositors wouldhave pulled their funds from some banks, and those bankswould have been forced to beef up their capital or cool theirrisky lending. Now, in the lean times, the regulators havebecome hostage to the system, and must go out of their way toreassure large depositors that they will be fully compensatedin the event of a major bank failure.   Similarly, policy makers failed to use the flush times tobolster bank capital. As a result, credit standards must betightened and capital shored up now -- just when banks andcompanies can least afford it. The banks have been placed inthe painful predicament of bolstering their balance sheets byshrinking their assets, thus weakening their clients and theeconomy as well.   There are no heroes in this story. This was a case ofsilent collusion among many parties -- politicians,regulators and even depositors who enjoyed the higherinterest rates. The bankers too could have asserted theirregulatory grievances more assiduously and proclaimed thebankruptcy of the current regulatory system. Instead, theyjumped on one lucrative lending fad after another, heedlessof the consequence and hoping to be elsewhere when the day ofreckoning came.   In 1991, Washington will have a chance to compensate forthis gross political procrastination, although reports of apanicky exodus from the House Banking Committee -- a sort ofcongressional run on the committee -- don't inspireconfidence. Maybe the severity of the current banking crisiswill lead to some uncharacteristic statesmanship. It is timethat the U.S. had a national banking system so as to avoidthe state disasters that have now befallen Rhode Island. Thecountry can no longer tolerate wildly unequal standardsbetween those of the FDIC and of some states.   Perhaps the U.S. could finally get regulation, not bysegmentation and product limitation, but by introducingtougher capital standards, more restricted deposit insuranceand tighter supervision. We must design a system that inducescaution in boom times and flexibility in bad times. Most ofall, we must treat the apparently separate crises of thefinancial industry as a single problem.   ---   Mr. Chernow's &quot;The House of Morgan&quot; won the 1990 NationalBook Award for nonfiction.</TEXT></DOC>