<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910131-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>910131-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Infant-Formula Makers Are Sued   By Retailers Citing Overpayments   ----   By Wade Lambert and Gregory Stricharchuk   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   ABT AHP BMY KMG LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)DRUG-BASED RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS, PHARMACIES (RTD)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)OIL, SECONDARY (OIS)PETROLEUM (PET)MARINE TRANSPORTATION (MAR)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)BANKS (BNK)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC (FIS)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   In the wake of government allegations of price-fixing byinfant-formula makers, retailers have filed class-actionlawsuits against the manufacturers to recover allegedoverpayments.   Mark Drug-Strathmore Inc., Buffalo Grove, Ill., filed asuit in federal court in Manhattan against AbbottLaboratories, American Home Products Corp. and Bristol-MyersSquibb Co., the major infant-formula makers in the U.S. Thesuit seeks class-action status on behalf of all companiesthat bought the product for resale at allegedly inflatedwholesale prices.</LP><TEXT>   Other retailers have filed similar suits in recent daysalleging price-fixing and antitrust violations. The suits areexpected to be combined in one case, attorney Richard D.Greenfield said. &quot;Ultimately the injury to these {retailers}will be massive,&quot; said Mr. Greenfield of Haverford, Pa., whorepresents Mark Drug-Strathmore.   The allegations are similar to those made in a suit filedearlier this month by Florida's attorney general. The threecompanies are accused of conspiring to fix prices for infantformula and to monopolizing the $1.6 billion market. TheFederal Trade Commission also is investigating the allegedprice-fixing.   The companies have denied the allegations. A spokeswomanfor American Home Products, based in New York, said, &quot;We havealways set our prices independently and competitively.&quot; Aspokeswoman for Bristol-Myers of New York said, &quot;We have notand do not and will not discuss our pricing and marketingpractices with our competitors.&quot;   A spokesman for Abbott, based in Abbott Park, Ill.,declined to comment. Previously the company called theallegations untrue.   The Mark Drug suit, filed in federal court in Manhattan,accuses the manufacturers of illegally fixing baby-formulaprices since at least 1980. The suit claims that as a resultof the alleged scheme wholesale prices for the product &quot;havebeen raised, fixed {and} maintained . . . at artificial andnoncompetitive levels.&quot;   The suit did not specify damages but says they should beawarded based on the amount retailers would have paid, had itnot been for the alleged price-fixing.   Earlier this month, class-action suits also were filed onbehalf of shoppers who bought the infant-formula products atallegedly fixed prices.   ---   ARBITRATORS' TRIPLE DAMAGE award under RICO reinstated byappeals court.   The federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled thatarbitrators can award triple damages under the RacketeerInfluenced and Corrupt Organizations law, even when theracketeering allegations weren't covered by the arbitrationagreement.   The court reversed a lower-court judge in approving thearbitrators' total award of $512,520 to Kerr-McGee RefiningCorp., a unit of Kerr-McGee Corp., Oklahoma City.   The Kerr-McGee unit sued Triumph Tankers Ltd., owner of atanker that the company chartered, after about 10,000 barrelsof oil disappeared during a shipment. Kerr-McGee's charterfor the ship included a typical maritime arbitrationagreement in case the shipment came up short.   The arbitrators found that the missing oil was concealedin a secret compartment in the tanker. As a result, themissing oil was kept inside the tanker when Kerr-Mcgeethought it was unloading the entire shipment.   To seek triple damages under RICO, however, a plaintiffmust show a pattern of wrongdoing by the defendants. InKerr-McGee's case, the arbitration agreement only applied tothe missing oil, not to the other allegations of wrongdoing,such as work allegedly done on the ship to build the secrettank.   The lower-court agreed with Triumph that the otherallegations weren't subject to the arbitration contract. Butthe appeals court, which generally has taken a narrowapproach to RICO damages, said it upheld the triple damagesbecause arbitration agreements must be interpreted broadly.   The appeals-court panel said, &quot;Since RICO claims arearbitratable, we see no reason here for limitingarbitratability to those situations in which all of thenecessary prior conduct . . . is governed by an agreement toarbitrate.&quot;   A lawyer for Triumph, a Liberia company, declined tocomment.   ---   THE CLOSING of a Cleveland asylum sparks a dispute.   Two descendants of former President James A. Garfield andhis brother, Thomas, have sued Ohio, claiming that about 50acres of land deeded to the state in 1852 should revert backto the Garfield estate.   The descendants allege that the deed to the landstipulates that a &quot;lunatic asylum&quot; must be operated on theland for it to continue to be owned by Ohio. The state didopen an institution on the land in 1855. But the facility wasclosed in 1988 because it was outdated and &quot;consistentlybelow standards for humane care,&quot; says a spokesman for theOhio Department of Mental Retardation and DevelopmentalDisabilities.   Since then, the state has been trying to dispose of theland, which the Garfield heirs estimate now has a value ofabout $5 million. They also allege that the state received aproposal from developers interested in erecting a $20 millioncondominium complex on the site. An Ohio assistant attorneygeneral said he couldn't comment on the case because hehadn't yet seen the complaint, which was filed in CuyahogaCounty Common Pleas Court in Cleveland.   A. Joseph Waterman, the lawyer who brought the suit onbehalf of the president's great-great-grandnieces, said hisclients want their property back. The Garfield family isincensed, he says, because the property was intended for anasylum, not a condominium or any other project.   President Garfield, who was assassinated, is buried in atomb in Cleveland.   ---   A VERMONT COURT RULING may affect the collection of loans.   The ruling has placed in jeopardy the collection of asmuch as $500 million in loans in Vermont by out-of-statefinancial institutions, according to state officials.   In a preliminary ruling issued this month, Superior CourtJudge Frank Mahady said the state's 53-year-old licensedlender law prohibits out-of-state banks, credit unions,savings and loans and insurance companies from making loansin Vermont without a state lender's license.   But numerous institutions have made such loans becausestate officials, largely oblivious to the arcane law, havenever required them to get such a license.   The ruling has raised concern among out-of-state banks,especially New Hampshire institutions that have made manyloans in Vermont. It also has raised fears among stateofficials that Vermont borrowers will be denied credit fromout-of-state institutions until the issue is clarified.   The ruling prompted the Vermont Legislature to swiftlydraft a bill &quot;clarifying legislative intent of the lenderlicense law, retroactively,&quot; according to William Russell,the Legislature's chief counsel. The bill, which might bevoted on as early as today, would allow out-of-stateinstitutions to do business in the state as long they arelicensed in other states or, in the case of foreign banks,licensed to do business in the U.S. by the federalgovernment.   &quot;We need to restore order, we have chaos,&quot; said a statebanking regulator who asked not to be named. &quot;People havebeen calling asking whether this means they don't have to paytheir credit card, or their mortgage.&quot;   Even if the Legislature passes its bill, the ruling maystill leave out-of-state lenders vulnerable, said Mr.Russell, because of the difficulty of laws having retroactiveeffect.   The judge issued the ruling in a case in which the ownersof an Essex, Vt., hotel and convention center built in 1988were sued by a contractor for an upaid bill. The contractorclaimed it had rights to collect its claim ahead of DartmouthBank, a New Hampshire bank which had lent $8 million to buildthe project. It cited irregularities in enforcement ofVermont's lender licensing law.   Paul Ode, an attorney for Dartmouth Bank, said thelender-law issue might not ultimately be resolved until thecase is concluded, which could take as long as three years.   ---   THE GOVERNMENT CHARGED a St. Louis union with labor-lawviolations.   The complaint, filed in federal court in St. Louis,accused a bakers union of improperly conducting an election.The government asked that the results be voided because someunion members allegedly didn't know they could vote withabsentee ballots.   Bakers' Union No. 4 of the AFL-CIO advised some, but notall, of its 1,900 members of the absentee-ballot option inits officers election last August, according to thegovernment's suit.   The winning candidate for president, who defeated theincumbent, received 293 votes. The government contends thatthe size of the uninformed union voter group was large enoughto affect the result. It said members at some bakeriessubmitted no absentee ballots.   The suit is rare, the U.S. attorney's office in St. Louissaid, noting that in the past 15 years fewer than five unionelections in the St. Louis region have been contested incourt.   John H. Goffstein, an attorney for the union local, saidhe wasn't aware of the complaint, but that he would ask theinternational union for an interpretation of the absenteemechanism and determine whether to contest the government'sassertions.   ---   GAY SOLDIER who won reinstatement gets $136,000 back-payfrom Army.   The soldier, Perry Watkins of Tacoma, Wash., also willreceive full retirement benefits under the settlement. Lastyear, Mr. Watkins won his case against the Pentagon when theSupreme Court let stand a federal appeals court decisionordering the Army to re-enlist him. Mr. Watkins is the onlygay soldier to win re-enlistment after being ousted for hissexual orientation.   Rather than actually re-enlist Mr. Watkins, however, themilitary settled by treating him as if he had been on activeduty since 1984, the year he was discharged.   The appeals court said the Army didn't have the right todischarge Mr. Watkins because it had drafted him and allowedhim to re-enlist for 16 years, knowing all along that he wasgay.</TEXT></DOC>