<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900515-0138</DOCNO><DOCID>900515-0138.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Supreme Court Hears Arguments   On Federal Flag-Burning Statute   ----   By Stephen Wermiel and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   TWX TAXES</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)INSURANCE (INS)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The justices of the U.S. Supreme Court gave no indicationthat they view a new federal flag-burning law more favorablythan a similar Texas law they struck down in June by a 5-4vote.   Five of the nine justices posed questions during anhourlong argument in which Solicitor General Kenneth Starrdefended the law and civil-liberties lawyer William Kunstlerargued that it is unconstitutional.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Nothing prohibits a legislature from providing physicalprotection to symbols,&quot; said Mr. Starr. &quot;One can protectthose things that are special to us as a people.&quot; He added,&quot;Congress was seeking in a neutral way, without regard to themessage, to protect the integrity of the flag.&quot;   But Mr. Kunstler, noting that Congress allowed the flag tobe flown in a &quot;hurricane, thunderstorm or tornado,&quot; said thefederal law &quot;protects {the flag} only from those who wouldhurt it or cast it in a bad light.&quot; That, he said, meansCongress intended to penalize only those who are protesters-- which is unconstitutional.   The federal law was passed last summer in response to theJune decision. Immediately after the law took effect inOctober, protesters burning the flag were arrested in Seattleand Washington, D.C. In both cases, federal district judgesdeclared the law unconstitutional.   In its decision in June, the court said the Texas lawinfringed on the free-speech right because it penalizedburning the flag as a form of political protest that offendedothers. Congress tried to circumvent this problem byeliminating subjective judgment, making it illegal to damagethe flag in any manner.   Justice Antonin Scalia, who voted against the Texas law,appeared unpersuaded. He said taking out the words &quot;castcontempt&quot; from the old federal law doesn't solve the problem,noting that the terms in the new law -- &quot;deface, defile,trample&quot; -- have the same negative connotation.   Mr. Starr argued that the two episodes weren'tconstitutionally protected because the protesters had a broadrange of verbal, political messages that weren't related toburning the American flag.   Justice Scalia responded, &quot;Surely burning the flag conveyssomething.&quot; Justice John Stevens interjected, &quot;Given JusticeScalia's interpretation, maybe you should try to bar{flag-burning} on the grounds that it's misleading.&quot;   Justice Stevens, who voted to uphold the Texas law, askedMr. Kunstler, &quot;Is it irrelevant that I don't know which isthe message&quot; of the protest. Mr. Kunstler said the act offlag-burning still conveys a message. Justice Stevens repliedcaustically that protesters could hand out a leaflet saying,&quot;Just call this phone number and I'll tell you what themessage is.&quot;   The stakes are high in this case because if the courtstrikes down the law this spring, there will be substantialpolitical pressure in Congress to approve a constitutionalamendment protecting the flag. Members of Congress, in turn,would face the amendment as a fall election issue.   ---   &quot;THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES&quot; raises legal ruckus in NewJersey.   Robert Wilentz, New Jersey's chief justice, refused toallow a production crew to film a scene in an Essex Countycourthouse in Newark unless script changes were made.   Judge Wilentz last week barred the use of a courtroom tofilm a scene that shows a group of black citizens riotingbecause, he said, it &quot;could serve to seriously undermine theconfidence of black citizens in our court system.&quot;   Warner Bros., which is producing the film based on thenovel by Tom Wolfe, has sought permission to film a differentscene in the corridor outside the courtroom. In a writtenstatement issued Sunday, Justice Wilentz said he would onlyapprove the corridor filming if the scene was changed to makeit less objectionable.   Warner had agreed to donate $250,000 to the courthouserestoration fund for the use of the courtroom. In order toshoot in the corridor, the company would pay the standardlocation fee, an average of $1,700 for a twelve-hour filmday.   &quot;We would hope that Judge Wilentz would recognize theFirst Amendment rights of this picture, based on a work offiction, to be made as our filmmakers have envisioned. Wehave no intention of rewriting the scene,&quot; said Rob Harris,the film's production publicist, on behalf of Warner Bros., aTime Warner Inc. unit.   The filming of the best-selling novel about an investmentbanker's journey through the New York court system hasgenerated controversy. Residents and officials of the Bronx,N.Y., where substantial action takes place, have charged thatthe film denigrates the borough.   Mr. Harris said the crew considered filming the courtroomscene in the Bronx courthouse but decided it would be toodifficult to move the equipment up and down to thesixth-floor courtroom. Ultimately the scene was filmed in acourtroom on the second floor of the courthouse in Queens, aNew York City borough.   Nicholas Amato, Essex County executive, said the countymay file a lawsuit opposing the judge's decision and possiblyseeking monetary damages for the lost fee. Mr. Amato said thejudge had no authority to act as a censor, particularly sincethe courthouse is maintained with taxpayers' money.   Mr. Amato said he had been unhappy with the portrayal ofItalian-Americans as &quot;gangsters, dope dealers andblackmailers&quot; in the movie &quot;Rage of Angels,&quot; which was alsofilmed at the courthouse. &quot;But my remedy is the same asothers, don't go to see the movie,&quot; he said.   ---   TAX EXEMPTION for Bible sales is invalidated in NorthCarolina.   The Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va.,struck down a 50-year-old North Carolina state law thatexempted the sale of Holy Bibles from the state's 5% salestax. The decision reaffirmed a line of cases by the U.S.Supreme Court that rejected tax exemptions for religiousliterature as violative of the First Amendment.   North Carolina's law specifically exempted Bibles whichcombine in one volume the Old and the New Testament. Theappeals court said the law violated constitutionalprohibitions against government establishment of religion andagainst infringements on freedom of the press. &quot;It isprecisely this type of official scrutiny of the content ofpublications . . . that is so repugnant to the free pressclause of the Constitution,&quot; wrote Chief Circuit Judge Sam J.Ervin III.   The case was argued by Brian L. Rubin, a Washington, D.C.,lawyer at the firm of Sidley andamp; Austin, who noticed the taxwhen he bought an Old Testament Bible -- which wasn'texempted from the tax because it didn't include the NewTestament. He brought the case on behalf of a rabbi, a memberof the Hindu faith and a member of the Hare Krishna.   Assistant North Carolina Attorney General Donald W. Latonsaid his office only challenged the plaintiffs' legalstanding to bring the suit and didn't defend the validity ofthe law. Said Mr. Laton, &quot;We do not foresee further appeal atthis time.&quot;   ---   JUSTICE DEPARTMENT backs antitrust lawsuit against biginsurers.   State attorneys general who banded together to sue some ofthe country's biggest insurance companies over an allegedantitrust conspiracy got a boost when the Justice Departmenturged a federal court to allow pretrial proceedings tocontinue.   The department last week filed a friend-of-the courtbrief, urging the federal circuit court in San Francisco toreverse a trial judge's earlier decision to dismiss thelawsuit brought by attorneys general from 19 states. Theappeal also got a boost from 13 other states, which filed asimilar brief. A court may consider such an amicus brief by anonparticipant in a case, but an outside party's argumentdoesn't necessarily affect the outcome.   In their suit, the state prosecutors charged that majorU.S. insurers conspired to eliminate certain lines ofcommercial liability and property coverage. Last year, afederal trial judge dismissed the case, concluding that thedefendants' conduct was immune from prosecution underexceptions to the federal antitrust laws protecting certainjoint activities by insurance companies. The JusticeDepartment, in its brief, contended that the suit should beallowed to proceed because the state attorneys generalalleged boycotts, coercion and intimidation not covered bythe insurance-industry exceptions.   Justice Department support for the states merits attentionbecause federal antitrust regulators in recent years havescolded state prosecutors for attempts to enforce federalantitrust laws.   ---   PRO BONO LEGAL WORK is required at four law schools.   At Tulane University Law School in New Orleans, the firstlaw school to implement a public-service requirement, each ofthis year's graduates completed at least 20 hours of freelegal service for indigents. Supervised by local lawyers, thestudents assisted clients with a variety of legal needs,including bankruptcy proceedings, landlord-tenant problems,death-penalty appeals and child-abuse cases.   Law schools at Florida State University, Valparaiso(Indiana) University and the University of Pennsylvaniaapproved compulsory public service for their students, andmore than 20 other law schools are considering similarprograms.   Some of the schools plan to let students fulfill pro bonorequirements through work for public-service organizations.Students at the University of Pennsylvania can work for anygovernment employer and for non-profit groups other thantrade associations. &quot;We don't discriminate on the basis ofpolitical orientation,&quot; says Judith Bernstein-Baker, directorof the law school's public-service program.   The American Civil Liberties Union, the Washington LegalFoundation, environmental groups, and organizations on bothsides of the abortion issue have solicited the pro bonoservices of the University of Pennsylvania students.   ---   Milo Geyelin contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>