<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910530-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>910530-0059.</DOCID><HL>   Slaking a Thirst:   Big Farmers in West   Get Subsidized Water   Despite Drought Crisis   ---   Many Divide Their Holdings   To Elude Federal Rules   That Limit Allotments   ---   Raising Cotton in the Desert   ----   By Charles McCoy   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD)CONGRESS (CNG)INTERIOR DEPARTMENT (INR)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)</RE><LP>   MENDOTA, Calif. -- For years, Panoche Farms has used a lotof water to grow crops in the desert here in the San JoaquinValley. It has reaped cotton and profits -- and now it isreaping trouble.   A federal agency says Panoche is deliberately evadinglimits on the amount of cheap, subsidized water farms canget. The farm and others like it, the agency says, arewasting the West's most vital resource. But the governmentisn't unanimous in its judgment of Panoche, and therein liesa controversy that is embroiling dozens of big farm venturesand hundreds of thousands of acres of land throughout theparched West.</LP><TEXT>   Water fights are nothing new to California. They flare upregularly between city and farm, between north (where thewater is) and south (where the desert is), between users andenvironmentalists. But five years of drought in the statehave made matters urgent. Reservoirs have been drawn down,the land is crackly dry, and parceling out limited suppliesof water has become an explosive issue.   Panoche Farms, named for a spindly creek that stragglesthrough sere flatlands, was until a few years ago a singleoperation run by a partnership between two agribusinessfamilies, the Hansens and the Bakers. It covered 13,000 acres-- nearly 20 square miles -- and netted as much as $1.5million a year.   The acres and families are the same today. But in 1986,the Hansens and the Bakers restructured Panoche into a mazeof 15 separate landholdings, controlled through at least 77partnerships, trusts, corporations, friends and relatives.They did this, they acknowledge, to sidestep new federallimits on taxpayer-subsidized irrigation water, without whichPanoche's productive desert acres would swiftly revert toroad runner range. The water subsidies from 1986 through 1989saved it about $1.5 million, according to Congress's GeneralAccounting Office.   The farmers use this cheap water mainly to grow cotton, aparticularly water-intensive crop that's in such bountifulsupply that the government subsidizes its price. PanocheFarms reaped $4.8 million of federal crop subsidies between1986 and 1989. Here, too, the rejiggering of the farm'sholdings was crucial: It enabled Panoche to avoid limits onthe amount of crop subsidies that individual farmers can geteach year.   The GAO contends the restructuring at Panoche, and at manyother farms in the region, is a paper shuffle that violatesthe intent of federal laws meant to limit the flow of cheapwater to big farmers. At the Agriculture Department, whichadministers the crop-subsidy program, investigators take asimilar dim view of the restructuring, calling Panoche's mazeof holdings a &quot;scheme and device&quot; to cheat the government.The department wants most of Panoche's 1986-89 crop subsidiesback.   But the federal agency that administers the water laws isneither of these. It is the Bureau of Reclamation. And theBureau of Reclamation says Panoche's arrangement istechnically legal, and the many entities are all entitled tosubsidized water.   The Panoche farmers say they've done nothing wrong and arechallenging the Agriculture Department on the crop-subsidyquestion in a suit filed in federal court in Washington.&quot;It's tough to farm out here, and about the only way to makeit is to stay big and make use of that water and those cropprograms,&quot; says Marshall Baker, one of the main partners.   Moreover, farmers' water allotments haven't escaped theimpact of the drought. They have been slashed to one-fourthof what they were two years ago.   Panoche Farms isn't alone. Many Western farmers --including some of the biggest and richest in the country --are stepping around federal water limits during the drought.Much of the water they get at low cost goes to grow cropsthat are subsidized or in chronic oversupply. A growingchorus of criticism is assailing this system as a waste oftax dollars, a threat to the environment and a misallocationof resources that the arid region can ill afford.   Farmers use a huge proportion of the West's water toproduce a shrinking share of its output and jobs. InCalifornia, farmers account for 75% of the state's annualwater consumption from all sources; they produce about 10% ofits $700 billion gross product.   Much of what Western farmers grow, of course, is importantfor the feeding of America. But a lot -- like cotton --isn't. Congressional estimates of the annual cost ofsubsidizing water for producers of subsidized crops range upto about $1.5 billion. Apart from the dollar toll, criticscontend that the practice is hastening the day when the 17Western states face an ultimate problem: Not enough water,too many people.   &quot;This confrontation between farm water and urban waterwill establish the boundaries and character of the West'sgrowth,&quot; says Richard Howitt, an economist at the Universityof California at Davis. &quot;The clock is ticking.&quot;   Where water goes in the West springs from governmentpolicies dating to the late 19th century that reserved foragriculture a prominent role in the region's development. TheBureau of Reclamation was set up in 1902 as an arm of theInterior Department and spent the next 70 years damming mostof the West's major rivers, setting aside much of the waterfor irrigation. The government gave farmers long-term,fixed-rate water contracts that often haven't covered theBureau's operating costs, much less its original constructionexpense.   Today, some California farmers get water for as little as$2 an acre foot (326,000 gallons, about what a family of fouruses in 20 months). Los Angeles water users pay about $545 anacre foot, while San Franciscans pay $300.   The low farm water prices have had a lot of unintendedeffects, all of which come into sharp focus on the bigspreads along the Western fringe of the San Joaquin Valley.Here, in a water district known as Westlands that covers anarea the size of Rhode Island, many farmers have managed tostay a step ahead of water reformers for decades.   In the early 1900s, the big landowners here foundloopholes in water laws that enabled them to flood theiracres with all the cheap water they wanted, despiteCongress's intention that subsidized water go mainly to smallfarmers. Reformers were always beaten back, either by Westerncongressmen friendly with the deep-pocketed growers or by theBureau of Reclamation itself, which over the years has showna disinclination to take water subsidies away from bigfarmers.   But in 1982, Congress passed laws meant to close theloopholes and limit subsidized water to 960 acres of afarmer's land. Big growers feverishly began breaking theirholdings into 960-acre chunks to skirt the new limits. TheBureau encouraged the practice: In 1987, it rejected toughnew regulations proposed by its staff that would have cut offthe water to many of these operations.   The Inspector General of the Interior Department recentlyissued an audit that criticized the Bureau's practice ofletting some of the restructured farms get so much subsidizedwater. Rep. George Miller, a California Democrat, and Sen.Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, have mounted a neweffort to limit big farms' subsidized water.   The Bureau has acknowledged it is sending cheap water toat least 120 farming operations that are larger than the960-acre maximum, though it reiterates that many if not allare technically legitimate. Still, the agency &quot;probably isproperly subject to criticism for not having pursued our ownrules and regulations as aggressively as we could have,&quot; saysBill McDonald, deputy director of resources management forthe agency. But he blames that partly on a lack ofenforcement powers, which he says makes it difficult to seebehind the farms' corporate structures. And he says theBureau has faithfully applied the law &quot;as written&quot; byCongress. &quot;If there are loopholes that Congress would like tosee closed, it is up to them to change the law,&quot; he says.   In the meantime, the water pours over places like theBoston Ranch, 23,238 acres of desert near LeMoore. Theacreage is part of landholdings controlled or managed by thefamily of J.G. Boswell, who is believed to work more landthan any other farmer in America. He produces more cottonthan anyone else in the country. Forbes magazine hasestimated his net worth at $500 million.   In May 1989, a Boswell subsidiary sold the 23,238 acres tosomething called the Westhaven Trust. It has at least 326beneficiaries, all of them employees of the Boswells, all ofthem now considered owners of multiple landholdings. Notably,no landholding exceeds 960 acres. The land is doused withwater that costs $23.40 an acre foot; without the subsidies,the price would be $60.27 an acre foot. The GAO estimatesthat Westhaven Trust's subsidized water costs taxpayers $2million a year.   Ed Griemann, vice president and counsel for J.G. BoswellCo., defends the arrangement. &quot;We've complied with the letterand spirit of reclamation law, perhaps more fully thananyone,&quot; he says. He says that since the Boswells sold theland, they have spread the benefits of cheap water to themany beneficiaries of the trust, rather than retaining themfor themselves. &quot;We don't get any profits out of the ranch. .. . This is not a Boswell deal.&quot;   But many critics, including the GAO, don't agree. Amongother things, they note that a Boswell subsidiary has acontract with the trust to manage all the acres for $1million a year. A bill that would essentially cut off most ofthe cheap water flowing to the trust's acres recently passedthe House Interior Committee.   The Boswells have pronounced themselves philosophicallyopposed to farm subsidies. But on occasion they've dippedinto that federal trough, too. In 1986, for example, thegovernment paid the Boswells $8,392,320 in crop subsidies,one of the largest single government payments ever to acommodity grower, according to government officials. Mr.Griemann says cotton prices that year were extremely low, andparticipating in the commodities program reflected theBoswells' &quot;duty to our shareholders.&quot; The Boswell family ownsmost of the company's stock.   Down the road a ways from the Boston Ranch, the Andersonfamily's lands begin. In 1985, the Andersons listed theirholdings here as one 8,026-acre farm irrigated with federalwater. By 1987, with water limits looming, they had splittheir operation into seven landholdings, controlled throughseven partnerships, 25 corporations and four trusts. Staterecords show that the new corporations were all owned bycombinations of Andersons, mainly Dick Anderson, two sons andfour grandchildren. Thousands of acres of Anderson land getcheap water, costing the taxpayer as much as $500,000 a yearin some years, according to GAO documents. Since 1987,Anderson operations have received $2.4 million in cropsubsidies, mostly for cotton.   Bob Anderson, one of the sons, acknowledges that theAndersons transformed their holdings to get around federalwater limits. &quot;Andersons got that water under the ReclamationAct of 1902,&quot; he says. &quot;People don't seem to understand: We'dhave a helluva tough time farming out here if we didn't getthat water.&quot;   Critics of the practice say that's just the point. Butmany of the growers here seem to regard cheap water as avirtual birthright. Jack Stone speaks proudly of a familythat came to the hard acres near Stratford in 1910,scratching and struggling to forge a farming empire that nowextends over 7,000 acres. &quot;My family leveled the land andcleared the sagebrush and made it into something,&quot; he says.&quot;It's not fair that I should be asked to let it go back tosagebrush.&quot; He has split his acres into landholdings in thenames of his children and grandchildren; they all getsubsidized water.   This water comes from far to the north -- and leavesenvironmental havoc in its wake. Water from NorthernCalifornia's reservoirs is pumped southward 400 miles throughtunnels and aqueducts, accumulating salt and other impuritiesthat threaten drinking water and destroy wildlife habitat.When the water is sprayed over Westlands lands -- much ofwhich suffers from poor drainage -- it gathers in asubsurface stew of salts, pesticide residues and naturallyoccuring poisons such as arsenic and selenium. For years, upuntil about 1987, some of the Westlands waste water waspumped into the Kesterton Wildlife Refuge, helping taint thatrich marshland.   &quot;The way water is moved and used in this state has causedmassive environmental damage,&quot; says Thomas Graff, an attorneyfor the Environmental Defense Fund. &quot;It is quite literally apoisonous policy.&quot;   Farmers say they do their best to avoid harming theenvironment. Some, like Mr. Stone and the Boswells, alsoargue that they grow a special kind of soft, long-fibercotton, known as alcala, that is widely used in shirts andundergarments. They say cotton grown elsewhere isn't as good.Farmers here also point out that they're struggling with thedrought too; most have had their federal water deliveries cutby three-quarters over the past two years. To make up for thelost water, many are pumping ground water.   But even with the cuts, Westlands farmers will consumesome 283,900 acre feet of federal water. That's enough tosupply San Francisco for about 2 1/2 years.   Back at Panoche Farms, Mr. Baker muses about troubles hesays are closing in on the farmers of the Westlands district.Panoche will be down this year to about 9,000 acres planted,about half in cotton, half in other crops. &quot;All because ofwater,&quot; he says. Mr. Baker declines to discuss the disputewith the Agriculture Department over crop subsidies, exceptto deny any wrongdoing. &quot;Our companies and partnerships arelegitimate and standing on their own,&quot; he says.   The department differs. In a report obtained under theFreedom of Information Act, it concludes that some of theentities Panoche lists were never legally chartered understate law. Checks submitted as proof that the corporationsoperated turned out never to have been negotiated. The reportstrongly suggests that some people involved with PanocheFarms doctored documents and misled department investigators.&quot;It is virtually impossible to point out all of thediscrepancies, fallacies and in some cases, totally erroneousrepresentations in this case,&quot; the report states.   Despite all that, the Bureau of Reclamation stillconsiders Panoche's reorganization legitimate. Mr. Bakerreadily concedes that the whole arrangement was created tosecure cheap water. &quot;Congress didn't understand when theywrote those laws that you can not make it out here unlessyou've got a lot of acres and a lot of water,&quot; he says. But,he adds, &quot;I do believe some of this could come back on us.You know, Mr. Boswell's Westhaven Trust, now that lookspretty bad.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>