<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911031-0048</DOCNO><DOCID>911031-0048.</DOCID><HL>   Second Revolution:   Democracy Is Growing   In Africa, as Ferment   In Zambia Illustrates   ---   Kaunda's Autocratic Regime   May Yield to Yearnings   Of His People for a Voice   ---   The First Election in 17 Years   ----   By Joe Davidson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>AFRICA (AF)ZAMBIA (ZA)</RE><LP>   SHIMABALA, Zambia -- Only Nathan Banda's fat-cheeked facecan be seen above the wrap that tightly binds him to hismother's back. As his curious eyes scan his world of mudhuts, he looks healthy and alert, but there are prominentsores behind his ears.   The baby's mother, 20-year-old Sophia Banda, can't affordthe medicine needed to treat his skin disease. &quot;I've got nomoney,&quot; she says. But even if she had the means to pay, it islikely that the clinics wouldn't have the drugs her babyneeds.</LP><TEXT>   For that she blames the nation's father figure, KennethKaunda, the man who has led Zambia since independence in1964. Under Mr. Kaunda, she says, &quot;life is more and moredifficult. We can't even look after our children properly.&quot;   Mr. Kaunda was the law of the land until political partiesother than his became legal 10 months ago. Now, at the age of67, he may be on the verge of being turned out of office asZambians vote today in the first contested, multipartypresidential election in 17 years.   Zambia's vote, no matter how it comes out, is an exampleof the democratic fervor marching across the Africancontinent. With notable exceptions, such as Kenya, leaderswho thought they would rule for life are acceding to pressureto open their political systems.   Former Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere, who voluntarilyresigned, has said that the old generation of Africanleaders, including himself, had caused a &quot;deficit ofdemocracy&quot; more serious than the shortage of foreignexchange.   From Benin in the west to Mozambique in the east, fromFrench-speaking Mali to Portuguese-speaking Angola, from bigNigeria to tiny Sao Tome and Principe, Africans are demandingand winning not just the end of one-party rule, but alsogreater respect for human rights and a liberalization oftheir economies. People are calling this Africa's &quot;secondrevolution.&quot;   Twenty-five African nations, about onehalf the total, areeither democratic or committed to democratic change, notesRichard Joseph, director of the African governance program atthe Carter Center in Atlanta, in the current issue of theJournal of Democracy. &quot;Zambia will be the first of theEnglish-speaking countries to conduct elections as part ofthis whole wave to more pluralistic situations,&quot; he adds inan interview. He is part of an international team observingtoday's election.   Zambians are well aware that three neighboring states --Zaire, Angola and Mozambique -- have suffered great turmoilin the course of political change. Angola, after a long civilwar, and Mozambique, which still faces rebel insurrection,have accepted plural politics. Rioting by unpaid Zairiansoldiers last month led to intervention by French and Belgiantroops. Chaos reigns in Zaire as President Mobutu Sese Sekoappointed, then fired, an opponent who had been named primeminister.   Etienne Tshisekedi, the dismissed prime minister, hadpromised to convene quickly a long-stalled nationalconference to organize elections and essentially create a newpolitical system in Zaire. National conferences have beenused to usher in democracy in French-speaking Africa,starting with Benin in February last year.   In Zambia and in other countries, political leaders atfirst resisted plural politics, but were forced by eventsthey couldn't control. Across the continent, pro-democracydemonstrations, often spurred by dire economic conditions,displayed the people's anger at one-party rule with a forceMr. Kaunda and other leaders couldn't ignore. As human-rightsabuses in some countries increased and living standards fell,the legitimacy of ruling parties was undermined.   At the same time, the demise of communism in EasternEurope and the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War meantfor Africa that the major powers had fewer reasons to backclient states. The U.S., for example, has cut aid to Zairenow that Cuban troops are leaving neighboring Angola, whichalso recently accepted multiparty politics. Countriesproviding aid, including the U.S., and internationalorganizations that provide assistance pressed for change bymaking clear that their loan and grant policies givepreference to democracies.   And not to be overlooked, says Peter Anyang Nyong'o, ofNairobi's African Academy of Science, is the &quot;constantstruggle by the people for democracy&quot; that emerged whenliberation movements declared, in the name of national unity,that they were the only legal parties in the various Africancountries. The legalization of liberation groups in SouthAfrica -- with their call for a multiparty democracy -- hasmade the continent's one-party states all the more untenable.   Here in Zambia, in June and July last year a failed coupand riots over higher food prices cast doubt on the stabilityof the Kaunda government. As a coup attempt, a takeover ofthe state radio station by a disgruntled lieutenant was ajoke. But the outpourings of joy by citizens who thought Mr.Kaunda had been overthrown suggested the tenuousness of hisrule.   Then rioters set fire to an old Land Rover he had usedduring Zambia's struggle for independence (it was part of anational monument), and security forces killed more than twodozen people during protests against economic austerity.   Mr. Kaunda, to his credit, takes seriously his politicalphilosophy of humanism, which, according to the policydocument of the ruling United National Independence Party,puts &quot;man at the center of all the activities of Zambiansociety.&quot; Thus, the lieutenant who took over the radiostation spent only about three weeks in jail. In somenations, he might have been shot.   The burned-out Land Rover still sits on the monumentgrounds, but now it is a symbol of popular dissatisfactionwith Mr. Kaunda. That dissatisfaction is the vehicle theopposition Movement for Multi-Party Democracy (MMD) hopes toride to victory. The sick economy, deficient schools andill-equipped hospitals are the main complaints on thejacaranda-tree-lined streets of Lusaka, the capital, as wellas on the red-dirt roads of the rural villages where sickbabies go untreated.   &quot;It is very difficult to buy clothes now,&quot; complains DinesSakala, 29, speaking in the Nyanja language spoken inShimabala. &quot;We can't even afford second-hand clothes. Maybethese new people {the MMD} will understand our plight.&quot;   Nearby stands Noria Tembo. She is dressed in layers oftattered garments and rags that she tries to pull tightagainst a cool breeze. There are several goats in a penacross from her small hut. Scrawny chickens peck at the dirt.A pigeon house made of straw sits on a platform, itsoccupants free to come and go until Mrs. Tembo decides tomake a meal of one.   She doesn't know her age, but appears to be in her 50s.She does know she is ready for a new system that will giveher a voice. &quot;It's a good idea to have many people, then youlet people choose the leader they want,&quot; she says. &quot;I willput a vote on Chiluba, because the new leader will come withnew ideas for the people.&quot;   Many expect Frederick Chiluba, 47, to be the nextpresident. A trade unionist and old foe of the Kaundagovernment, the onetime Marxist studied credit management inNew York and was impressed with the accountability Americansdemanded of officials involved in the Watergate scandal. Henow heads MMD, a coalition of forces -- business people,socialists and even spiritualists, among others -- heldtogether primarily by a common belief in an open politicalsystem and in opposition to Mr. Kaunda.   &quot;First and foremost is the desire for plural politics inthe country, that is the main thing,&quot; explains GeoffreyMwela, an MMD official. &quot;For any change to come, he {Mr.Kaunda} must be defeated, obviously. Otherwise the changewill not be total. He is the one person who has stood up toperpetuate the one-party state.&quot;   While exhibiting strong confidence, MMD officials fearedbefore today's election that voting practices, such ascounting all ballots in central locations, and the allegedintimidation of their supporters would hurt them at thepolls. There have been reports of house and granary burningsin the Eastern Province and complaints that troops wereenforcing an unofficial curfew. A 27-year state of emergencyremains in place. Meanwhile, Mr. Kaunda's UNIP has chargedMMD with harassment.   No matter which of the two main parties wins, it will haveto contend with a defeated economic system. The state subsidyof the nation's staple food, cornmeal, is likely to belifted, so consumers will have to pay more. But producersmight then export less cornmeal illegally, amelioratingZambia's corn shortage. Zambia must also confront the cutofflast month of $200 million in foreign assistance.   Though MMD puts greater emphasis on the free market, theparties' platforms weren't vastly different. Both pledge todiversify the economy beyond copper exports and to improvehousing and transportation. But in the course of describinghow it will remedy education and health problems, UNIP'spolicy document confirms how badly those areas have beenneglected under its leadership.   Because of the economic crisis, per pupil spending hasfallen since the late 1970s, the document shows. Severeovercrowding has resulted in triple shifts in some urbanschools. As for health, the document acknowledges that &quot;thecapacity of the system to deliver adequate services has beenseriously hampered&quot; because of financial problems.   Still, the main issue for Zambians and other democratsaround the continent is change. At political rallies, towhich supporters in UNIP shirts and hats are bused, PresidentKaunda attempts to get in front of that issue by claiming hisparty is bestequipped to administer change because of itsexperience.   &quot;We are the only party to bring about change peacefullyagain,&quot; he tells a rally in the small town of Kafue. Hepoints to the violence and turmoil that have accompaniedpolitical change elsewhere and contrasts it with Zambia'srelative stability: &quot;For 27 years we have taught one Zambia,one nation. For 27 years we have been at peace and not inpieces like some nations.&quot;   The prospect of today's election has already haddemocratic effects on Zambian institutions. Even thegovernment-owned press is bolder than before. New newspapershave sprung up to take advantage of new freedoms, includingthe Weekly Post, which provides Zambians with investigativeand muckraking reporting.   The judiciary, enjoying a new sense of independence, hasissued a flurry of decisions that dull some of the advantagesof incumbency. Earlier this month, a court ruling suspendedthe director-general of the Zambian National BroadcastingCorp. and the managing editor of the Times of Zambia fromtheir posts until after the vote. The court acted on arequest made by the Press Association of Zambia that arguedthe men were biased in their coverage of the election.   Mr. Anyang Nyong'o, of the Academy of Science, believesthat efforts, including a continental commission on humanrights, should be made to ensure that recent progress towarddemocracy isn't reversed. &quot;It's quite possible,&quot; he warns,that after a successful democratic election, the Old Guardcould feed on economic problems and &quot;try to come back inother guises.&quot;   But he remains optimistic. &quot;If I weren't,&quot; he adds, &quot;Iwould not be engaged in fighting for democracy in my owncountry.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>