<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910318-0006</DOCNO><DOCID>910318-0006.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Law Partnership Can Be Awarded   As Remedy in Discrimination Case   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   CBU WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MARINE TRANSPORTATION (MAR)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Law firms that discriminate because of sex when decidingwho can become a partner can be ordered to make thepartnership available, a federal judge in Philadelphia ruled.   The decision, involving the Philadelphia law firm Wolf,Block, Schorr andamp; Solis-Cohen, is the first in the country toaddress the issue of whether law firm partnerships can beordered as a remedy when associates prove sex discrimination.Anything less in such a case, U.S. District Judge JamesMcGirr Kelly ruled, &quot;would be contrary to the most basicprinciples&quot; of federal laws barring discrimination.</LP><TEXT>   The judge ruled last November that Wolf Block, one ofPhiladelphia's premier law firms, had discriminated againstformer associate Nancy Ezold by not making her partner in1988.   The judge will now hold a trial to determine damages. Inhis decision Friday on what range of damages are permissible,the judge said that Wolf Block could be ordered to provideback pay from the date of his decision on damages or offerfront pay, in lieu of making her a partner. Front pay isseverance computed at a partner's pay scale for an agreedupon period of time.   Ms. Ezold's attorney, Judith Vladeck, a New Yorkemployment law specialist, said Ms. Ezold will seek to returnto the law firm as a partner. &quot;She is a gutsy woman who likesthe kind of practice they have and worked very hard there,&quot;said Ms. Vladeck.   Wolf Block's two chairmen were not available for comment.   Federal courts have previously required companies topromote employees who were denied advancement because of sexdiscrimination. Last June, in a discrimination case that wentto the U.S. Supreme Court, the accounting firm PriceWaterhouse was ordered to grant a partnership to a woman whowas turned down nearly eight years ago.   No similar case involving a law firm has ever gone totrial. Ms. Ezold, a litigator specializing in white collarcrime, joined Wolf Block as an associate in 1983 at the ageof 40. According to testimony during her non-jury trial lastsummer, she was told at her interview that a partnershipwould not be easy because, among other things, she was awoman and did not go to an Ivy league school.   According to testimony, Ms. Ezold was assigned inferiorcases and then was criticized for the lack of complexity inher assignments. She was praised by partners she worked with,but was denied a partnership in the litigation department inOctober 1988. She left the law firm in June 1989 rather thanaccept a partnership in the law firm's domestic relationsdepartment.   ---   JURY SENTENCES defendant to prison in first test of afederal anti-drug law.   The Chicago federal jury could have sentenced the drugdealer to death under a new law that allows the imposition ofthe death penalty for murders committed in furtherance of acriminal enterprise.   The drug dealer, Alexander Cooper, was convicted last weekfor ordering the 1989 murder of a government informant. Hewas the first defendant to be tried under a federaldeath-penalty law, targeting drug kingpins, which was passedby Congress as part of an anti-drug package in 1988.   U.S. Attorney Fred Foreman told the jury that Mr. Cooperis &quot;the type of person, by definition, who deserves the deathpenalty. Congress has returned to the people a mandate togive that kind of sentence to people like Alexander Cooper.&quot;   Mr. Cooper's lawyer, Rick Halprin, said his strategy fromthe beginning was to save his client's life. He conceded thatMr. Cooper was a drug dealer in his opening statement.   Ten out of 12 jurors voted against death, according to thejury forewoman. After the sentencing, Mr. Foreman predictedthat the statute will be amended as a result of the verdictto make prosecutions easier. He noted that the law sets nostandard for balancing aggravating and mitigatingcircumstances in determining the sentence, and any one jurorcan decide not to impose death.   Four other defendants face the death penalty under thelaw, according to the National Association of CriminalDefense Lawyers.   ---   COMMODORE REACHES settlement on damages in suit brought byex-chief.   Thomas Rattigan, former chief executive officer ofCommodore International Ltd., sued the computer maker forbreach of contract in 1987 after he was ousted by thecompany's chairman. In federal court in Manhattan last month,a jury found in Mr. Rattigan's favor, but didn't decidedamages.   Jonathan Rosner, Mr. Rattigan's attorney, said his client&quot;was very pleased with the settlement,&quot; but he declined todisclose the amount. When the suit was filed, it soughtdamages of $9 million. Mr. Rosner said the settlement coversthe salary, bonuses, stock, and retirement and pensionbenefits that Mr. Rattigan was owed.   Mr. Rattigan is now chairman and chief executive officerof G. Heileman Brewing Co.   A spokesman for West Chester, Pa.-based Commodore declinedto comment.   ---   MARITIME CREDITOR can't be sued for unpaid shipping bill,court rules.   Overturning a controversial lower court decision, the U.S.appeals court in Manhattan said that a secured creditor isn'tliable for shipping charges just because it took an activerole in overseeing the transaction.   The case involves a shipment of gasoline that Beaumont OilInc. bought with financing from Banque Paribas (Suisse) S.A.The shipping company, A/S Damps kibsselskabet Torm, was neverpaid for transporting the gasoline from Venezuela to the U.S.   The shipping company sued Banque Paribas for the paymentin 1986, and the lower court judge ruled in the shippingcompany's favor. In an unprecedented ruling, the districtjudge found that Paribas was liable because it had exercisedcontrol over the cargo by imposing certain conditions, forinstance, on where it was stored.   The U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals, however, ruledthat the lower court was penalizing Paribas for merely actingresponsibly as a lender. The appellate panel said thatParibas could only be held responsible for the shipping billif it had taken ownership of the gasoline.   The appellate judges said the lower court decision, &quot;ifallowed to stand, would subject the entire banking industryto a vast area of liability simply for following commonplaceand prudent commercial banking practices.&quot;   Mark C. Flavin, an attorney with the New York law firmHaight, Gardner, Poor andamp; Havens, which represents the Danishshipping company, said his client &quot;is considering all itsoptions.&quot;   ---   MANDATORY PRO BONO commitment from Texas lawyers sought insuit.   The suit, filed last week in state district court inAustin, Texas, seeks a court order that would force the StateBar of Texas to require lawyers to provide free legalservices to poor people. The State Bar, of which all Texaslawyers are members, currently sponsors a voluntary pro bonoprogram.   The suit, which seeks class-action status on behalf of allpoor Texans, was filed by the Austin-based Texas Civil RightsProject. Director James Harrington said he filed the suit instate court because the Texas Constitution guarantees openaccess to the courts.   &quot;Because of the complexity of the legal system, you don'thave access to the courts without a lawyer,&quot; he said.&quot;Currently, only 10% of the needs of poor Texans are beingmet.&quot;   State Bar President Jim Parsons, who is named as adefendant in the suit, said in a statement that the &quot;StateBar fully agrees that more needs to be done to effectivelydeliver legal services to the poor in Texas,&quot; but he calledthe filing of the suit &quot;unfortunate and surprising.&quot;   The State Bar is scheduled to report to the TexasLegislature in two years on whether Texas lawyers should berequired to provide free legal services.   ---   DEAF INMATE sues New York state prisons fordiscrimination.   The lawsuit, which seeks to be made a class action onbehalf of deaf and hearing-impaired prisoners, alleges thatthe inmates' rights have been violated because the statedoesn't provide translators and other services. The suit,filed in federal court in Manhattan, also accused the prisonsystem of violating federal laws barring discriminationagainst the handicapped.   The suit alleges that hearing-impaired inmates can'tparticipate fully in disciplinary proceedings, medical careand rehabilitation programs in prison. Doris Clarkson, thedeaf inmate who filed the suit, alleged that she cannotcommunicate with prison officials because she onlyunderstands American Sign Language and no qualifiedinterpreters have been provided.   &quot;Prisoners aren't supposed to be punished for theirdisabilities,&quot; said Janet Sabel, an attorney for the LegalAid Society, which represents the inmates.   James Flateau, a spokesman for the state prison system,said he hadn't seen the suit. He said special facilities areprovided to some male inmates, but, &quot;we are not required, weare not empowered, to meet absolutely every perceived need ofevery inmate.&quot;   ---   JUSTICE DEPARTMENT NAMES Jones, Day partner to overseeantitrust policy.   Charles A. James will succeed departing Michael Boudin asDeputy Assistant Attorney General for Policy and Legislation.Working under antitrust chief James Rill, Mr. James will beresponsible for policies affecting foreign trade andinternational antitrust activities as well as more generalpolicy planning and legislation.   Mr. James, 36 years old, served at the Federal TradeCommission during the Carter and Reagan administrations in avariety of capacities, including assistant to the director ofthe Bureau of Competition. He left in 1985 to join theWashington office of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue, where hespecialized in antitrust work.</TEXT></DOC>