<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900921-0188</DOCNO><DOCID>900921-0188.</DOCID><HL>   An Anti-Consensus Defense of the Census   ----   By Martha Farnsworth Riche</HL><DATE>09/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><GV>COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)</GV><LP>   Nearly everyone is saying the census is a flop, buteveryone is wrong. If a successful census is one that countsall the people, then the 1990 census is as close to a successas we can reasonably expect.   The first two phases of the census operation are complete-- the mailing out and mailing back of questionnaires and thepersonal visits by enumerators. By the end of July, theCensus Bureau had contacted more than 99% of all knownaddresses, and had more than 99 million completedquestionnaires in its computer. Now the census safety netsare in place, and the census effort has both the time and theresources for them to function effectively.</LP><TEXT>   Late last month, the Census Bureau sent preliminary countsof housing units, by block, to nearly 40,000 counties, citiesand other local governments to check for accuracy. Thesegroups are complaining just as loudly as the public did inthe spring -- the numbers are below everyone's estimates,including the Census Bureau's. But that's the point of theprocess. The bureau will recanvass blocks where localofficials disagree with the counts. This procedure was toorushed in 1980 to be effective, but if local officials dotheir jobs, there's enough time for it to work this year.   At the same time, the bureau is using its new ManagementInformation System to integrate information about missinghousing units, and to target blocks for recanvassing. Allthose press accounts of missing units have been fed into thesystem, as well as information received from calls to thebureau's hotline, letters from individuals and communitygroups, and information from the Postal Service.   Census Bureau Director Barbara Everitt Bryant told acongressional hearing last month that &quot;statistical samplechecks show no evidence of large blocks of missing housingunits.&quot; But when a newspaper wrote that housing units in onecity were reportedly misclassified as containing only oneperson, the bureau used the MIS to search for excessiveoccurrences of one-person households nationwide. As a result,Ms. Bryant said, interviewers were sent back to 58,000households in nine census districts. The numbers localofficials are reviewing now don't include any of thesecorrections.   These and similar procedures will probably produce acensus count that is as complete as we have ever seen. Thepublic doesn't think that's happening because it looks atspecific instances where the basic procedures fail and thenprojects that failure onto the whole. But the reality is thatthe basic procedures can't work on their own any more. In acomplex society, it takes a bundle of procedures to produce acomplete count of the population.   The mail census is the cheapest procedure: It counts theshare of the population that is willing and able tocooperate. That share is evidently declining, and not justamong the general public. The Direct Marketing Associationreported last month that an embarrassingly low fraction ofits members cooperated with the government's request to avoidmailings around Census Day.   Personal visits -- the classic census procedure -- areexpensive but inevitable when so many households lackEnglish-language facility, literacy skills or familiaritywith filling out questionnaires, particularly wordygovernment efforts like the census questionnaire. And thereare always households that are not willing to be counted. Nowthat the census is computerized, we have a better chance ofcounting them. That's why this census will probably be asuccess -- if you define success as counting just abouteverybody.   However, if you define success as a complete and accuratearray of information about just about everybody, then thecensus is less successful. About 3% of the housing units nowrecorded in the census data base contain what the bureaucalls &quot;last-resort&quot; information. This means that the bureaumade up to six attempts to contact people in person or on thephone. When that failed, census-takers got information fromneighbors, letter carriers or building superintendents. Insome cases, people hadn't provided all the informationrequested; in other cases they hadn't provided any.   Although the nationwide use of last-resort informationisn't terribly significant, it is significant in largercities -- that's where the basic procedures seem increasinglyinadequate. According to Ms. Bryant, preliminary data for NewYork City, in particular, suggest that last-resort data mayhave been substituted for more than the usual hard-to-countpopulations. That would explain why so many New Yorkers thinkthey haven't been counted: Someone else provided informationfor them.   The use of last-resort data obviously reduced the numberof people who had been expected to answer the long, detailedcensus questionnaire. So did other emergency procedures. Forexample, all people who chose to give their censusinformation over the telephone hotlines were administered theshort form. Evelyn Mann, New York City's chief demographer,says this situation &quot;thinned&quot; the detailed data, and biasesthose tabulations toward the characteristics of people whocooperated with the census.   New York City may be a special case, but it may alsosignal the census-taking environment of the future. Thatraises the ultimate question about the success of the census:its cost-effectiveness. According to the General AccountingOffice, the cost of counting each housing unit (in 1980dollars) rose from $5 in 1950 to $12 in 1980. Due in part tothe unexpectedly low public cooperation, it will reach anestimated $17 per unit in 1990.   Let's leave to the political arena the issue of whetherthe government should adjust census results for people whoslip through the bureau's safety nets. Thanks to computerizedstatistical firepower, this census will probably produce thebest estimates yet of how many of them there are.   ---   Ms. Riche is national editor of American Demographicsmagazine.</TEXT></DOC>