<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911129-0136</DOCNO><DOCID>911129-0136.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Moscow's Perspective on Fidel Castro's Cuba   ----   By Carlos Alberto Montaner</HL><DATE>11/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7</SO><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)PETROLEUM (PET)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>CANADA (CN)CUBA (CU)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)JAPAN (JA)MEXICO (MX)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SPAIN (SP)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)WEST INDIES (WIS)</RE><LP>   I was in Moscow, invited by the Russian Parliament, whenCuba's Fourth Communist Party Congress was being held. Asnews from the Congress reached us, it became clear that FidelCastro was going to use the platform to blame the formerU.S.S.R. for Cuba's disastrous economy. And cries of&quot;socialism at any cost&quot; underscored his decision to insist onMarxism-Leninism as a political and economic model.   I've seldom seen leaders as disturbed as those Russians.What's more, I don't think there's a parliament in the worldas anti-Castro as the one presided over by Ruslan Jasbulatov.This is only natural. According to calculations byspecialists at the Academy of Sciences, the three-decade-longCuban adventure has cost Soviet workers more than $100billion (not counting an enormous amount of military aid) --this for an island of just under 11 million inhabitants. Andto make matters worse, as a yield on this enormous&quot;investment,&quot; the coffers of the Bank of Russia today hold750 million Cuban pesos, which are absolutely useless becausethere's nothing to buy with them in Cuba.</LP><TEXT>   But it's all over now. Beginning next year there will beno subsidization of sugar prices. Instead of the $450 foreach of the four million tons of sugar that Russia imports,Havana will be offered (in exchange for petroleum) theapproximately $200 that a ton of sugar would fetch on theworld market. This means that Cuba's fuel ration will be cutby half. That is, there will be a drop to fewer than fivemillion tons of crude, although the minimum needs of theisland are about 10 million.   What will Mr. Castro do in the face of this? Among his fewoptions is watching the progressive paralysis of the country.According to economist Olga Paniushkina, of the Academy ofSciences, in 1989 Cuba's gross national product dropped by10%; and in only the first six months of 1991 the fall was20%. This means a 24% reduction in industrial production; a50% decrease in domestic petroleum processing; a 25% cut insteel production, and a 20% reduction in the production ofnickel. Predictions are that the coming year will see anoverall 80% decline in GNP.   But where the scarcities become particularly dangerous isregarding foodstuffs and medicines. Many Cubans are goinghungry, while the chronically ill cannot obtain propermedication and will become more seriously ill or die.   At fault is the disastrous economic policy imposed on Cubaby its Maximo Lider: a model unable to generate the wealththat the country needs to produce or import the food andmedicines it requires. All of Europe, Japan, Canada andforeign subsidiaries of U.S. companies (so far this year,exporting more than $50 million in goods to the island) wantto sell the Cuban dictatorship anything it needs and buywhatever it can sell at market prices. But they requireironclad guarantees, because Cuba will get no credit; it'sbroke. It owes $25 billion dollars to the former U.S.S.R., $8billion to the West -- similar to the amounts owed by theEast European countries -- and several million tons of sugarto France and Japan. These orders have been paid for but notdelivered (part of an operation irresponsibly backed byMoscow), and Paris and Tokyo can demand the immediate returnof their money in cash, since Cuba has not complied with thecontracts.   The problem with the Cuban economy, then, is not the U.S.embargo. At fault is a mad economic system that earmarks anenormous percentage of the national wealth to maintain avoracious, repressive state. This includes the armed forces,the political police, party functionaries and a hypertrophicbureaucracy that consists of 50 functionaries with the rankof minister, 200 vice ministers and a foreign service aslarge as that of a country as big as France. In Spain alone,there are approximately 185 Cuban diplomats, spies andcommercial officials serving Havana.   In addition -- besides depending on a wrongheaded economicsystem run by a demoralized, gigantic and clumsy bureaucracy-- Fidel Castro made the error of basing the island's economyon the supposition that subsidies from the now-deceasedU.S.S.R. and Comecon would be permanent. This increased thedependency on sugar, the selling price of which has been lessthan the cost of production for more than five years. In thissense, it seems things won't change in the near future.   If Fidel Castro does not make a drastic change in Cubaneconomic and political policy a great human catastrophe isjust around the corner. This will include, but not be limitedto, infant undernourishment, growing rates of disease andmortality, the proliferation of delinquency, prostitution andgeneral social violence. There also will be a growth in thesuicide rate, which has already increased tenfold since thebeginning of the revolution. And more of the young and daringwill take to the shark-infested seas on anything that floats.And &quot;palace&quot; conspiracies, street disturbances or subversiveattacks by totally desperate people cannot be dismissed.   All these eventualities are unavoidable. So what option,short of drastic internal economic and political change, willMr. Castro take? He has already announced it: an attempt tosave communism with the help of the capitalists. At thispoint there are literally hundreds of Cuban agents in Europeand Latin America -- especially in Spain and Mexico --looking for businessmen willing to offer the island hardcurrency and know-how. In exchange Mr. Castro is offeringthem a fiscal paradise: extremely low-paid, servile workers,the possibility of repatriating profits at once, and aquasi-diplomatic status for the investors. This is hisresponse to the current crisis: to save Stalinism with themethods of Manchesterian capitalism.   Just for this reason, of course, it won't work. First,because capitalists are not going to rush in in sufficientnumbers to one of the most volatile and dangerous territoriesin the world; second, because Mr. Castro's final crisis isprobably more immediate than anyone thinks. The Russians, forexample, believe that Cuba will be paralyzed in about eightmonths. It's not just that Mr. Castro has no money; he has notime. And that's even more serious.   What, then, can be done? Under current conditions, Westernbusinesses must be strongly discouraged from investing so asnot to prolong unnecessarily the dying process of a regimethat cannot be saved. However, generous aid and the immediatelifting of the embargo could be held out if the Cuban regimeopts for serious political negotiations with domestic andforeign opposition. In addition, free and fair multipartyelections must be guaranteed for all.   But at least as important as negotiations with a desperateleader are discussions that must be opened between Cubans onthe island and those living in exile. Within Cuba there hasemerged a coalition of opposition groups called the CubanDemocratic Concertation. Outside Cuba a group called theCuban Democratic Platform is preparing for open and cleanpolitical exchange with the Concertation. For the moment,this doesn't appear probable, but it may begin to be when allvestiges of hope for the regime are lost.   ---   Mr. Montaner is a Cuban exile writer and a founder of theCuban Democratic Platform. He lives in Madrid.</TEXT></DOC>