<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900525-0071</DOCNO><DOCID>900525-0071.</DOCID><HL>   Economic Imperative for Mideast Peace   ----   By Hassan bin Talal</HL><DATE>05/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   AMMAN -- Arab summits are generally better known for beingdisputatious than for fashioning serious programs to advancethe cause of peace in the turbulent Middle East.   Nevertheless, Arab leaders who will gather in Baghdad onMonday have an extraordinary opportunity to construct aplatform that would bring peace to a region that has beenbedeviled by conflict for an eternity. They must be mindful,however, that &quot;peace&quot; doesn't consist of politics alone: Anequally vital element of any peace settlement is sustainedeconomic development of our region.</LP><TEXT>   To be sure, this summit is not being held under auspiciouscircumstances. Last Sunday's slaying of seven Palestinians bya crazed Israeli gunman, the subsequent violence perpetratedby Israeli soldiers in the occupied territories, and thedisturbances that have affected several countries -- thesethings could well make any peace efforts even more elusive.   But moderate Arab states are fervently hoping that thissummit will not degenerate into yet another frustratingtalkfest. This summit must push Arabs toward realisticprospects of talking directly with the Israelis.   Israel has paid a heavy economic price to ensure itssurvival. The Israeli economy appears headed for disaster.Israel's budget deficit rose last year to nearly 40% of grossdomestic product. The country's high defense expenditurediverts funds from domestic development.   The Arab-Israeli conflict has similarly imposed heavydemographic and economic burdens on my country, Jordan. For acountry of barely three million people to be spending $600million annually on defense -- or 16% of GDP -- is untenable.Israel's occupation of the West Bank after the Six-Day War of1967 deprived Jordan of 40% of its gross national product,while thrusting more than 400,000 refugees upon it.   Assistance from oil-producing Arab countries to Jordan tocope with these problems has dropped sharply: to less than$400 million today from $1.2 billion in 1981. As the revenuesof our oil-producing neighbors declined, remittances fromexpatriate Jordanians -- whose skills have helped createmodern societies in the Gulf region -- have dropped more than20% in the past three years to less than $800 million today.Contributing to Jordan's economic problems has been the worlddecline in commodity prices, although we have made everyeffort to streamline the phosphate industry, which remainsour biggest export trade item. Jordan's total external debthas risen from $3.5 billion in 1984 to nearly $8 billiontoday.   The &quot;intifada,&quot; or Palestinian uprising that started inDecember 1987 in the West Bank and Gaza, has resulted inPalestinians liquidating more than $250 million in Jordaniandinars held by them as cash reserves. Jordan has sufferedheavily as a result.   Radical politics feeds on deteriorating economicconditions. This is to no one's benefit. All parties in theregion should be mindful of the dangers posed by theexpanding fundamentalist movement that is rapidly winningconverts among our restless and unemployed young.   Jordan believes that while the two superpowers must assumegreater responsibility in expediting the peace process, theremust be greater regional and interregional economiccooperation. Such cooperation would provide politicalstability and also enhance the constituency for peace in theArab world.   The following are the potential building blocks for widereconomic and political cooperation:   -- The Gulf Cooperation Council. The oil resources andrevenues of the GCC members -- Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait,Oman, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates -- continue to be amajor factor in the economic growth of the region. Thecreation of such sub-regional economic clubs invites abilateral dialogue between manpower-exporting states such asJordan and the resource-rich countries of the region.   -- The Arab Cooperation Council. A relatively newgrouping, consisting of Jordan, Egypt, Iraq and what wasuntil recently North Yemen, the ACC seeks to think inpractical terms about common concerns, such as water, energy,transportation and telecommunications. Arabs and Israelisshare a common geography and history. Why not a commoneconomic framework that would work for the benefit ofeverybody?   -- A United Nations peace conference. The most appropriatevehicle for a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeliconflict is an international conference under the auspices ofthe U.N. The only acceptable basis for a just and lastingsettlement is a fair exchange of land for peace -- asembodied in U.N. Resolutions 242 and 338. These resolutionscall for the withdrawal of foreign presences from theoccupied territories, and also offer implicit recognition ofIsrael's sovereign existence.   -- Regional security. Jordan calls for an Arab Summitmeeting in order to formulate a peace strategy that wouldsafeguard the legitimate rights of the Palestinians and thesecurity and stability of the Arab regional order.   -- Big-power support. The U.S., the Soviet Union, Europeand the parties concerned in the dispute must work in concertto generate peace momentum. Since the Israeli settlements inthe occupied territories violate international law, the U.S.and Europe should predicate their subsidization of theimmigration and resettlement of Soviet Jews on Israel'sfreezing all settlement activity in the occupied territories.   Jordan has genuinely been the &quot;middle ground&quot; for theregion, not only because of its location but also because ofits moderate and practical approaches to the many issuesbedeviling the Middle East. Regrettably, Israel hasn't chosento join in the spirit of accommodation. Instead, it haschosen to distract attention from the critical issue ofpeace. This time it has gathered all its resources to welcomea new wave of immigration -- a wave that provides a powerfulcase for Israeli expansionists to keep the occupiedterritories.   But not only will this new immigration exact a price bythreatening all peace initiatives -- its economic cost isstaggering. The Shamir government has asked the U.S., forinstance, for at least $300 million to meet the expendituresof settling Soviet newcomers in Israel. The chairman of theJewish Agency -- the main resettlement organization --estimates that 750,000 immigrants will arrive in Israel overthe next five to six years. Israelis have already sent morethan 360,000 invitations to Soviet Jews, and Israel isissuing 200 visas a day in Moscow to Jewish applicants. Inthe first three months of 1990 more than 17,000 Jews arrivedin Israel from the Soviet Union. This could change thedemographic identity of the occupied territories.   To provide safeguards against a breakdown of the peaceprocess, the development of a sophisticated long-termstrategy is required. Like all other conflicts, the Palestinequestion has shown in the past few months that it issusceptible to compromise. Change can be hastened through aconcerted effort. Proposals must be designed to accommodateboth the political requirements of the Palestinians and theresettlement of Soviet Jews.   There is ample room for everybody in the Middle East --Moslems, Jews and Christians alike. With the establishment ofa genuine peace, I see Jordan emerging as a sort of Singaporeof the region whose economic progress would have a multipliereffect -- a staging ground for international companieswishing to accelerate their business in the area. We have theskilled manpower, we have a superb infrastructure, we havepolitical stability, and we have a strong work ethic.   But we don't have peace. Yet.   Jordan truly believes that regional peace is a possibilitywhose time has come. We, the players in the process, mustn'tpermit the opportunity to pass us by, yet again. Any takers?   ---   Prince Hassan is crown prince of Jordan and chairman ofthe Amman-based Arab Thought Forum.</TEXT></DOC>