<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910607-0019</DOCNO><DOCID>910607-0019.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>06/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE U.S. AND SOVIETS INTENSIFIED efforts to complete astrategic arms pact.   Secretary of State Baker and Soviet Foreign MinisterBessmertnykh scheduled talks today in Geneva in a bid toaccelerate work on the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty andpossibly lay the groundwork for a superpower summit thissummer. In Washington, Bush conferred with his NationalSecurity Council for what he called a &quot;rather important&quot;session to discuss the arms pact, which would reducestockpiles of long-range nuclear weapons. At a NATO meetingin Denmark, Baker virtually ruled out a big injection ofeconomic aid for the Soviets, saying, &quot;They must start withself-help.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Britain formally proposed that Gorbachev be invited toLondon following a July summit of the G-7 industrializednations so that the Soviet leader can make his pitch formassive Western aid.   ---   Israel's Shamir sent Bush a letter rejecting a U.S. planto arrange for U.N. participation in an international peaceconference on the Mideast. The response casts new doubts onthe chances of launching Arab-Israeli talks. Jordan's KingHussein earlier had sent an unenthusiastic response to theplan.   ---   NATO foreign ministers said they wouldn't accept any&quot;coercion or intimidation&quot; of nations of Eastern Europe.While NATO stopped short of extending its security umbrellaover the nations of the defunct Warsaw Pact, a Dutch diplomatsaid the initiative &quot;was the closest thing NATO could do tooffering a security guarantee.&quot;   ---   The House voted to preserve funding for the space stationunder a restructured budget that sacrifices promisedincreases for an array of other NASA initiatives. The 240-173roll call followed intense lobbying by the White House andspace contractors.   ---   The Pentagon disclosed that it plans to spend more than$15 billion on a fleet of new Stealth missiles beingdeveloped by Northrop. A Pentagon aide said the program,secretly started in 1986, is designed to produce ashort-range, non-nuclear weapon that is better able to evaderadar than current cruise missiles.   ---   The Supreme Court ruled that federal judges have broadauthority to penalize individuals who abuse the federal courtsystem through fraud and delay. By a 5-4 vote, the high courtsaid that judges may order one party to a lawsuit to pay theother's legal bills as a form of punishment for a pattern ofabuse.   ---   A study of students' math skills ranked states withtraditional classroom approaches the highest. The assessment,a possible precursor of a nationwide test, showed littlecorrelation between school budgets and math performance,which generally was poor.   ---   Kurdish leaders asked U.S. military commanders to create ademilitarized zone in northern Iraq and to press Baghdad toagree to Kurdish demands for autonomy. But a U.S. aide saidcoalition forces would reject the demands, because they wouldforce the allies to overstep the bounds of their mission,protecting Kurdish refugees.   ---   The EPA proposed a clean-air rule that removes a majorconcern for electric utilities that must meet new acid-rainlaws. The proposal assures utilities that adding newequipment to reduce sulfur-dioxide emissions won't triggermore-stringent anti-pollution requirements that apply tomodernized plants.   ---   A lack of jet parts may impede the airline industry'sefforts to meet a 1994 deadline for the repair of thenation's oldest jets, according to the GAO, which also citeda shortage of mechanics and the airlines' financial problems.The FAA last year ordered repairs of about 1,400 agingairliners.   ---   Mandela urged 30 hunger-striking South African prisonersto start eating and called on the public to join &quot;masscampaigns&quot; for their release. The anti-apartheid leader saidthe political prisoners had been effective in making theirplight known and shouldn't further risk their health. Mosthave been fasting for over a month.   ---   About 100 Albanians rioted in a refugee camp in southernItaly, beating police with sticks and throwing rocks, Italianauthorities said. A police official said the violence stemmedfrom frustration about conditions at the temporary camp inBari, where about 600 Albanians are living in tents.   ---   A Senate committee pproved legislation that would repeal aban on abortion counseling at federally fundedfamily-planning clinics. The Senate Labor and Human ResourcesCommittee's vote marked the first congressional initiativeaimed at repealing the prohibition since the Supreme Court'srecent decision upholding the restriction.   ---   House Democrats moved to delay action on aid to ElSalvador at least until September, to keep up pressure on theSalvadoran government and rebels to reach a peace accord thissummer. The unusual move was arranged by Rules CommitteeChairman Moakley as his panel gave the go-ahead for actionnext week on a foreign-aid bill.   ---   Yugoslavia's six republics reached a compromise in aquarrel over future power sharing that has pushed the countryclose to civil war, the host of a national summit said inSarajevo. Leaders of the republics were said to have accepteda proposal for a loose federation of sovereign republics as abasis for further talks.   ---   Ethiopia's new leaders consolidated their grip on thecountry, extending control to a number of remote towns andnaming a caretaker administration. The state news agency saidTamirat Laynie, previously vice president of the rebelinterim government, was appointed acting prime minister.   ---   Died: Sylvia Porter, 77, a financial reporter andnewspaper columnist since 1935, Wednesday, in Pound Ridge,N.Y., of complications from emphysema.</TEXT></DOC>