<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911211-0044</DOCNO><DOCID>911211-0044.</DOCID><HL>   Under Pressure:   Japan's Banks Are Hit   By a Slower Economy,   Deregulation's Impact   ---   Financial System Isn't at Risk,   But Some Institutions Are,   Government Aide Warns   ---   The End of the Easy Life   ----   By Clay Chandler   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   J.IBJ J.LTC J.NCK</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES andamp; COMPANIES (ANL)EARNINGS PROJECTIONS (ERP)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)</RE><LP>   TOKYO -- When Hitoshi Kawamura got a job with Japan'sgiant Mitsubishi Bank Ltd. in 1978, he expected an easy life.   After all, the Bank of Japan set interest rates, and theMinistry of Finance determined lending volumes. Mr. Kawamuraassumed that he mainly would be &quot;smiling at customers,passing out gift towels to new depositors and every so oftenasking borrowers to show me their books.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Not anymore. Now that a recession abroad and two years oftight credit at home have ended the boom of the late 1980s,Japan's bankers are scrambling to deal with their worstproblems since World War II. Manufacturers' profits aresliding, prices of stocks and land have tumbled, andcorporate bankruptcies -- once a rarity here -- are settingrecords. With bad debts mounting alarmingly, Japan'sfinancial regulators are subtly backing away from alongstanding commitment to prevent the collapse of anyfinancial institution.   &quot;Japan's banks have never skated this close to the edge,&quot;says Alicia Ogawa, a Tokyo-based financial analyst at S.G.Warburg Securities Ltd.   The problem isn't just the cooling economy; Japan's bankshave weathered downturns before. This time, slower growth haslaid bare the effects of two trends of the past decade:financial liberalization, which has left lending rates andvolumes increasingly to the market, and the huge financialreserves of Japan's prosperous blue-chip manufacturers, whichno longer need banks the way they once did. In the late1980s, these trends were masked by the &quot;bubble economy,&quot; aneconomy of big trade surpluses, a strong yen and a flood ofliquidity in which asset prices soared and every loan lookedlike a winner.   &quot;Once, Japan's banks could always make money. The systemvirtually guaranteed it,&quot; says Akio Mikuni, founder of Mikuniandamp; Co., a credit-rating agency. &quot;Now, that game is over.&quot;   Japan's financial system probably isn't in danger ofcollapse; in many ways, Japanese lenders face fewer problemsthan their U.S. competitors do. However, many Japanese banks,in contrast to the Americans, are just beginning to adjust toderegulation and are clearly struggling. Some are retrenchingoverseas. And analysts predict that the current troubles willspeed up deregulation and a shakeout and will widendisparities in the Japanese banks' size and profitability.   For the first time, Japan's banks are being forced to dealwith what, for many, still is a novel concept: They are atrisk. Signs of that growing riskiness abound:   -- Five years ago, 11 Japanese banks, including six of the11 multibranch, consumer-oriented city banks, had top-notchcredit ratings from Moody's Investors Service Inc.; now, nonedo. Standard andamp; Poor's downgraded ratings on nine city banksthis year. Last week, Moody's downgraded two more banks,Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan Ltd. and No. 2-ranked MitsuiTaiyo Kobe Bank Ltd., because of their exposure to troubledreal-estate companies, and said it is reviewing its ratingfor Bank of Tokyo Ltd.   -- Ranked by asset size, Japan still has eight of theworld's 10 largest banks, but those behemoths aren'tfattening up on trade surpluses and coining money any longer.Pinched by nonperforming loans and rising costs, they haveslipped far behind the more cautiously managed, moreprofit-oriented German and Swiss banks in globalreturn-on-asset rankings.   -- Bad debts are soaring. Nihon Keizai Shimbun, a leadingfinancial newspaper here, estimates that for the currentfiscal year ending March 31, 1992, banks are burdened with3.5 trillion yen in nonperforming loans, some 1.6% of totaldebts. But David Atkinson, an analyst at Salomon BrothersAsia Inc., thinks those loans' true face value could exceed20 trillion yen, or about 7% of total debt. Because of laxfinancial-disclosure requirements, no one really knows; bankregulators concede that even they aren't sure how many loanshave gone bad.   -- In the past year, financial authorities have had torescue several small lending institutions by cajoling stablebanks to absorb them. In October, Tokai Bank Co. took overSanwa Shinkin, a credit-union affiliate that had lent almosta third of its assets to the principal of a language schoolwho was later arrested on embezzlement charges. Sanwa Shinkinwas stuck with 20 billion yen of bad loans.   Similarly, Toho Sogo Bank Ltd., a regional bank in Shikokuprefecture, last year had 30 billion yen of bad loans after amajor borrower, Kurushima Shipbuilding, collapsed. Bankauthorities are pressing Iyo Bank Ltd., Shikoku's largestregional lender, to absorb Toho Sogo; they have promised IyoBank eight billion yen from the government'sdeposit-insurance system. This is the first time they haveoffered those funds since the system was established in 1971.   These strains are forcing Japan's regulators tore-evaluate their policies. &quot;If management is poor, it'spossible for banks to collapse, even in Japan,&quot; FinanceMinister Tsutomu Hata warned late last month.   In the U.S., where more than 1,000 banks have failed inthe past five years, such a comment might seem tame. But itseems downright radical in Japan, where no financialinstitution has collapsed since World War II because theauthorities always mounted a rescue operation.   The government's longstanding confidence in its ability toprevent bank failures is reflected in the meager funding ofits deposit-insurance system. The system has set asidepremiums totaling only 500 billion yen ($3.91 billion),enough to bail out just a few small banks. And banks' ownbad-debt reserves are small, too, because the FinanceMinistry, eager to maximize tax revenue, insists that theypay taxes on any reserves exceeding 0.3% of total loans.   The forces raising the riskiness of Japan's once-tranquilfinancial system are complex. The high -- though declining --profitability of Japan's big manufacturers accounts for muchof the change. The companies were solid, dependable borrowerswhose prospects were enhanced by government supports, buttheir fast growth created a voracious appetite for capitaland they used to beg banks for loans.   In the late 1970s, however, big manufacturers began makingmoney faster than they could spend it. By 1989, at thespeculative bubble's peak, they had piled up cash totalingfour times their annual outlays on plant and equipment. Banksseemed irrelevant.   In 1985, meanwhile, the Finance Ministry, largely inresponse to U.S. pressure for liberalization, began liftingcontrols on the rates banks pay to depositors. But becausebanks couldn't correspondingly increase the rates they chargeborrowers until the beginning of this year, loan spreads --the difference between banks' cost of funds and their yieldon assets -- narrowed sharply in 1989 and 1990. At the sametime, the ministry eased a variety of longstandingrestrictions on the volume and types of bank loans.   For a while, the impact of these two trends -- and thehigher risk they implied -- didn't hit the banks very hard.But then, the Bank of Japan, apparently fearful that theyen's surge against the dollar would damage Japan'sexporters, abruptly eased. It let inflation-adjusted interestrates plummet to 2.5%, and cheap capital flooded through theeconomy. In the ensuing boom, manufacturers needed banksstill less; they could raise money cheaply in the stock andcapital markets.   Despite the loss of some big customers, banks didn'tsuffer because they themselves invested heavily in stocks.They also lent money to lesser-known companies thengenerating enormous profits by speculating in securities,real estate and art. Between 1985 and 1990, bank loans as apercentage of Japan's gross national product rose to morethan 50% from about 30%, and real-estate-related lendingtripled.   &quot;The bubble put Japanese bankers to sleep,&quot; says YujiWatanabe, deputy general manager of corporate planning atIndustrial Bank of Japan Ltd. &quot;Just at the time we shouldhave been thinking more about risk, it became possible tomake money easily on property and stock.&quot;   Yasushi Mieno awakened bankers with a jolt. In December1989, within a few days of becoming governor of the Bank ofJapan, Mr. Mieno raised the discount rate -- the rate thecentral bank charges on loans to banks -- to 3.25% from 2.5%.Further increases followed, and although the bank has reducedthe discount rate twice since July, it remains at arelatively high 5%.   The surge in interest rates hurt the banks several ways:It further raised their costs, clobbered some of theirshakier borrowers and, by depressing stock prices, hamperedtheir efforts to raise capital ratios. The Japanese banks,which traditionally had operated with only modest capital,are having difficulty meeting the higher capital requirementsimposed by the Bank for International Settlements, and thebanks had long counted as capital 45% of their unrealizedgains on stocks.   This array of problems has hurt all Japanese banks, butsome more than others. Analysts say the mammoth city banks,which account for about half of Japan's 217 trillion yen ofbank loans, will feel the least pain. With capital againrelatively scarce, they have widened loan spreads to levelsalmost equal to those before liberalization. Many analyststhink wider spreads will offset most of the interest incomethe city banks will lose from bad loans. In the six months toSept. 30, the city banks reported profit increases averaging8.4%, but analysts attributed much of that strength toJapan's quirky disclosure requirements. Many expect the citybanks to report flat profits for the next three years.   In the wake of the bubble's collapse and to raise theircapital ratios, many city banks are unloading overseas assetsand paring administrative costs. The Finance Ministry isexpected to rescind restrictions on banks' real-estatelending next month, but officials at several city banks saythey plan to hold property loans to a minimum. Many of themhave tightened screening procedures and scrapped quotasystems for evaluating loan officers. Sumitomo Bank Ltd. saysbranch managers now will be evaluated on the basis of theirbranch's long-term performance rather than on its performanceduring their tenure only.   Conditions are tougher for long-term credit banks andtrust banks. Lending to property and finance companiesaccounted for an average of more than 30% of total loanportfolios at long-term and trust banks, compared with anaverage of 15% of total loans at the city banks.   Long-term credit banks, which specialize in long-termloans to businesses, also are sweating because they'reheavily dependent on interest income from loans to bigmanufacturers. Unlike the city banks, which take depositsfrom the general public and focus on short-term lending,credit banks haven't benefited from the increased loan demandbecause the interest they earn is fixed at 0.9 percentagepoint above the yield of their most recent bond issue.   Industrial Bank of Japan, the biggest of the threelong-term banks, is already competing aggressively forbusiness at medium-sized companies and is likely to carve outa respectable niche in equity underwriting as deregulationprogresses. But analysts see tough times ahead for IBJ'ssmaller rivals, Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan Ltd. andNippon Credit Bank Ltd.   Prospects are even gloomier for the seven trust banks.They can participate in a broader range of financial services-- including acceptance of long- and short-term deposits,management of pension funds, estate management and financialconsulting -- but have far fewer branches than the city banksdo and are ill-prepared for a deregulated environment. Theirprofits declined 45% in the six months to Sept. 30, andanalysts expect them to post substantial losses in the yearsahead. Moreover, trust banks' balance sheets havedeteriorated in the past two years because they rely heavilyon commissions from equity and property transactions.   And the changes will be most dramatic among Japan'sthousands of small regional banks, credit unions and loancooperatives. Their administrative costs have been rising,but their interest income hasn't. And their profits will besqueezed further as interest-rate liberalization is extendedto smaller deposits.   Despite all the changes, analysts say Japan's banks won'ttruly come to terms with risk until Finance Ministryofficials tighten the notoriously lax financial-disclosurerequirements. To maximize tax revenue, the ministry forcesbanks to keep bad loans on their books for up to a year afterborrowers have stopped paying interest. Moreover, ministryofficials usually don't let banks write off bad loans untilthey have established beyond doubt that there's no chance ofrecovery through either repayment or liquidation ofcollateral.   Such disclosure rules make it almost impossible forinvestors and depositors to assess the institutions' creditrisks -- or for banks to sell off their bad loans.&quot;Regulators are going to do something about the disclosurerules soon,&quot; Salomon Brothers' Mr. Atkinson says. &quot;They haveto.&quot;   However, Industrial Bank of Japan's Mr. Watanabe is morepessimistic. &quot;I don't think we're approaching a solution tothese problems yet,&quot; he says. &quot;To the contrary, I thinkthings will have to get worse before they get better.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>