<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910114-0097</DOCNO><DOCID>910114-0097.</DOCID><HL>   Changing Course:   Gorbachev's Power Is   Uncertain After Move   By Army on Lithuania   ---   Crackdown in Baltics Shows   Influence of Hardliners;   A Setback for Perestroika   ---   West Opposes Use of Force   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   VILNIUS, U.S.S.R. -- President Mikhail Gorbachev'ssix-year effort to bring greater openness and other peacefulchange to the Soviet Union came to a bloody halt thisweekend.   The army's attack on unarmed Lithuanians seeking to keeptheir democratically elected government from topplingsignaled in dramatic fashion the strength of the hard-linefaction in Moscow that has opposed Mr. Gorbachev's plan forchange, or perestroika.</LP><TEXT>   It also raised questions about the level of control Mr.Gorbachev has over his deeply fractured nation.   More than a dozen Lithuanian citizens were killed and morethan 100 wounded early Sunday morning when Soviet paratroopsand tanks moved to take control of the radio and televisionstation and a television signal tower here in the capital.The radio station in Kaunus, the second largest city in thisBaltic republic, was also taken over.   A right-wing faction of the Lithuanian Communist Partythat is aligned with the military proclaimed itself incontrol of the republic, and the local Red Army militarycommander in Vilnius declared a curfew and a ban on protestsand strikes.   Still, the Lithuanian parliament met yesterday, andthousands of stubborn, proud and peaceful Lithuaniansremained last night outside the parliament, hoping againsthope to protect it from attack by sheer willpower andstrength in numbers.   &quot;People are ready to die,&quot; says Tarcizos Tamosiunas, a47-year-old father of three who was planning to spend thenight in Vilnius's central square. &quot;If fate decides it, thenso be it.&quot;   Late last night, Lithuanian President Vytautus Landsbergistold his republic's mission in Moscow that he was calling onthe people to leave the parliament building because he hadinformation that more Soviet troops had begun crossing theLithuanian border, and he feared further violence beforemorning.   The heads of the three Baltic states, along with Russianrepublic head Boris Yeltsin, last night called for anemergency United Nations conference on the Baltic troubles.Mr. Yeltsin, who flew to the Baltic state of Estonia, alsosigned there a mutual support pact with the Baltic states andcalled on Russian members of the Soviet army not to fightagainst the Baltic people.   Concern reverberated throughout the Soviet Union over whatthe military action means for several other republics thathave been at odds with Mr. Gorbachev's government, and evenfor the political stability of the country as a whole.   Yuri Afanasyev, a leader of the radical InterregionalGroup of Deputies, said at a solidarity rally in MoscowSunday, &quot;What happens today in Lithuania can happen in Latviaand Estonia tomorrow, and the day after tomorrow it can allhappen in Moscow.&quot;   Thousands marched through the center of Moscow yesterday,waving republican flags draped with black ribbons andshouting, &quot;Down with the Hangmen&quot; and &quot;Hands off Lithuania.&quot;   It remains unclear whether Mr. Gorbachev is willing orable to stop the sharp tilt in power toward militaryhardliners and other anti-democratic groups that has recentlytaken place. Over the past weeks, as the Soviet Union hassunk ever deeper into political and economic chaos, he hasincreasingly allied himself with hardliners in the KGB andmilitary in the hope of salvaging the authority and powers ofcentral government. Last month, Mr. Gorbachev's longtimeally, Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, announced hisresignation, denouncing the political right wing and citingwhat he said was a potential move toward dictatorship in theSoviet Union.   In Washington, the Lithuanian crackdown was greeted withdismay, partly because there were fears it could mean Mr.Gorbachev had effectively lost his power or his commitment toreform.   &quot;There are unclear signals as to the extent to whichGorbachev is fully in charge,&quot; said one senior administrationofficial working on a response. &quot;We are trying to establishcontacts with the Soviets.&quot;   President Bush said yesterday that &quot;we condemn these acts,which could not help but affect our relationship.&quot; He added apersonal appeal to Moscow, saying &quot;I ask the Soviet leadersto refrain from further acts that might lead to more violenceand loss of life.&quot;   Asked if the Soviet president had lost control, Mr. Bushsaid, &quot;I'm concerned about the internal affairs there and hehimself is very concerned about that.&quot; He was apparentlyreferring to statements Mr. Gorbachev made in a phoneconversation the two men held Friday.   Mr. Bush brushed aside questions about possible protestactions by the U.S. and insisted the Persian Gulf crisishadn't made it easier for the crackdown to occur. He said hewas confident the Soviets remained firm backers of the U.N.stand in the Gulf.   British Prime Minister John Major said yesterday, &quot;Furtheraction, particularly if it were directed against theLithuanian parliament, would compel us to review with ourEuropean partners the support which we are giving the SovietUnion individually and collectively.&quot;   Leaders of the democratic movement inside the Soviet Unioncalled on the West to stop supporting Mr. Gorbachev. &quot;Yousend food and now he'll introduce martial law all over thecountry and put this food on the shelves and everyone will beglad,&quot; says radical democrat Igor Chubais.   Sunday morning's military action came just hours afterPresident Gorbachev had promised leaders of the Sovietrepublics that he wasn't about to use more force inLithuania. In that meeting on Saturday, Mr. Yeltsin, leaderof the Russian republic, argued against the use of force in&quot;very strong language,&quot; according to one delegate to themeeting.   Solidarity among the newly powerful Soviet republics couldprove much harder for the central government to crush thanthe small, independence-minded Baltic republics alone,especially if it is spearheaded by Mr. Yeltsin, the mostpopular politician in the country and Mr. Gorbachev's mostformidable rival. Deputies from several republics said thatthe crackdown will all but scuttle Mr. Gorbachev's long-heldhopes of reaching an agreement on sharing of power andresources with the republics so that the central budget andfiscal plan can be implemented, let alone his dreams ofconcluding a new union treaty with all the republics.   Democratic Russian parliament members yesterday called foran emergency session of that body where they will urge Mr.Yeltsin to threaten to remove his signature from a just-drycompromise on economic cooperation with the centralgovernment if the military crackdown isn't called off.   The official Soviet version of this weekend's eventsclaims that military force was made necessary by theanti-Soviet actions of the Lithuanian government, which isseeking independence.   Boris Pugo, a former Latvian KGB boss who was recentlyappointed Soviet interior minister, claimed on national TVthat the violence was prompted by the Lithuanian side. Hesaid Lithuanians had allegedly flashed bayonets at theso-called national salvation committee, the right wingcommunist group that has now claimed control of Lithuania,and that the committee members then sought help from thearmy.   The first sign of trouble came when Radio Vilniusbroadcast an urgent appeal to citizens to protect the maingovernment building, saying that it was being attacked by 50paratroops. That turned out to be a false alarm. Instead ofparatroops, some 35 Russian workers from a Vilnius radiofactory were trying to break into the building, but wereeasily repulsed by a small group of civilian defenders,including a trio of grandmothers in fur coats, all in theirlate 60s. &quot;They pushed us, and we pushed them back,&quot; saidWonda Wyzbariene, 67, proudly, clutching her umbrella.   But such stubborn defiance soon vanished as the majorattack began shortly before 2 a.m. Sunday. Two large columnsof at least 20 tanks and armored personnel carriers roared toa TV tower and the radio and television headquarters in thecity, firing smoke bombs on the way.   At both places, dozens of paratroops with Kalashnikoffmachine guns fired their way past small groups of unarmedguards who were blocking the entrance. The unarmed guards putup some token resistance that was quickly crushed. Severalwere killed by machine gun fire and at the TV tower, somewere even crushed by the advancing tanks.   In both places, the soldiers made ferocious andindiscriminate use of their weapons. At the radio and TVheadquarters, a small crowd gathered around four armoredcars, shouting &quot;Lithuania&quot; and &quot;Freedom&quot; and waving theirfists. The soldiers replied with tear gas and live bulletsand also sprayed surrounding buildings to scare awayonlookers.   Military trucks accompanying the tanks then played a taperecording in Lithuanian and Russian, urging people to go homeand claiming that the shadowy national salvation committee,which had been formed on Friday and whose membership is stillunknown, had taken control of the republic. &quot;BrotherLithuanians: In the name of the Committee of NationalSalvation, I report to you that all power in the republicshas transferred to the hands of our committee. This is thepower of the simple working people, workers, peasants andservicemen. The power of people like you,&quot; the announcementsaid.   The focus of attention then quickly turned to the nationalparliament, a four-story concrete and glass building in thecenter of town that became the last line of defense. By 3a.m., a crowd of about 10,000 had gathered outside waving theyellow, green and red national flag.   Inside, about 700 youths armed mainly with lead pipes andgas masks were on alert, as were several hundred older mendressed in the green uniforms of the Union of LithuanianRiflemen. The only arms in sight were about 100 small huntingrifles and several crates of Molotov cocktails.   The people inside included Vytautus Lapienis, a68-year-old, for whom the scene was reminiscent of earlierdays when Stalin forcibly annexed Lithuania in 1940. Thentoo, he was part of the token resistance. &quot;Of course, if wehad guns it would be better,&quot; he sad defiantly. &quot;But it won'tbe like 1940 when we didn't fight back.&quot;   &quot;We are not afraid,&quot; said Verdzinija Baksiene, awhite-faced mother of three who was standing with twoneighbors. &quot;Every time there's a threat, we come&quot; to defendthe building, she added stoically.   Shortly before 4 a.m. Lithuanian officials inside thebuilding called over a loudspeaker for a general politicalstrike to start Monday. Then, Virgilius Cepaitis, the leaderof the Lithuanian Independence Party, calmly announced fromthe parliament chamber: &quot;Dear deputies, we are beginning asession of parliament to prove that we are still in power.&quot;   Rolandis Norkunas, a radio journalist who had earlier beenpushed out of his office by the paratroops, rushed inside theparliament building to Mr. Landsbergis's office. There heheard the Lithuanian president call the republic'srepresentative in Moscow and a leading radical in the Sovietcapital, Mr. Afanasyev. In the conversation, Mr. Landsbergisreferred to Mr. Gorbachev as &quot;a murderer,&quot; Mr. Norkunas said.   The Lithuanian leader also tried to reach the Sovietpresident by phone, but failed. Later, turning to Westerncorrespondents, he asked: &quot;Is it true that Bush sold us{out}?&quot;   The focus of military activity then moved to Kaunas, therepublic's second largest city, where a radio tower wasstormed. But local radio officials, already prepared for theworst, managed to continue transmitting from a secretlocation. Over and over, they broadcast a message to theworld in French, German, Russian and Lithuanian announcingthat &quot;Our regular program has been broken by military force.. . . It is possible to break us by force, but nobody willforce us to revoke our independence and freedom.&quot;   By midafternoon in Vilnius yesterday, PresidentLandsbergis and many members of Parliament sounded exhaustedand drained. One woman deputy even read out poems inquavering voice. A three-man delegation sent by theFederation Council, which consists of the leaders of theSoviet republics, met with Mr. Landsbergis and then went onto talk to military leaders at the town's northern barracks.But the delegates rejected an appeal by some of the deputiesto spend Sunday sleeping in the parliament in order to ensureagainst attack.   As night fell and temperatures dropped, the size of thecrowd fell off slightly and people walked around to keep warmor sat in the stairwells of nearby apartment blocks. Someclutched pocket radios, straining to tune in to theunderground radio station that continued broadcasting orpassed around copies of the newspaper Respublika, whichsomehow managed to be printed. On its front page, above a bigpicture of a man being crushed by a tank, it ran theheadline: &quot;Bloody Sunday.&quot; By contrast, Lithuanian TV, now inthe hands of the military, showed Donald Duck cartoons.   The atmosphere on the square was strangely calm, thepeople expecting the worst. Gediminas Urbonas, a historyteacher who left his wife and five-year-old daughter at homein order to spend the night on the square, was bitter aboutthe lack of Western support for Lithuanian independence. &quot;Weare like Kuwait, a small country,&quot; he said, &quot;the onlydifference is that we don't have oil.&quot;   In the event of an attack, he was less than sanguine abouthis chances of survival. &quot;Our only weapons are our words andthe truth,&quot; he said. &quot;They are ready to kill us all here.&quot;   ---   Walter S. Mossberg in Washington contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>