<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910806-0128</DOCNO><DOCID>910806-0128.</DOCID><HL>   The Scandal Behind Japan's Financial Scandals   ----   By Kenichi Ohmae</HL><DATE>08/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)INSURANCE (INS)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)</IN><NS>SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Japanese financial markets have been rocked by scandalthis summer. Four of the top securities firms -- Nomura,Nikko, Daiwa and Yamaichi -- have admitted to reimbursing biginvestors, but not small ones, for stock market losses.Executives of the Itoman trading company have been arrestedfor fraud in the art, real estate and stock markets. FujiBank has disclosed that managers in its Tokyo branchescreated nearly $2 billion in fake collateral to backspeculative loans. Among the many lessons of these scandalsis that Japanese financial markets, and the Ministry ofFinance that regulates them, are in desperate need of reform.   The Ministry of Finance is a dinosaur, designed for a timewhen Japan's financial industries were young and werebelieved to need protection and encouragement. But todayJapan's markets are grown up and the ministry must grow up aswell. To reach maturity the ministry must change in two ways:To reduce the potential for conflicts of interest, theministry must be broken apart into a number of smallerregulatory agencies. And the ministry's mandate must shiftfrom protecting financial firms to defending investors,depositors and all other users of financial services.</LP><TEXT>   The Ministry of Finance is a sprawling regulatory andenforcement agency, dwarfing anything in the U.S. Theministry collects taxes, as the Internal Revenue Service doesin the U.S. It writes Japan's budgets, as the Treasury andCongress do. The ministry issues stock when companies areprivatized -- including the Nippon Telephone andamp; Telegraphoffering, the largest privatization in history. Itsaffiliated agencies manage giant pension funds and issuegovernments securities. The ministry is responsible both for&quot;developing&quot; the Japanese financial industry, andsimultaneously for controlling and monitoring the performanceof financial firms.   When Japan was a developing country, developing strongfinancial institutions may well have been a legitimatepriority for the ministry. But Japan passed the $10,000 percapita GNP mark in 1979, joining the club of advancednations. At some time in the past decade, the Japanesegovernments should have switched the ministry's role fromthat of nurturing the financial industry to that ofcontroling it. The ministry should be siding with investorsand depositors, not with the providers of financial services.Sadly, this has not happened.   The financial firms kept collecting money from people withvery high propensities to save, and using that money toprovide low-cost financing to industry. They have neverthought of their position as being on the side of theconsumers. The Ministry of Finance still sides with theproviders of these financial services. Today, the ministry'srole ought to be -- as it is in other advanced nations -- togive people more choice and insure fairness. The ministryshould not care if the Japanese people are being served by aJapanese bank or insurance company or a foreign bank orinsurance company, so long as they get good, fair service.   This necessary change has been slow to come because of theunsavory relationship that the bureaucrats of the Ministry ofFinance has established with the financial firms. TheMinistry of Finance retirement age is 55. But today a55-year-old is a youngster, with at least 10 years ofprofessional life ahead of him. So the financial firms havehired these retirees. Likewise, former government economistsoften get jobs in the research arms of the big brokerages. Asa result, officials in the Ministry of Finance come to seethe world in the same way as officers of the financial firmsdo: Both have become insiders in the market.   This subtle form of corruption is well known. What is notso well known is a more blatant form. The Japanese governmenthas profited, directly and enormously, from the anomalies inthe Japanese securities markets created by the securitiesfirms and banks. For example: NTT stock is now trading atless than one-third its offering price, the price set by theministry. The ministry was able to persuade investors to buystock at what now looks like an excessive price by takingadvantage of the oligopoly of the Japanese securities outfitsand their research institutions. Telecommunications was hypedas the industry of the future, and NTT's perceived value wasinflated. Securities firms profited too, because -- thanks toMinistry of Finance regulations -- Japanese brokerage firmsoperate on very hefty fixed commissions, which rise as theoffering price rises. The government gets its money, thebroker pockets his commission and the poor, ill-informedinvestors have lost twothirds of their investment -- $80billion dollars.   In other markets this might be known as insider trading,and market manipulation. The ministry asks the oligopolisticsecurities outfits to preserve the value of NTT stock duringthe initial offering, which means they kept recommending itto their clients. The firms cooperated because the&quot;protection&quot; of the ministry is very valuable. Last year, theJapanese securities houses alone made eight times more profitin Tokyo than all securities companies, U.S. and foreign,earned in New York, although the two markets are about thesame size.   But Japanese brokerage houses and the Japanese governmentare not alone in profiting from the power of the Ministry ofFinance. So does the U.S. government. The U.S. has beenrunning a federal government deficit for a long time, and itis the Japanese who have been financing it. About one-thirdof U.S. government securities are owned by Japaneseinvestors.   Many years ago, Japanese banks and insurance companiesnoticed that U.S. government paper is a rotten buy. As thedollar weakened in the mid-1980s, U.S. government paperplummeted in value. Most institutions have had to write offbillions of dollars of losses on these securities, and thereare billions of additional losses yet to be written off. Somefirms have probably been bankrupted; most have long wanted tobail out. But the ministry was always there to twist theirarm.   By May 1988, Japanese investors had had enough losses onU.S. government securities; they no longer wanted to buy.World markets sensed the Japanese apprehension, and fearedthat the bond market would collapse, triggering a world-widefinancial panic.   The Ministry of Finance whispered to the Japaneseinstitutions, &quot;How many are you going to buy? How many? Howmany?&quot; Implying that what they were going to buy was notenough. They bought more -- and have unhappily continued tobuy at every subsequent auction. What's more, the ministryalso pushed these companies not to sell the securities theyalready owned. And the companies had no choice but tocooperate -- remember, the ministry is also the InternalRevenue Service. If financial firms do not comply with itssuggestions, the ministry can come in and ransack everysingle page of their books.   Modernizing the Ministry of Finance is an extraordinarilycomplex problem that will take years to solve. A first stepwould be to break the ministry into several offices accordingto function. Industry development should be taken away fromthe central government and if done at all, go to localauthorities. Japan no longer needs to develop industriescentrally, and the central government's role should beconfined to the development and enforcement of rules andstandards. The remaining functions of the ministry-taxation,budget planning, financial market regulation and so on --should each have their own unique office. This would be a bigstep toward the elimination of conflicts of interest and therigged markets that inflated the &quot;bubble economy&quot; of the1980s and led to scandal after scandal.   The Ministry of Finance must change. The Japanese marketsmust be reformed and modernized. But fundamental changesproduce unexpected side effects and much pain. The U.S.government has used the the Ministry of Finance to helpfinance its massive budget deficit and direct its investmentflows. The economies of all the advanced nations have beenparty to the Ministry of Finance's power. They will all beaffected when that power is taken away.   ---   Mr. Ohmae is a partner in the Tokyo office of McKinsey andamp;Co., an international consulting firm.</TEXT></DOC>