<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900815-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>900815-0107.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Judge Gives   Lost Gold   To Salvagers   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   CI MVL LIT AXP</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)INSURANCE (INS)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal judge ruled that a group of treasure hunters cankeep the largest trove in American history -- gold found in aship that sank 133 years ago off South Carolina.   U.S. District Judge Richard Kellam in Norfolk, Va., ruledyesterday that Columbus-America Discovery Group, a privatemarine-exploration company based in Columbus, Ohio, is theowner of a cache of thousands of mint-condition gold coinsand rare gold bars valued at between $450 million and $1billion.</LP><TEXT>   Judge Kellam rejected the arguments of eight insurancecompanies and the state of New York's acting superintendentof insurance that they owned the gold because they had paidout claims arising from the 1857 disaster.   Before the ruling, only nations had been found to havedeep-ocean salvage rights in international waters. Lawyerssaid that the court's decision to grant individuals the samerights could affect future exploration of the deep sea and,ultimately, outer space.   In addition, Judge Kellam's decision is significantbecause he allowed the group to establish ownership of thetreasure using remote video cameras to produce live imagesand robots to retrieve objects. Previously, courts had ruledthat ocean explorers had to physically dive to a site tostake a claim.   &quot;The decision is a major development in the law. Thismakes it clear that individuals are free to explore the deepocean and enjoy the benefits of their discoveries,&quot; saysRichard Robol of the Norfolk law firm Hunton andamp; Williams,which represented Columbus-America.   Douglas A. Jacobsen, a partner with the New York law firmBigham Englar Jones andamp; Houston, which represented theinsurers, said that if the decision is upheld, &quot;it means thatthe game is one of finders keepers. We are opposed to thatidea. Owners' rights still exist. Just because something hasbeen gone for a long time doesn't mean the ownership title islost.&quot;   The judge also dismissed claims filed by rival treasurehunters Harry John and Jack Grimm, as well as the trustees ofColumbia University, who alleged that the Columbus-Americagroup misappropriated their research about the ship'slocation.   The bitter legal battle was spawned by the discovery ofgold in 1989 in the wreck of the S.S. Central America, aluxury steamship that sank in 8,000 feet of water, 160 milesoff the coast of South Carolina.   Bearing three tons of California gold and 476 passengers,many of them prospectors returning from months in the goldmines, the S.S. Central America steamed into a hurricane onits way to New York. Passengers and crew spent 30 desperatehours bailing water. Women and children escaped to a passingvessel; the men stayed on.   Only 166 passengers survived. Many were dragged to thebottom of the Atlantic, weighed down by heavy gold moneybelts they refused to remove from around their waists.   At the time of the sinking, many banks teetered on theverge of collapse. Officials had stemmed the rising financialpanic with announcements that the Central America's goldshipment was due soon. The sinking touched off a wave of bankfailures and unleashed the &quot;Panic of 1857,&quot; a major economicdownturn.   Searches for the ship turned up nothing, and over theyears the gold became one of the most sought-after treasures.The Columbus-America group's quest began in 1981 and hasalready cost more than $10 million. The money was put up by166 investors, most of them from the Columbus area.   The search was masterminded by Thomas G. Thompson, aresearch scientist with Columbus think tank Batelle MemorialInstitute, who believed that newly available technology usedby the Pentagon to find lost submarines could be applied totreasure hunting, making deep-sea recovery economicallyfeasible for the first time.   Using a remote-controlled, 5,000-pound robot sprouting anarm and video cameras, Mr. Thompson's group searched a1,400-square-mile area. The group was hampered by badweather, mechanical failures and the fact that it initiallyfocused on the wrong site.   But in 1989, Mr. Thompson arrived at the Norfolk portbearing a ton and a half of booty. That find set off a kindof gold rush, as other parties sought a share of thetreasure.   In his decision, Judge Kellam did not dispute the factthat insurance companies may have paid out claims. But hesaid the eight companies had intentionally abandoned theirrights to any recovery when they destroyed records relatingto the sinking of the ship. The insurers comprise two U.S.concerns, Atlantic Mutual Insurance Co. of Murray Hill, N.J.,and Insurance Co. of North America, a unit of Cigna Corp. ofPhiladelphia; and six British companies.   Judge Kellam said the companies had kept no copies ofinsurance policies, invoices for shipments, or other recordsin order to establish a claim for the gold. He said there wasno indication that the companies had attempted to recover theship and that newspaper accounts of the amount of money paidby insurance companies contained too many discrepancies to beconsidered reliable proof.   &quot;They had no hope or idea they could locate the CentralAmerica, and even if they located it, they had no hope theycould recover anything from it,&quot; Judge Kellam wrote.   Mr. Jacobsen, who represented the insurers, said that noone would intentionally give up their rights to a cargo ofgold and that he will recommend that his clients appeal.   Judge Kellam's ruling also dismissed the claims oftreasure hunters Messrs. John and Grimm and ColumbiaUniversity. The judge ruled there was no evidence that Mr.Thompson used their results from a 1984 survey of the oceanfloor done during a search for the Central America and thatthey were therefore not entitled to any share of therecovery. A lawyer for Messrs. John and Grimm said he willrecommend an appeal. A lawyer for Columbia said theuniversity hadn't decided yet whether to appeal.   Mr. Thompson said it will take at least another yearbefore all the gold is brought up from the bottom of theocean. In the meantime, it seems unlikely that the judge'sdecision will put an end to all the confusion. Mr. Thompsonhas been sued by California treasure hunter Dennis A.Standefer, who alleged he provided research that led to thegold's recovery and is seeking a share of Mr. Thompson'sreward. The case was recently dismissed, but Mr. Standefer isappealing. Mr. Thompson's wife is also claiming a share ofthe gold in their pending divorce proceedings.   ---   STATE JUDGES focus on resolving asbestos litigation.   Although recent actions by federal judges have putasbestos personal-injury litigation in the news, most of thecases are before state courts. Working in conjunction withsome of the federal judges, three state judges from New York,Baltimore and Philadelphia have begun planning a conferencefor this fall at which about a dozen judges from across thecountry will meet.   &quot;Nothing is more important to the state judiciary than theresolution of this asbestos problem,&quot; said Judge Marshall A.Levin, a Maryland state circuit court judge in Baltimore. Thehuge backlog of asbestos personal-injury cases has thepotential &quot;to wreck the court system,&quot; he added.   Many judges have become frustrated with the growingbacklog of asbestos cases and fear that some defendants mayrun out of funds before all the claims are paid. Asbestos,once used in shipbuilding and construction, causes cancer andrespiratory ailments.   Of the estimated 100,000 asbestos personal-injury casesnow pending in U.S. courts, about two-thirds are before statejudges. Although some state judges may be reluctant to giveup their control of such cases, Judge Levin said he believesmost welcome the possibility of a national settlement thatwould include the state cases. The federal judges pursuing anational resolution of the cases have indicated that theyexpect state judges to come on board.   &quot;It will lighten our burden considerably,&quot; clearing theway for state courts to handle more criminal cases as well asother civil litigation, said Judge Levin. Judge Levin has5,300 asbestos cases pending.   The other two state judges working closely with JudgeLevin are Justice Helen Freedman of Manhattan and JudgeSandra Mazer Moss of Philadelphia.   Justice Freedman said she expects the state judges tofocus on alternative ways to encourage the parties to settlethe suits and avoid going to trial. She said aclaims-resolution system needs to be set up to ensure thatthe more seriously ill claimants are paid first and to speedup the compensation process.   Separately, the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appealsyesterday upheld a freeze on payments by the Manvilleasbestos personal-injury trust. The decision strengthens theauthority of U.S. Judge Jack B. Weinstein, who has assertedcontrol over the trust.   Some asbestos victims' attorneys had requested that thefreeze on settlement and judgment payments be lifted, arguingthat Judge Weinstein had overstepped his jurisdiction.   The trust, formed in the bankruptcy-court reorganizationof Manville Corp., told the appeals court it supported thefreeze while it works out a way to solve its huge cashshortage.   The freeze ends Sept. 6, the deadline Judge Weinstein setfor the trust to come up with new financing.   ---   SETTLEMENT FUND to be used for public interest lawfellowships.   U.S. District Judge Ann Claire Williams of Chicago ruledthat a $6 million surplus from the settlement of thefolding-carton industry antitrust litigation should be usedto pay graduating law students and judicial clerks to providelegal services to the poor.   Alexander Domanskis, a partner with the Chicago law firmRoss andamp; Hardies, says this may be the first time a settlementfund will be used to finance a nationwide public interestprogram. Mr. Domanskis is a member of a four-lawyeradministration committee appointed by the judge to draft anoutline for the fellowship program.   The federal court's order is the latest in protractedlegal maneuvering over the surplus from an 11-year-old $200million settlement. The folding-carton case was aprice-fixing civil suit filed in 1976 by some 2,700 companiesagainst 24 paper and carton manufacturers.   The judge's order is subject to review by a federalappeals court in Chicago, which last year rejected acourt-ordered proposal for the surplus to go to twoChicago-area law schools to study antitrust litigation.   The appeals court knocked down the proposal because itsaid the plan wasn't necessary or national in scope.   ---   EFFORT TO FORCE Dennis Levine to testify in inside-tradingcase is rejected.   A federal magistrate in Manhattan ruled that Mr. Levinedidn't waive his constitutional right not to incriminatehimself when he wrote a Fortune magazine article in May abouthis insider trading.   Litton Industries Inc. is seeking to force Mr. Levine totestify in its civil suit against him and against LehmanBros. Kuhn Loeb Inc., Litton's former investment adviser andMr. Levine's former employer. The suit, filed in 1986, claimsthat Litton ended up paying too much for its takeover of ItekCorp. because Mr. Levine leaked news of the transaction totraders. Lehman Bros. is now part of American Express Co.'sShearson Lehman Brothers Inc. unit.   Litton argued that Mr. Levine should be ordered to testifybecause the details in his article indicate that Mr. Levinehas no reasonable fear of further prosecution. Mr. Levineclaimed the information in the article was previouslydisclosed in documents and proceedings related to his guiltyplea in 1986.   U.S. Magistrate Nina Gershon, however, found that Mr.Levine's statements in the article don't waive hisconstitutional rights.   She also ruled that while further prosecution of Mr.Levine appears unlikely, it remains a possibility.   ---   Wade Lambert and Arthur S. Hayes contributed to thiscolumn.</TEXT></DOC>