<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910412-0090</DOCNO><DOCID>910412-0090.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Gorbachev Is Preparing to Take a Giant Step to Japan   ---   Disputes Over Islands Tops Agenda   For First Visit by a Soviet Leader   ----   By Peter Gumbel and Urban C. Lehner   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><RE>JAPAN (JA)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   TOKYO -- When President Mikhail Gorbachev next weekbecomes the first Soviet leader to visit Japan, he will carrywith him a list of tens of thousands of Japanese prisoners ofwar who died in Siberian labor camps in the late 1940s andearly 1950s.   For decades, the Soviet leadership denied it had suchrecords. By handing them over to his hosts and making aformal apology, Mr. Gorbachev will be making a gesture thatSoviet officials hope will reflect the spirit of the entirevisit.</LP><TEXT>   But Japanese aren't displaying euphoria at the prospect ofthis example of glasnost. Rokuro Saito, who was held captivein Siberia for four years until 1949 and now heads anassociation of former Japanese POWs, says he looks forward toan era of better relations with the Soviets. But, he adds,&quot;President Gorbachev's just visiting here and bringing thelist will not be the end of things.&quot;   Mr. Saito's mixed feelings sum up the troubled state ofSoviet-Japanese relations, and the difficulties the twocountries face in trying to improve them. Mr. Gorbachev'sfour-day visit and talks with Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifuare likely to be important steps in bringing about arapprochement between Moscow and Tokyo, with potentiallyfar-reaching implications for the U.S. and Asia.   But the visit itself may be longer on atmospherics thansubstance, as was Mr. Gorbachev's first visit to Bonn threeyears ago. A solution to the critical territorial disputethat divides the two countries and a massive increase ineconomic interchanges are only likely to come later, afterfurther high-level visits.   For the Soviet Union, Japan is the elusive key to itsstrategy of becoming a major player in the Pacific. Warmerrelations, Moscow hopes, will not only increase its clout inthe region, but also help to shore up the collapsing Sovieteconomy.   For Japan, smoother ties with the nuclear Goliath nextdoor could boost its self-confidence as it struggles todefine its role in the world. Better Soviet-Japanese tiesmay, for example, improve the prospects of reunifying Northand South Korea, and in the long run even lead to an easingof military tensions and a reduction of arms levels in theregion.   Such a detente would be important for the U.S., providinga new focus to its relationship with the Soviet Union. Muchof the attention in U.S.-Soviet ties has been centered onEurope. Now that the Cold War has wound down there, Asiacould become a much more important arena for cooperation.   Indeed, the U.S. seems to be very much on the minds ofTokyo and Moscow as Mr. Gorbachev's visit approaches.Officials in Moscow insist Washington has no reason to bealarmed by Soviet overtures to Japan. The days when theSoviets sought to play Tokyo off against Washington are longgone, they say. Japanese officials, too, are adamant thatthey won't jeopardize relations with their most importanttrading partner for the sake of better ties with Moscow.   Mr. Gorbachev will visit Kyoto and Nagasaki, as well asTokyo, and is expected to sign more than a dozen agreementson cooperation. They range from one that would provideJapanese management training for Soviet executives to anaccord on the joint archeological exploration of theU.S.S.R.'s Altai Mountains.   But the two sides are still divided by broad cultural andeconomic differences and a bitter territorial dispute.Expectations are running high, perhaps too high, on bothsides. The Soviets are already talking about the visit as a&quot;watershed.&quot; Japan, meanwhile, is rife with rumors that theSoviet leader will offer a bold, new solution to the dispute,which concerns ownership of four volcanic islands off thenorthern tip of Hokkaido. If he doesn't, his visit may be anembarrassing flop.   The dispute over the islands, known as the South Kurilesin the Soviet Union and the Northern Territories by Japan,has been a severe strain on relations ever since the Red Armyoccupied them in 1945 and evicted the Japanese residents.   For Japan, which demands their return, the islands haveattained an enormous significance that belies their smallsize and dubious strategic value. A foreign ministry officialin Tokyo says they are the symbol of the wrong Japan feels itwas done when the Soviet Union declared war against Japan inthe final days of World War II, hauled Japanese prisoners offto Siberia and seized the islands.   While Japan recognizes that it acted wrongly againstChina, Korea and other nations during World War II, itdoesn't feel it wronged the Soviet Union. Quite the opposite,the official says.   There is some recognition but little sympathy in theSoviet Union for such sentiments. Nonetheless, officials dorealize their central importance to the future ofSoviet-Japanese relations. Apart from anything else, theislands dispute is holding up the signing of a World War IIpeace treaty between the two nations that would signal a fullnormalization of relations.   Mr. Gorbachev, Soviet officials say, is determined to showhis good will. But he faces strong domestic opposition toceding any territory, particularly from the military andhard-liners who now are prominent in the Kremlin. Many ofthem are still fuming at the way Mr. Gorbachev allowedEastern Europe to break away from the Soviet grasp. But evenmany Soviet reformers have doubts about the wisdom ofreturning the islands.   One possible solution rumored in Moscow and Tokyo wouldinvolve reviving an agreement dating back to 1956, when thetwo sides established diplomatic relations. At that time, theSoviets offered to hand back two of the islands once a peacetreaty was signed, but rescinded the offer five years laterwhen Tokyo renewed its security treaty with the U.S.   But Japanese officials are already signaling that areaffirmation of the 1956 arrangement won't be enough. Ifthat was all Mr. Gorbachev came with, &quot;I would say `Noprogress from the very start.' That's the starting line,&quot;says a senior Foreign Ministry official in Tokyo.   Mr. Gorbachev recently joked to a visiting Japanesepolitician that the territorial issue, &quot;is so burning youcan't tackle it with bare hands.&quot;   It is possible that the Soviet president will seek todefuse tension over the issue, rather than tackle it head on.Mr. Gorbachev received a rapturous welcome on a visit to Bonnmore than a year before he gave Chancellor Helmut Kohl thegreen light for German reunification. During that visit, hesigned a joint declaration of general principles that seemedfairly meaningless at the time. But he used that document athome later to justify letting go of East Germany, arguingthat relations between Moscow and Bonn had reached a newlevel of trust and friendship.   A similarly broad joint political declaration is on theagenda for Mr. Gorbachev's Tokyo trip. And some officialshint that, even if he doesn't come with a new deal on theislands, he may at least offer some other interestinginitiatives. They could include an offer to demilitarize theislands or other parts of the Soviet Far East. And Mr.Gorbachev seems likely to press for the creation of activeeconomic cooperation in the Pacific, using Soviet resourcesand Japanese know-how, and involving neighboring nations suchas China and the Koreas.   &quot;I would like to see accelerated efforts to haveconfidence-building measures, transparency and a reduction of{armed} forces in the region,&quot; says Andrei Kozyrev, ForeignMinister of the Russian Federation, who will accompany Mr.Gorbachev to Tokyo. In an interview, Mr. Kozyrev endorsed theestablishment of a new forum for economic cooperation thatincluded the Soviets.   The Soviets may be in for some surprises on the questionof economic cooperation, however. Japanese businessexecutives have been extremely cautious about investing inthe Soviet Union, partly for political reasons connected withthe islands dispute, and partly because of economic chaos inthe U.S.S.R. Moscow has long sought to persuade Japan to helpexploit the natural resources of Siberia, which it arguesthat Japan could well use. But Japanese companies aren'tconvinced they can reap riches there until the Soviets getserious about economic reform.   Such difficulties have relegated the Soviet Union to avery marginal position in Japanese trade. Although the volumeof business between the two nations is about $6 billionannually, substantial by Soviet standards, it amounts to justover 1% of Japan's foreign trade. Moreover, because of ahard-currency crunch, the Soviet Union currently owesJapanese companies more than $500 million in unpaid bills,according to Japanese estimates.   Whatever the outcome of Mr. Gorbachev's visit, it willundoubtedly end one dark chapter of history. Unlike themassacre of Polish officers at Katyn, or the disappearance ofRaoul Wallenberg, most Russians never knew or even had a hintthat 600,000 Japanese prisoners were kept in Stalin'sSiberian gulags long after the war ended. Prior to theirrepatriation, one in 10 of them died, most during the firstfreezing winter, according to Alexei Kirichenko, a Sovietscholar on Japan and one of the few people allowed to studythe Moscow archives.   Mr. Kirichenko says that during the Tokyo trip, Mr.Gorbachev is likely to ease arrangements for families of thedeceased to visit the graves, many of which are in areas thatare off-limits to foreigners.</TEXT></DOC>