<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910111-0074</DOCNO><DOCID>910111-0074.</DOCID><HL>   Drucker on Management:   Permanent Cost Cutting   ----   By Peter Drucker</HL><DATE>01/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><LP>   Scores of large organizations -- businesses of all kindsbut also government agencies, hospitals and universities --have sharply cut staffs these past few years. But few haverealized the expected cost savings. In some cases costs haveeven gone up. In many more performance has suffered. Andthere are growing employee complaints about stress and workloads.   Cutting staffs to cut costs is putting the cart before thehorse. The only way to bring costs down is to restructure thework. This will then result in reducing the number of peopleneeded to do the job, and far more drastically than even themost radical staff cutbacks could possibly do. Indeed, a costcrunch should always be used as an opportunity to re-thinkand to re-design operations.</LP><TEXT>   To start cost-cutting managements usually ask: &quot;How can wemake this operation more efficient&quot;? It is the wrongquestion. The question should be: &quot;Would the roof cave in ifwe stopped doing this work altogether?&quot; And if the answer is&quot;probably not,&quot; one eliminates the operation. This isunpopular, to be sure. Some one is bound to argue: &quot;We neededthis procedure only 18 months ago and may need it again 18months hence.&quot; But eliminating an entire operation is by farthe most effective way to cut costs, and the only one likelyto produce by itself permanent cost savings. It is by nomeans accident that the only places where cost-cutting doneduring the past few years has produced real savings are wherean entire operation was eliminated -- in the commercial bank,for instance, that closed down an unprofitablemerchant-banking subsidiary.   And it is always amazing how many of the things we do willnever be missed. One example -- a fairly typical one -- isthe old manual order-entry system used until the task wascomputerized five years ago, but still maintained &quot;just incase.&quot; Another is the system of duplicate patient files thatmany hospitals maintain, one for billing, one forpatient-care, each run on a different computer with adifferent program. Altogether, up to one-third of allclerical and control operations are likely to be foundunneeded, because they either never served a purpose orbecause they have outlived it. And nothing is less productivethan to make more efficient what should not be done at all.   The next question in respect to the two-thirds ofoperations that will be found to serve a need is: &quot;Whatcontribution to the business should each make? What purposedoes it serve?&quot; Managements usually think the answer to beobvious. But more often than not, no one has an answer; orthe answer is patently wrong; or, worst of all, there is morethan one.   &quot;Why do we check all our sales peoples' expense accounts?&quot;&quot;To keep them honest, of course.&quot; But that is hardly abusiness objective. The right answer is: &quot;To keep salesexpenses under control.&quot; And this is best done -- and at afraction of the cost -- by determining expense standardsbased, for instance, on a sales person's need to travel andon the number of nights spent away from home. All that isneeded to arrive at these standards is for a small number ofexperienced sales people to keep a record of their actualexpenses twice a year for one week.   The previous system in the company -- the system thatthought its purpose was morality -- kept 11 clerks busy theyear round. The new system employs not even one full-timeperson. And it further enabled the company -- a largenational wholesaler of builders' supplies -- to cut its salesforce to 158 people from 167, despite a steady growth insales volume. Sales people have more time to sell, when theyno longer misuse selling time filling out lengthy &quot;swindlesheets.&quot;   Just as common as the wrong answer to the question of whatpurpose a given operation serves, are two or more answers.But a well-designed and cost-effective operation serves onepurpose only. To combine two or more in one operation meansinefficiencies and sky-high costs.   &quot;We have two objectives in supplying our 2800 nationaldistributors,&quot; said the builders' supply people in answer tothe question of what their big logistics operationcontributed. &quot;We make sure that none of our distributors isever out of stock. And we make sure that we don't pile upexcess inventory.&quot; What was needed were two separateoperations.   One would make sure that the distributors are alwaysstocked adequately with the fast-moving standard items thattogether account for about half of the firm's dollar sales.This is being done by stocking the distributors with 15% to20% more of these items than they will sell during the nextthree weeks. There is no central inventory of these items anymore, and no inventory control. The stock level for everydistributor is determined by systematic spot checks, takenevery other week, of the actual retail sale of a 3% sample ofdistributors -- that is of 84 distributors throughout thecountry. This requires only seven or eight sales trainees,and has been found, incidentally, to be a most effectivetraining tool.   A second operation then handles the 20% of &quot;speciality&quot;products -- mostly big-ticket items -- that together accountfor the other half of the firm's dollar sales (and for asubstantially larger part of its profits). These are stockedin one central warehouse located at the hub of an air freightcompany, and shipped free of charge by overnight air deliveryanyplace in the country within six hours of receipt of theorder.   The old system cost almost 1% of the company's sales (andthat in a business where a 6% return on sales is consideredoutstanding]). The new systems together cost less thanone-third as much. And where the old system kept 53 peoplebusy the two new systems together employ 20. Yet the newsystems give both, better service and better inventorycontrol.   The question of how to organize the restructuredorganization for maximum performance and minimum cost comesonly at the very end. More computers to handle more datafaster is rarely the right answer. To be sure, the endproduct will be in many cases expressed by a computerprogram. But the task is to define what information is neededrather than how to manipulate it.   This may mean -- as it did in one of my earlier examples-- switching from inside to outside data, in order to findout the actual retail sales of one's customers to theultimate consumers. It may mean -- especially in operationsaimed at controlling a process -- shifting from counting tostatistics and sampling. Not only is sampling much cheaperthan counting, it is far more reliable. Statistical analysisalone can provide the crucial information on which effectivecontrol rests: the difference between fluctuations within thepermissible range of normal, and the &quot;exception,&quot; that is thegenuine malfunction, which calls for immediate remedy.   Cutting costs is only the beginning. If all that is beingdone is to cut costs without putting in adequate costprevention, a recurrence of excess costs a few short yearshence, can be guaranteed. For costs never drift down. Costprevention requires steady work on productivity improvementof every operation, year in and year out -- with a 3% annualimprovement a minimum goal. It requires that every operationand every activity be put, every third year or so, to thequestion: &quot;Do we really need to do this or should it beabandoned?&quot; It requires that new operations and activities --and especially new staff operations -- be entered only if anold operation is abandoned or at least pruned back.   Each operation and activity should also be questioned --again every three yearsas to the purpose it serves and thecontribution it makes to the business. And each, finally,should be subjected to the question: What is the simplest wayto achieve this purpose?   By now most of us have learned the hard way that dietingoff fat is a good deal more difficult than not putting it onin the first place. Excess costs are excess fat. Cuttingcosts rarely gets much support from the work force itself; itmeans, after all, laying off people. Without active workforceparticipation, however, none of the measures needed foreffective cost control are easy to implement. Indeed onereason why so many of the cost-cutting efforts of past yearshave failed to cut costs is that they were imposed from aboveon a work force that saw in them a threat to their own jobsand incomes. Cost prevention, however, can count on active,and indeed, enthusiastic work-force support. Employees knowwhere the fat is. They also know that low, controlled costsmean better and more secure jobs.   A great deal more cost-cutting is still needed, especiallyin big organizations (and by no means only in American ones-- the big Japanese companies, e.g. the big banks, are farmore over-staffed still). But cost-cutting should always beused as the first step towards building permanent costprevention into the organization.   ---   Mr. Drucker is a professor of social sciences at theClaremont Graduate School in California.</TEXT></DOC>