<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910517-0087</DOCNO><DOCID>910517-0087.</DOCID><HL>   Hardy Weed:   EC's Farm Subsidies   That Imperil Trade   Have Deep Roots   ---   French Wheat Growers See   Policy the U.S. Condemns   In a Very Different Light   ---   A World Divided Into Blocs   ----   By Philip Revzin   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)</RE><LP>   BEAUMONT-SUR-SARTHE, France -- Like his father andgrandfather before him, Gerard Leroux grows wheat, rape, peasand hemp on an immaculately kept 148-acre farm here, 150miles southwest of Paris. Though usually quiet, he getsincensed when talking of proposals to cut grain subsidies.Even the 30% cut offered last December by the EuropeanCommunity and rejected by the U.S. as too small would &quot;put meout of business,&quot; he says.   Francis Capelle, also like his father and grandfatherbefore him, tills 740 acres -- a large farm by Europeanstandards. A farm such as this could survive the subsidy cut,Mr. Capelle says. But he gets incensed about fresh ECproposals -- welcomed by the U.S. -- to end the EC'sguarantee of a set price no matter how much farmers produce.That, he says, &quot;would be the end of European agriculturealtogether.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Big or small, European farmers stoutly support the EC's30-year-old Common Agricultural Policy. That costly, complexprogram -- it's sometimes called the Crazy AgriculturalPolicy -- has produced butter mountains and wine lakes. Butit also has fed postwar Europe and kept 10 million Europeanfarmers working their land.   Now the CAP is under severe challenge. During negotiationsunder the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the U.S.proposed that all 101 GATT countries greatly reducetrade-distorting farm subsidies over 10 years. The EC,prodded by farmers like Messrs. Capelle and Leroux, rejectsthis as &quot;unrealistic.&quot; It says the plan, which would forcethe EC to dismantle the CAP and idle much of its farmland,goes too far too fast.   European politicians know the CAP can't remain unchanged.It eats up nearly two-thirds of the EC's budget and istechnically bankrupt. It faces pressure also from EasternEurope, which wants to sell produce to Western Europe. Butthe EC is so intimidated by farmers' political clout that itbarely managed to get internal agreement last December on the30% proposal, and the GATT countries rejected the plan almostunanimously.   This week's appointment of Edith Cresson as France's primeminister may stiffen the EC position. As agriculture ministerand trade minister in past French governments, she has firmlydefended farmers and the CAP and strongly criticized U.S. andJapanese trade policies.   The trade talks are stalled. The U.S. and many othercountries have made it clear that without quick, clear reformof EC agricultural policies, the rest of the so-calledUruguay round of negotiations, covering everything fromsoftware to soft cheese, could collapse.   The stakes are enormous. GATT, established in 1947 toforestall any reversion to crippling 1930s-style tariffs, hasworked well. In five negotiating rounds, tariffs on thousandsof manufactured goods have been reduced or eliminated,sparking a boom in world trade. GATT committees have resolvedhundreds of complicated disputes that could have set offtrade wars.   Now, many businessmen see GATT continuing to play acrucial role in a world dividing into regional trading blocs,such as the EC, a proposed U.S.-Canada-Mexico combination anda Japanese-led group in Asia. &quot;Large multinational agreementsare preferable to bilateral or regional agreements,&quot; saysAllen F. Jacobson, the chief executive of Minnesota Mining andamp;Manufacturing Co. &quot;In a world where trade flows between somany countries, rules governing world trade are moreefficient and effective in large areas.&quot;   Government officials say a successful new agreement wouldspread the benefits of freer trade in the Third World andEastern Europe, the sort of economies often hardest hit whenbig traders get into a fight. &quot;It would be especially tragic,after all these years of preaching the benefits of rules,free trade and capitalism to Eastern Europe, that just asthey emerge to join us we're unable to agree,&quot; says AlainFrank, GATT's director of external relations.   Since 1986, the Uruguay round has set ambitious targets:reduction of trade barriers in such nebulous areas asservices and intellectual property as well as in the toughestarea of all, agriculture.   Two key decisions will determine the future of the Uruguayround. Either house of Congress has until June 1 to denyPresident Bush a two-year extension of his &quot;fast-track&quot;negotiating authority, under which Congress could vote downbut not amend any GATT agreement. The debate has becomeenmeshed in another U.S. dispute, over fast-track authorityto negotiate a free-trade pact with Mexico, but recentcommittee votes suggest that the fast-track authority will berenewed.   The second decision is up to the EC, which, officials say,will wait until it sees what Congress does. But then the ECmust decide about reform of the CAP. So far, the EC's 12members have done little to prepare the political ground forchange.   Europe's farmers, accustomed to old ways and comfortableincomes, are determined to delay the inevitable. Theycomplain that the U.S. is asking for immediate dismantling ofa salvageable system rather than gradual reform and isignoring European geography, history and economics in orderto impose on it a flawed American system.   On both sides of the Atlantic, temperatures are rising. Anew EC report says the U.S. &quot;is itself not free of the typeof trade and investment barriers it condemns,&quot; while Sen.Albert Gore calls EC farm policies &quot;a visible, often-flagrantsource of distortion in the marketplace.&quot; The TennesseeDemocrat says the 30% proposal isn't anything the EC didn'talready plan to do just to cut its own costs. (Because ituses a 1986 price formula, it really involves a cut of onlyabout 15%.)   Despite the finger-pointing and the risk of irreparabledamage to the world's trading system, hope still glimmers.New proposals from the EC farm commissioner, Ray MacSharry,would replace some price supports with direct payments notrelated to how much farmers produce, would take some land outof production and would encourage farmers to retire early.Farmers' incomes would be maintained without their growingexcess crops, and the EC hopes to save money eventually.   But this plan, slated to be formally unveiled next month,still hasn't been accepted by EC governments. Britain,France, the Netherlands and Germany all opposed early draftsof the proposal for different reasons. And although itencouraged GATT officials enough to restart the stalledtalks, it won't be swallowed easily by farmers.   &quot;Now we get a fixed, agreed price for basically all we canproduce,&quot; Mr. Capelle says. &quot;With direct payments, we'll begetting money from taxpayers, so taxes would need to triple.&quot;Nor would consumers save much, he argues, since the cost ofwheat is a small fraction of the price of bread. &quot;We'll fightthe MacSharry plan to the end,&quot; Mr. Capelle says.   Some farmers are already fighting, and not just withwords. A few weeks ago in south-central France, dairy farmersangered by proposed new milk quotas put the local agriculturedirector's desk on a Paris-bound train and addressed it tothe Minister of Agriculture. Farmers in southwest Francerecently dumped four tons of Hungarian foie gras on the lawnof a Socialist member of parliament to protest cheap importsfrom Eastern Europe.   Although research by the Organization for EconomicCooperation and Development shows that all governmentssubsidize their farmers -- the OECD-wide total was astaggering $300 billion last year -- nobody wants to disarmfirst. Meanwhile, an OECD official says, &quot;Farmers areproducing food no one wants at prices consumers can'tafford.&quot; After several years of declines, EC stocks ofsurplus beef, milk and butter are rising again.   The OECD says that in addition to direct subsidies fromthe EC and member governments of nearly $50 billion lastyear, European consumers paid $85 billion more for food thanthey otherwise would have. It figures U.S. farmers received$47 billion in direct payments, but U.S. consumers paid only$28 billion more because of subsidies. Adds the OECDofficial: &quot;The ongoing debate is how to replace thesesubsidies while still meeting legitimate cultural andenvironmental goals.&quot;   Europe's big farm federations say they have a way: Theywould accept subsidy cuts if world crop prices could beraised through international agreements to maintain farmers'incomes. But such global price fixing is opposed by the U.S.,the Third World and the GATT secretariat.   A look at European farming shows the obstacles to anyUruguay round settlement. Although European farmers havegrown fewer and their farms larger, the changes lag wellbehind those in the U.S. In France, 6% of the work forcetills the land, triple the U.S. percentage.   European farmers have latched onto environmentalism,arguing that responsible use of chemicals on working farms isthe surest guarantee of a green future; throwing them out ofwork and into already-crowded cities wouldn't help anybody,they say. In France and Germany, where the political left andright are evenly split, the farmers' swing vote carriesdisproportionate weight.   As European farms grow bigger and more efficient, problemswill mount for the U.S. and the global trading system. Only20% of Europe's farmers get 80% of the EC subsidies. The morethey produce, the more they cost European taxpayers andconsumers, and the more food they send onto glutted markets.   But with their livelihoods at stake, say farmers such asMr. Capelle and Mr. Leroux, no one should be surprised thatthey defend their turf vigorously.   Mr. Capelle's main weapon is technology. Tromping throughwheat at his farm 100 miles northeast of Paris, he uprootssome stalks, checks a couple of shoots through a magnifyingglass and then cuts them open. &quot;No disease,&quot; he says with apleased grunt. &quot;No insects,&quot; he says with another. &quot;Fourstalks in this bunch,&quot; he says, now really pleased.   Through better fertilizer, seed and insecticide, he hopesto raise production to 15 tons of wheat per hectare (2.471acres) from the current 10 and cut his cost to 700 francs($119.35) a ton from 1,000 francs. He claims to grow far morewheat per hectare than farms he has seen in Kansas.   But even at 700 francs a ton, his cost of production wouldbe nearly double the world price for wheat. And he figures ECsubsidies are likely to decline eventually. Then, he says, hewould have to produce even more -- adding to surpluses.   Back in his office, he produces computer charts and graphsshowing how French wheat farmers are cutting costs and howthe weak U.S. dollar skews international trade. His argumentsagainst the U.S. proposals are detailed and polished.&quot;Gradual reform, sure,&quot; he says. &quot;But the Americans are beingcowboys, brutally throwing their plan on the table, blowingthe smoke from their six-guns and asking us to take it orleave it.&quot;   Still, says Mr. Capelle, the trend in France, as in theU.S., is inexorably toward bigger, less labor-intensivefarms. &quot;Smaller farmers have only two options: To turn theirfarms into tourist resorts or to become custodians of theland and the historic buildings.&quot;   Gerard Leroux sees things differently, but just asobstinately. He works his small farm mostly by himself, withoccasional help from a son and constant advice from his83-year-old father. To make ends meet, his wife teachesschool. The graceful stone and wood farmhouse dates back 300years, the silo to Napoleon's era.   &quot;Letting me continue to work on this farm will cost muchless than welfare,&quot; Mr. Leroux argues, stepping out into hiswheat field. Even a 30% cut in subsidies &quot;means a profit ofzero. We'll all go broke.&quot;   His father, clad in the farmer's traditional blue smockand black beret, explains how in his day the farm housed 25cows and grew mostly hemp, which was soaked in water and thenbaked before being made into rope. His son, who is growinghemp again for extra income, concludes: &quot;Maybe we do want tokeep the old-fashioned ways, but you won't solve the world'sproblems by putting us out of business. We're not going tolet it happen. We're ready to pound on the table.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>