<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910617-0050</DOCNO><DOCID>910617-0050.</DOCID><HL>   Corporate Targets:   As Cold War Fades,   Some Nations' Spies   Seek Industrial Secrets   ---   They May Intercept Messages,   Plant Moles to Get Data   Useful to Own Companies   ---   Caterpillar Resorts to Codes   ----   By William M. Carley   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CAT GE</CO><MS>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGLOMERATES (CGL)HEAVY MACHINERY, FARM EQUIPMENT (MAC)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CONNECTICUT (CT)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)ILLINOIS (IL)ISRAEL (ISR)JAPAN (JA)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)OHIO (OH)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TURKEY (TU)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   In Houston's posh River Oaks section, a guard at anexecutive's home recently noticed two men grabbing bags oftrash and throwing them into a van. As the van roared off,the guard scribbled down the license number, which was tracedto the French consulate in Houston. Bernard Guillet, Frenchconsul general, now says he and an assistant were onlypicking up bags of grass cuttings to fill a hole dug for aconsulate swimming pool that couldn't be completed because ofa zoning dispute.   But going through trash is routine for intelligenceoperatives. Federal Bureau of Investigation agents suspectedthat French intelligence was after documents discarded bycorporate executives living nearby -- documents possiblycontaining information useful to French companies.</LP><TEXT>   Going through garbage isn't illegal, and the FBI says onlythat it found no violation of U.S. law. Mr. Guillet callssuspicions of espionage &quot;ridiculous.&quot; Nevertheless, theepisode illustrates why some U.S. companies increasinglysuspect that foreign intelligence agencies, working fornations traditionally friendly as well as those oftenunfriendly, are seeking to scoop up sensitive, potentiallyvaluable information.   &quot;The U.S. is ahead in many technologies,&quot; making it atempting target, says Stansfield Turner, director of theCentral Intelligence Agency under President Carter. Theretired admiral says that while at the CIA, he saw &quot;a numberof instances&quot; of foreign intelligence agencies getting datafrom U.S. companies, &quot;and I think that's increasing as it'srapidly becoming one big international market out there.&quot;   U.S. corporations have long battled foreign companiestrying to get their trade secrets, of course. InternationalBusiness Machines Corp., for example, has been a target ofJapanese computer makers trying to steal technical data. Butcompared with companies, government intelligence agencieshave far greater resources.   According to current and former U.S. officials, severalforeign intelligence services are intercepting overseascommunications of U.S. companies, including telexes,facsimile messages and phone calls, either by capturingsatellite signals or picking up transmissions passing throughgovernment-owned telephone exchanges.   Intelligence services also recruit nationals working forU.S. subsidiaries abroad to act, in effect, as spies. Lastyear, a French magazine reported that French employees of IBMand Texas Instruments Inc. handed over company documents toFrench intelligence agents, who in turn passed them on to aFrench computer maker.   And some foreign intelligence agencies do &quot;bag jobs,&quot;searching briefcases and luggage that executives leave inhotels. A former FBI agent based in Asia says intelligenceagents for China often go through briefcases in Hong Konghotels, photographing anything that looks interesting.   It's nearly impossible to measure how much data U.S.companies are losing to foreign intelligence services. &quot;Theymay be getting your most confidential marketing strategies byintercepting satellite transmissions, and there's almost noway you can find out,&quot; says Noel Matchett, a Silver Spring,Md., consultant formerly with the National Security Agency.NSA is the defense agency that intercepts foreign andprotects U.S. communications.   But many view the problem as serious. Oliver Revell, untilrecently FBI associate deputy director, says some foreignservices &quot;are gearing their whole apparatus to collect ourproprietary information.&quot; Mr. Revell cites a recent item inthe Soviet press, in which a KGB official says the spy agencywill begin collecting &quot;economic&quot; information for Sovietenterprises.   At the behest of the Senate Intelligence Committee, theCIA has been studying just how serious the threat is.Meanwhile, the FBI, says Deputy Assistant Director R. PatrickWatson, is reorganizing its counterintelligence division togo after more than Soviet spies stealing military secrets.The new goal, he says, is to cover, &quot;across the board,&quot;foreign intelligence agencies that might steal corporatetechnology that is unclassified but still critical. Laterthis year, he adds, FBI agents will begin interviewingscientists and engineers at U.S. companies to try todetermine how such technology is lost and how to stop it.   Some U.S. companies aren't waiting. Caterpillar Inc. hasbegun putting nearly all its overseas communications in code.Du Pont Co. has hired James Geer, who as chief of the FBI'scounterintelligence division until 1989 was in charge offoiling spies. Boeing Co.'s security department has warnedexecutives traveling abroad to keep a tight grip on sensitivedocuments, never leaving them in hotels.   The long history of industrial espionage by Frenchintelligence services illustrates what U.S. companies arefacing. Over 10 years ago, a sales team for a U.S. high-techcompany traveled to Paris to offer Air France a device toupgrade its planes' performance. The innovation wasconsidered so secret that there were only five copies of adocument detailing the device, its costs and the sales team'snegotiating strategy.   But at a meeting with the U.S. sales team, an Air Franceofficial asked questions that indicated he already knew whatwas in the document. Asked about it, he admitted he had readit.   The executive heading the U.S. sales team was furious. Butjottings on the copy eventually returned by the airlineofficial indicated that it was the American executive's owncopy that had been reproduced and turned over to Air France.   How? &quot;It was the hotel maid,&quot; says the U.S. company'ssecurity director. While the U.S. executive was out for anevening in Paris, the maid, working for French intelligence,removed, copied and replaced the document. Then, Frenchintelligence gave the copy to government-owned Air France,the airline official said. Air France didn't respond torepeated requests for comment.   Though caught in the act, the French haven't dropped suchtactics. At the headquarters of IBM-France in Paris severalyears ago, a &quot;bug&quot; -- a tiny transmitter -- was found in thepresident's office. At first, IBM security men assumed that acompetitor had planted it.   But then doubts developed about the Frenchman on the IBMsecurity staff who had discovered the bug. &quot;How often do youwalk into the president's office and within 15 minutes find abug? Hardly ever,&quot; says an American familiar with the case.   The Frenchman on the security staff also turned out tohave close connections with the government. &quot;He could getgovernment permits in hours where it normally took thecompany days,&quot; the American says. The Americans eventuallyconcluded that the Frenchman had been either planted on thesecurity staff or recruited there by French intelligence andthat he had &quot;discovered&quot; the bug to establish his credibilitywithin IBM.   Although an IBM spokesman declines to comment, theAmerican familiar with the case says the French securityofficial is no longer with the company. But the officialquickly got another top security job -- at a French aerospacecompany linked to the French government.   Whether or not IBM was right in this case, Frenchintelligence undoubtedly is still collecting information byrecruiting French citizens working for American companies.&quot;Our {French} employees, especially those who have served inthe French military, tell us that they are visited regularlyby French intelligence agents,&quot; says the security director ofan American company. The agents' &quot;pitch is patriotism, andtheir questions are, `What are your business plans, what areyour research projects?'&quot;   This technique raises touchy issues. If a foreign employeeis approached by his own government, another securitydirector of a U.S. company says, &quot;you have a man on the hornsof a dilemma. What is this man going to do?&quot;   Just one recruit can do a lot of damage, as last year'sdisclosure involving Texas Instruments and IBM illustrates.At TI's facility near Nice, headquarters for itssemiconductor and computer operations in Europe, one companyofficial was giving French intelligence unusually sensitivetechnical information. It was passed on to the Frenchgovernment-owned computer firm Cie. des Machines Bull, saidL'Express, the French magazine. Two U.S. government officialsconfirm this.   TI declines to comment. Bull says its management doesn'tknow of any data passed to it. It also has repeatedly deniedany involvement in espionage against IBM and says suchactivity would contravene company policy. The French Embassyin Washington says neither intelligence nor politicalofficials will comment.   Similar information was siphoned out of IBM and passed toBull, a U.S. government official says. According toL'Express, FBI agents confronted French employees of the twocompanies during the employees' visits to the U.S. When somedenied feeding information to French intelligence, the FBIspecified the information transmitted and locations where theemployees would rendezvous with intelligence agents. Facedwith specifics, employees admitted their actions. They werefired. As in the TI case, the French Embassy won't comment.   As spying has begun shifting to economic subjects, thetargeted companies have changed, too. Instead of a McDonnellDouglas Corp. assembling a hot new fighter plane, the targetsnow are more likely to be in basic research and development,the FBI's Mr. Revell says. Among probable targets arecompanies such as Corning Inc. and its fiber-optictechnology; Du Pont and its polymers, coatings andlightweight but high-strength materials; or IBM's electronicsresearch. &quot;We can't just lock up defense plants; the problemof protecting critical technology is much broader than that,&quot;Mr. Revell says.   In addition to high-tech companies, other likely targetsare companies such as Bechtel Group Inc. that bid on bigoverseas engineering projects. If a foreign intelligenceservice intercepted a phone call or fax containing the U.S.company's bid information in advance of the final biddingdate, a competitor could use the data to underbid the U.S.company. Or the bidding strategy could be passed to acustomer, perhaps allowing it to wangle a lower price fromthe U.S. company. Bechtel, says one U.S. security consultant,is &quot;extremely concerned&quot;; a Bechtel spokesman says only that&quot;it's a genuine issue.&quot;   Often companies aren't sure they're targets. Thoughlacking hard evidence, Caterpillar officials became convincedtheir messages were being intercepted after examining thepattern of overseas bidding, an industry official says. &quot;It'samazing how close the competitors' bids were,&quot; he says. ACaterpillar spokesman declines to comment on this but saysthe company has been using code since switching to satellitecommunications vulnerable to interception in late 1988.   U.S. companies are trying various defense tactics. Whenexecutives of one U.S. concern travel to certain countries,they now seek anonymity, the security director says. They flyon commercial carriers rather than the corporate jet and makeplane and hotel reservations at the last minute so foreignagents can't easily arrange to put them under surveillance.   At American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., a manager about tomake an initial business trip abroad is put through ahalf-day seminar by the security department. Among tips:Don't use a laptop computer on the plane if a seatmate mightread sensitive material.   Some companies also are increasing use of secure phones,which scramble conversations. In late 1989, TRW Inc.'selectronic-products subsidiary began producing a device thatencodes fax messages. It has sold several thousand, includingnearly 60 to one U.S. multinational, says Paul Graham, anofficial at the TRW unit.   Increasing security of information, however, isn't alwayseasy. Many scientists and engineers believe in the free flowof ideas to further scientific progress. Security directorssay top managers, asked for bigger security staffs orexpensive encoding devices, often don't want to spend themoney, and worry that foreign governments with sophisticatedintelligence services can crack corporate codes anyway.   And other considerations can intervene. The securitydirector of one U.S. electronics company says he recentlysuggested that a new device be developed in Europe ratherthan Japan, for fear the invention might be stolen byJapanese intelligence agents or competitors. But his U.S.bosses rejected the idea because they think the best researchin that area of electronics is being done in Japan andbecause developing the product there would help penetrate thebig Japanese market.   Once a company feels threatened, however, nothing is tootrivial to protect. General Electric Co.'s jet-enginedivision, based in Cincinnati, is installing fax-encodingdevices in its offices around the world; units are alreadyoperating in Israel, Japan, Britain and Turkey. When queriedfor this newspaper article, GE's Cincinnati officials firedoff messages about the article to company executives abroad.Even these messages were sent in code.</TEXT></DOC>