<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900723-0127</DOCNO><DOCID>900723-0127.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Exploring the New Germany and its Future   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>07/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><LP>   ERFURT, Germany -- A few months ago, this dateline wouldhave read Erfurt, East Germany, but now &quot;East&quot; is redundant.Chancellor Helmut Kohl sewed up German reunification lastweek at Mikhail Gorbachev's Caucasus retreat by persuadingthe Soviet leader to withdraw troops and allow Germany &quot;fulland unrestricted sovereignty.&quot; Germans already have beguntrying to awaken their East from its long slumber underSoviet hegemony.   Erfurt will need a lot of rousing. Once the thrivingcenter of the state of Thuringia, it today wears that dull,dilapidated look communism inflicts. Two Russian soldiers,with boots neatly shined, lounged in a command car angledacross a street blocked for construction work; the Red Armyhas been reduced to traffic duty.</LP><TEXT>   Near Weimar -- of short-lived Weimar Republic fame --there is a distant view of what looks like a vast parking lotfor military helicopters. This region for years was apotential launching pad for a Soviet attack through the&quot;Fulda gap&quot; into West Germany. Nearby also is Buchenwald,where Communist guides not long ago were blaming &quot;capitalism&quot;for Nazi atrocities against the Jews. That the Nazis calledthemselves &quot;socialists,&quot; not capitalists, was deemedirrelevant.   Along a back road, three lads spot our American car andsmilingly flash V-for-Victory salutes. Graffiti scrawled on aroad-construction machine label Karl Marx with a wordunprintable in either German or English. Farther east,Dresden, firebombed unmercifully by the RAF in World War IIin retaliation for Hitler's Coventry raid, is beginning torecover its former beauty as long-delayed restoration workprogresses. Southward on the road to Prague, a roadside signadvertises a &quot;privat restaurant.&quot;   Crossing the Czech border is no problem. Czechoslovakiadoesn't require a visa for Americans. Six years before, whenmy wife and I made the same crossing, visas and hotelvouchers were needed and there was a long wait. We hadwatched green-uniformed East German &quot;vopos&quot; training a Germanshepherd dog to sink his teeth into the well-padded arm of aman simulating a motorist -- that is to say, someone like us.   Clearly, shedding police-state tactics has made EastGermany a kinder, gentler place. West German SocialDemocrats, trying to take the edge off Mr. Kohl's triumph,still wring their hands about the future, warning of massunemployment because of the inability of East Germanfactories to compete with the West.   But socialists always have trouble understanding theenergizing power of freedom. With all the rebuilding thatneeds to be done and all the simple services needed -- suchas cafes and automatic laundries -- East Germany can be anentrepreneur's paradise if entrepreneurship is allowed freeplay. Just give a laid-off factory worker some tools and lethim go to work on Erfurt's plumbing. He will need only alittle practice, materials and economic freedom. The prospectof earning real deutsche marks, exchangeable for Westerngoods of a range and quality only dreamed of a few monthsago, will be sufficient incentive for hard work.   Certainly there will be problems, such as how to privatizeland and buildings. But Poland next-door already has begunprivatization, demonstrating that what is mainly needed isthe will to begin. Demands for restoration of privateproperty surely will activate German authorities.   Of course, the larger question is how the new Germany willposition itself vis-a-vis its North Atlantic TreatyOrganization partners, the European Community and the SovietUnion. Some Europeans are fearful that Germany will gradually&quot;move East,&quot; as restored sovereignty gives it a politicalstrength it could not have under four-power supervision. Suchfears were fed, no doubt, by the chummy meeting between Mr.Kohl and Mr. Gorbachev, and the fact that some of the pointsthe two agreed to, such as Mr. Kohl's promise that therewould be no nuclear weapons in what is now East Germany,seemed to have not involved consultation with the NATOallies. The fact that Germany will be a benefactor to Mr.Gorbachev in his time of serious financial difficulty -- atreatment his reasonableness was deemed to merit --contributes to the sense of a new German-Soviet entente.   The thought of Germany and the Soviet Union teaming up toswing their considerable weight in the politics of Europe andthe world does, of course, give pause. Germany is an economicpowerhouse, and the Soviet Union, for all its troubles,possesses awesome military might, including more than 500,000troops that have not yet left the soil of its CentralEuropean neighbors. The introduction by Germany of the SovietUnion into a larger role in the political life of Europe is acontingency not totally unimaginable.   But at this point, such thoughts hardly seem worth morethan mild interest. Germany last week formally guaranteed theborders of Poland, a country that physically separates itfrom the Soviet Union. Neither the Poles nor the newlyliberated East Germans have any love for the Russians. Itseems unlikely that warmth toward the Russians would win muchpolitical popularity in either country once fears ofprovoking the Russians and their troops subside.   Even more to the point is the question of exactly what thewords &quot;Soviet Union&quot; will mean in a year or so. If Sovietchess champion Gary Kasparov is correct, those words will behistory. He predicts that the so-called union will break upinto its separate parts as the Soviet Communist Party losesits grip on the 15 constituent republics. If that shouldhappen, Berlin (which may well become the capital of Germanyonce more) will be separated from Moscow by still furtherbarriers. In yet another big story of last week, Ukraine'sParliament declared national &quot;sovereignty,&quot; meaning that theUkrainians intend to take charge of many of their ownaffairs, including military conscription. Baltic independencemovements are well advanced. Byelorussia, the other republicalong the western tier of the Soviet Union, has people withaspirations similar to those in Ukraine.   Germany, and for that matter its partners in NATO and theEC, will be quite interested in the lands stretching eastwardto the Urals, because they will have little choice. Poland,Czechoslovakia and Hungary are trying to recover fromcommunism and are offering opportunities for trade andinvestment. The same may be true in the Soviet republicssooner than expected. Europe has changed dramatically in thepast year, and more big changes are yet to come.   Driving from the now-unguarded East German border atEisenach to Dresden, one gets a sense of that change as along-dormant polity stirs with new life. One can only hopethat progress toward peace and democracy continues withoutserious interruption and at no slower pace than the one wehave just witnessed.</TEXT></DOC>