<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900823-0128</DOCNO><DOCID>900823-0128.</DOCID><HL>   How Jordan's King Was Played for a Fool   ----   By Karen Elliott House</HL><DATE>08/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   As the Gulf crisis enters its second week, it's far fromclear whether Saddam Hussein will wind up winner or loser.What is clearer is that there will be other regional losers-- beyond the exiled emir of Kuwait.   The likeliest loser of all is Jordan's King Hussein, theregion's longest reigning ruler. Like a cat with nine lives,the cautious, clever, sometimes opportunistic and alwaysgracious monarch, has somehow managed for nearly four decadesto slip sundry snares: assassination attempts, PLO-inspiredcivil rebellion, anti-royalist coups across the Mideast,chaos and carnage in neighboring Lebanon, and, of course,Arab-Israeli conflicts. But this time the cat seems likely tobe belled.</LP><TEXT>   It's among the sadder ironies of the current situationthat the basically moderate and pro-Western Jordanian monarchwho prides himself on close relations with all but one (JimmyCarter) of the last eight U.S. presidents has wound up as thepuppet of Iraq's amoral, anti-Western and anti-royalistSaddam Hussein. Jordan's king, no fool, has been played forone by a wily neighbor with whom he shares neither values norinterests.   How this came about is a tangled tale. Nearly a decade agoKing Hussein edged into alliance with Iraq in its war withIran both to support a fraternal Arab state and to containthe Islamic fundamentalism that Iran's Shiite ayatollahs wereunleashing. As that war largely shut down Persian Gulfshipping, it was Jordan's port of Aqaba that became Iraq'smilitary and commercial lifeline. King Hussein also gaveSaddam another gift -- respectability. The degree to whichWestern and Arab powers came to view Iraq as the lesser evilto Iran was in no small part due to the king's patronage ofhis uncivilized neighbor. The scene was much like a littleorgan grinder leading around a giant gorilla on a leash. Therest of the Arab world, especially the Saudis and Kuwaitis,poured billions into the gorilla's tin cup.   In recent months, as King Hussein worried more than usualabout what he saw as the twin threats of Soviet Jewishimmigration into the Israeli-occupied West Bank andPalestinian radicalism within his own borders, the organgrinder became more and more the instrument of the gorilla.Saddam Hussein played on the king's fears of Israeliexpansionism and promised him protection. Furthermore, KingHussein, who prides himself on loyalty, felt a genuinefriendship for Saddam Hussein.   Jordan has benefited from the friendship with Iraq.Baghdad supplies oil, jobs for Jordanians and the majormarket for Jordanian products. Commerce through the port ofAqaba is vital to Jordan's sick economy, certain to getsicker with the loss of remittances from Jordanians workingin Iraq and Kuwait. As the West imposes an economic blockadeof Iraq, Jordan will be the first to feel its pain. If theking seeks to keep Aqaba open, he'll incur more Westernwrath. If he closes Aqaba to Iraqi supplies, he will fuelradicalism in Jordan and hasten his demise.   In an interview six weeks ago, the king was visiblytraumatized by what he saw as the likelihood of anIsraeli-instigated Mideast war. Israel, he said, sought apretext to topple his kingdom and turn it into a homeland forPalestinians pushed from Israel to make room for Soviet Jews.He said the risks of war were greater than at any time in his37-year rule.   The king's rule began when he was a teen-ager and hisgrandfather, King Abdullah was stabbed in front of him duringFriday prayers in Jersualem. King Abdullah had been installedin Transjordan by the British, who created the country in1921 as a consolation prize for him after they removed himfrom the Hejaz, now part of Saudi Arabia, in favor of IbnSaud, founder of the Saudi royal family. The British took theyoung King Hussein to England to train him in soldiering andcontinued to advise him back in Jordan.   The interview took place in the king's sitting room, asever decorated with photographs of European royal friends.This time he had a new photo -- that of Saddam Hussein. Asthe king spoke, there was Saddam staring over his shoulder,almost visibly abetting his nightmares.   A few days later, in an interview in Baghdad, SaddamHussein exuded confidence. He wasn't focused on visions of anIsraeli attack but rather on posturing as leader of the Arabworld. There were no photos of friends in his marble audiencechamber. Indeed, less than 24 hours before the invasion,Saddam Hussein lied so persuasively to King Hussein about hisplans that the Jordanian monarch phoned his friend GeorgeBush to assure him, against satellite and other evidence,that the Iraqis hadn't any intention of invading Kuwait.   The two Husseins couldn't be more different in personalstyle. King Hussein is gracious, charming, and ever attentiveto others. At an outdoor birthday party for one of his youngsons a few years back, he disappeared into his palace andreturned with sweaters and shawls for all the mothers who hadbegun to shiver in the evening coolness. Meetings are usuallyin his small family sitting room. And at any meeting he neverfails to ask first in his flawless English about one's healthand offer juice and tea before getting down to business. If avisitor needs a ride, the king will sometimes take the wheelof his Mercedes and personally chauffeur. He frequently takeshis young sons by his American wife with him and smilespatiently when they snuff out his cigarettes, chiding himabout his bad habit.   By contrast, Saddam Hussein makes no attempt to becharming. To greet visitors, he stands erect and stifflyoffers his hand. Pleasantries are nonexistent. While he hasbegun to wear expensive Western suits, he remains as insularas the king is sophisticated and well-traveled. The Iraqileader's only trip to the West was more than a decade ago.   Iraq's invasion of Kuwait has forced Arab leaders tochoose sides. Over the weekend, as Egypt's Hosni Mubarak,Syria's Hafez al Assad, and other lesser leaders finallylined up with Saudi Arabia, there was King Hussein, holdingthe bag for Saddam Hussein. Not only has the king missed anopportunity to protect Saudi Arabia, earning gratitude anddesperately needed largesse, he also has ended up opposingthe interests of the U.S., whose support and protection hespent decades cultivating. The king is now in no man's land,used and abused by Saddam and isolated from his naturalallies. The king can no longer count on support from a U.S.president he personally mislead and since has failed tosupport. Nor can he count on Israel, in whose eyes, Jordanmay have outlived its usefulness.   The biggest danger to King Hussein, however, is his&quot;friend&quot; Saddam Hussein, who aims to arouse masses throughoutthe Mideast to a jihad, or holy war, against Americanimperialists and Zionists. His response to Mideast leaderswho oppose him will be to forment riot and rebellion againstthose leaders.   Saddam's offer this weekend to withdraw from Kuwait ifIsrael vacates territories taken from Jordan, Syria and Egyptand if Syria withdraws from Lebanon, has greatly enhanced hisappeal across the Arab world. This is only the beginning ofthe propaganda battle. Kerbela and Najaf, two of Shia Islam'sholiest sites are in southern Iraq, where Saddam could easilybomb them and blame it on Israel or America. Such an actwould almost certainly guarantee a Mideast firestorm againstevery Westerner in the region.   King Hussein is uniquely vulnerable. He is a Hashemiteruler of a state where 60% of the population is Palestinian.Moreover, his pro-Western history makes him suspect toIslamic fundamentalists, who already are flooding Jordanianmosques to chant &quot;Down With America.&quot;   The confrontation between America and Saddam Hussein willcertainly get much nastier. As it does, the risks to the kingwill rise accordingly. Even if Saddam does not seek todethrone the king, rising radicalism at home seems likely toaccomplish that. At the same time, rising radicalism inJordan will be seen as a threat by the Israelis, who then mayopt for toppling the king and taking Jordan before hecrumbles of his own accord.   The whirlwind Saddam Hussein is sowing could well claimother victims. Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, America'sstaunchest ally in the region, faces his own fundamentalistsand skeptics about his peace with Israel. He has now addedthe burden of helping to defend Saudi Arabia's unpopularmonarchy with Western &quot;imperialists.&quot; The Saudis andAmericans, not to mention the Israelis, will be heavy burdensfor Mr. Mubarak as Saddam Hussein unleashes the high winds ofnationalism and fundamentalism. For its part, the Saudi royalfamily can count on no true friend anywhere in the region andon little popularity among its own populace.   About the only thing that can be predicted with someconfidence is that another period of Mideast instability hasbegun. The grim possiblities are almost endless, particularlywhen one tosses Israeli fears and Iranian fanaticism into thecauldron of potential chaos. If Saddam goes down, he'll takeas many others with him as possible. It is a safe bet thatneither Mideast borders nor leaders will look the same a yearfrom now and that the chaos will claim other victims beforeit claims Saddam Hussein.   ---   Ms. House is vice president, international, of Dow Jones andamp;Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal.</TEXT></DOC>