<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910128-0133</DOCNO><DOCID>910128-0133.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   What Mideast Arabs Need Is a Real Peace   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>01/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   Since World War II, hundreds of thousands of Mideast Arabshave been killed in 11 wars. If you include guerrilla actionsand terrorism, fighting on one front or another has beencontinuous.   The &quot;mother of all wars,&quot; to paraphrase the bloodthirstySaddam Hussein, was the eight-year Iraq-Iran struggle of the1980s, which killed an estimated one million combatants, manyof them Arabs. The 1948 Arab-Israeli war was mild bycomparison but preceded a series: the 1956 fight betweenEgypt and a British-French-Israeli alliance; the 1967Arab-Israeli &quot;Six-Day&quot; War, and the 1973 Egypt-Israel YomKippur War. In 1970, Jordan fought and expelled the PLO. In1982, Israelis and Christian Arabs tangled with the PLO inLebanon, with Israel also neutralizing Syria.</LP><TEXT>   Add in the various Yemeni wars and 15 years of fighting inLebanon among Christian Arabs, Muslim Arabs, subgroups ofboth, Druse, Syrians and fanatics loyal to Khomeini. Countalso the Syrian slaughter of 5,000 Arab dissidents in Hama in1982. Finally, there are the Kuwaiti Arabs who fell to SaddamHussein last August and the Iraqi soldiers now dying inatonement for last summer's crimes.   All of the bloodshed has yielded Mideast Arabs absolutelynothing. Egyptians, Yemenis, Syrians and Jordanians are aspoor as ever. Iraqis would be were it not for oil. TheLebanese are even poorer than in 1975. The Palestine refugeecamps of Gaza, the West Bank and Lebanon are as squalid asever, 42 years after their inhabitants were first heldhostage to Middle East and U.N. politics.   Clearly, the famous Arab militants -- Gamal Abdel Nasser,Yasser Arafat, Hafez Assad and Saddam Hussein -- havesucceeded only in getting their followers killed or consignedto lives of poverty. With the U.S. and its allies waging awar to rid the world of one of the three surviving militants,it is time to start thinking about finding better leaders forordinary Arabs, both for their own good and the good of theworld.   Since the U.S., Britain and the other allies were forcedinto a radical solution to the Saddam problem, surely it'sequally appropriate to consider fresh and radical solutionsto the problem of Middle East peace. One of the firstrequirements is to restrict the postwar peace process only toparticipants who understand and are willing to accept theprinciple that the best antidote to civil conflict isdemocracy. When peoples have true freedom and the right toselect and deselect their leaders, it's amazing how well theycan manage.   This first principle rules out a number of would-beplayers. Assad is no peacemaker. The PLO was formed in 1964to make war on Israel and it since has learned to make war aswell on any Arab leader who seeks a moderate, peacefulsolution to Arab-Israeli problems. It deserves no part in apeace process either. The Soviet Union, which has variouslysponsored all four of the above-mentioned troublemakers andis certainly not well disposed toward democracy, also has nopositive role to play.   Those who do have roles to play are King Hussein ofJordan, Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, thesheiks of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, George Bush, John Majorand Francois Mitterrand. The U.S. is leading the war allianceand must take responsibility for the peace. Britain andFrance, aside from being alliance partners, deserve a role incleaning up the messes left from their League of Nationsmandates of the '20s, '30s and '40s.   This kind of restricted peacemaking needs something else,a military presence. Iraq should be occupied, primarily bythe U.S., Britain and France, with sufficient power retainedto intimidate Syria and, if necessary, Iran. This strongstuff would be too much for the U.S. State Department, whichis notorious for being duped and manhandled by Arabstrongmen. Military government of the type that establisheddemocracy in West Germany and Japan after World War II iswhat is needed. All three major Iraqi groups, Shiites, Sunnisand Kurds, must be represented in a new democraticgovernment.   Once order is restored in Iraq, or even before, the nextplace deserving of attention is Jordan. There, the combinedweight of the peacemakers should be brought to bear on KingHussein, who initially sided with Saddam out of fear of bothSaddam and the PLO. PLO radicals should simply be extricatedfrom Jordan so that, finally, the festering problem ofPalestinian refugees can be addressed. When that happens, aJordanian-Israeli compact will become possible.   That will require concessions from Israel as well, ofcourse. One useful concession -- for both countries -- wouldbe to offer the Palestinian inhabitants of the campscitizenship. In Israel that might be conditional citizenshipof the type that gives Israeli Arabs political representationbut frees them from army service. (Israeli Druse Muslims doserve in the Israeli Defense Force, by the way.) In Jordan,it could be full citizenship and voting rights, although thatcould well require substantial pressure on King Hussein, whofears his ruling Hashemite regime will be overwhelmed by aPalestinian majority.   The rich Arab countries, in return for having theirchestnuts pulled out of the fire by the U.S. and in atonementfor their past financial backing of Arab radicals, should beasked to finance new housing and property ownership for thePalestinians. Israel could bring fresh air to the peaceprocess by doing something it needs to do anyway, removingthe socialist fetters that have crippled its economy. Thatwould create more jobs and housing not only for RussianJewish immigrants but also for Arabs who want to work, andperhaps live, under Israeli political jurisdiction. Egypt, amajor recipient of U.S. economic aid, should be asked to lendits political weight to the expulsion of the PLO and to anIsraeli-Jordanian peace.   Finally, there is the question of Assad. After he seeswhat happens to Saddam, he might be far more forthcoming thanhe has been in the past. At issue is not so much Syria butLebanon, which he now substantially controls. While restoringdemocracy to that shattered country is a tall order indeed,it deserves a serious try. The allies should bring their fullweight to bear on Assad to remove Syrian troops from Lebanonas soon as a suitable system for representing the variousLebanese regions can be worked out. The refugee camps shouldbe dismantled and the PLO recognized only to the extent itdemonstrates a genuine willingness to participate in ademocratic system. Arab terrorists throughout the regionshould be hunted down and prosecuted for their crimes, manyof which have been committed against other Arabs.   I warned at the outset that these are radical proposals.But maybe it's time to apply radicalism on behalf of peaceand democracy for a change, in an area that has seen littleof either. Don't assume that it won't be welcomed by Arabsthemselves.</TEXT></DOC>