<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900510-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>900510-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Black South Africa's Civil War   ----   By Lawrence Schlemmer</HL><DATE>05/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><CO>   AFRIC</CO><LP>   JOHANNESBERG -- Shortly after his release from prison,African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela appealed tothe warring black factions in this country to throw theirguns and knives into the sea. Up to 5,000 blacks have died atthe hands of other blacks since late 1984. The easternprovince of Natal has been the scene of the worst and mostbloodthirsty clashes, claiming the lives of more than 2,500people over the past five years and rendering between 50,000and 70,000 people homeless.   But Mr. Mandela's plea has gone unheeded, and the violenceis getting worse. Since the beginning of this year, more than600 people have been killed in Natal and more than 2,000 havebeen injured. In the first two weeks of March alone, therewere 730 recorded instances of serious violence. The killingshave been brutal. Eighteen people have been &quot;necklaced&quot; --burned to death by a gasoline-soaked tire round the neck --this year. One of them was a nine-year-old-girl, another a14-year-old boy.</LP><TEXT>   An 80-year-old woman was abducted and brutally stabbed todeath south of Durban. A 75-year-old black town councillor inNewcastle, Natal, shot himself in the head to avoid captureand a necklace death at the hands of a mob of youths. Tinybabies have been burnt to death in fire-bombed houses, orabandoned by parents fleeing for their lives.   The strife is often described as inter-tribal violencebetween the Zulus -- the largest of South Africa's 12 blackethnic groups and formerly the rulers of large stretches ofpresent-day South Africa -- and the Xhosas, the secondlargest group. This impression is sometimes sustained by thechauvinist remarks of some traditional Zulu spokesmen.Zwelethini Goodwill, hereditary king of the Zulus called onhis people in a March speech to honor their culture &quot;withyour Zulu might.&quot;   In that same speech, he railed against Zulu youth who jointrade unions and disobey their elders, and called upon Zulutraditionalists to &quot;act swiftly and decisively.&quot; This speechwas given in the middle of bloody fighting in Natal and wastaken as a &quot;call to blood.&quot;   When black troops from outside a region are deployed,local people will often express fears that the troops areZulus. When black conservatives mobilize as &quot;vigilantes&quot; tooppose radical activists in their townships they are widelythought of as associated with the Zulus. Radical activists inturn single out Zulus for punishment. Black youths on theWitwatersrand have attacked motor vehicles with Natalregistration plates in a search of Zulus.   In fact, though, the conflict among black South Africansis not a tribal struggle, but an ideological one. Largenumbers of Zulus belong to the ANC and its affiliates, theUnited Democratic Front and the Confederation of SouthAfrican Trade Unions. While the membership of Inkatha, thereligiously and politically conservative group that is theANC's chief rival for power in black South Africa, isoverwhelmingly Zulu, Inkatha's leader, Mangosutho Buthelezi,has very seldom appealed to sectional tribal loyalties.   Years ago Mr. Buthelezi incurred the wrath of the SouthAfrican government by issuing citizenship in the &quot;independenthomeland&quot; state KwaZulu, of which he is chief minister, toXhosas and other non-Zulus in order to help them to evade&quot;influx control&quot; laws and move to the rapidly developingindustrial areas of Natal. Inkatha has always been open toblacks of all tribes and has for years published itsmaterials not only in Zulu but in Sotho, English andAfrikaans as well.   Although Mr. Buthelezi is connected to the Zulu royalfamily, his differences with the ANC are not ethnicallymotivated. A devout traditional Anglican who considersliberation theology a threat to the integrity of the Gospel,Mr. Buthelezi understands the benefits of federalism anddevolution and mistrusts central state hegemony. His concernwith growth and employment has led him to oppose emphaticallythe ANC's campaign for sanctions against South Africa. So,while he has always acknowledged the importance of the ANC,he cannot find a home in a movement that leans towardsocialism and is allied to the South African Communist Party.   Mr. Buthelezi's views are shared by Zulu traditionalists,many of them businessmen and conservative Christians. Theyare fiercely rejected by unionized black workers, youngerurban activists and left-leaning ministers and priests. Zulusare found on both sides of this intellectual divide -- adivide that is the origin of the Inkatha-ANC struggle inSouth Africa, and especially in Natal.   Since 1985, the exiled ANC has sought to assert controlover all the anti-apartheid forces in South Africa. At theend of 1989, the Mass Democratic Movement (an ANC front)approved a motion at its &quot;Conference for a Democratic Future&quot;to bring pressure to bear on &quot;homeland&quot; leaders to resign ordeclare their loyalty to the ANC, and to bring similarpressures to bear on local black town councilors.   Political resistance to this bid for ANC dominance hasbeen greatest in Natal, where Inkatha is strongest. Inkatha,in its turn, is accused by the ANC of having provoked theviolence by an aggressive membership campaign also aimed atestablishing political control in Natal.   But while ideology explains the conflict between blacks inSouth Africa, it does not explain why it is so bitter. Afterall, the ANC has been able to establish politicalunderstandings with five other &quot;homeland&quot; leaders, mostnotably with Enos Mabusa, the chief minister of KaNgwane. Onemust add a few additional ingredients to the analysis.   As in many Third World societies in which democraticpluralism has not yet taken root, politics in black SouthAfrica is about establishing local hegemony or control ofpolitical territory. Add the fact that upward of 70% of blacktownship youth are unemployed, bored and tempted by theexcitement of political struggle, and it's no surprise that aculture of violence is taking hold.   A black doctor in Durban, Natal, was recently attacked byUDF-linked youths who accused him of treating Inkathapatients when he should treat only ANC sympathisers. In someschools in metropolitan areas in Natal, Inkatha pupils aremade to feel at least unwelcome, if they are not actuallybarred; in other schools in other areas UDF youth are putunder similar pressures. Violence erupted in Durban in March,when a Confederation of South African Trade Unions-linked busstrike prevented Inkatha supporters from attending a rally inDurban at which the Zulu king spoke.   Both the ANC and Inkatha are consequently ambivalent aboutthe violence in Natal. They want to establish or defend theirpolitical control of black society in Natal. On the otherhand, the sheer brutality of conflict -- and the intensepersonal vendettas that have emerged in the townships --embarrasses them. UDF-ANC leaders complain of &quot;criminalelements&quot; infiltrating their struggle and Inkatha feelsuneasy about local conservative &quot;big men,&quot; called warlords,who mount offensives on personal initiatives for which Mr.Buthelezi is blamed.   Peace talks between Mr. Mandela and Mr. Buthelezi wereplanned for late March or early April, but Mr. Mandela brokethem off because, as he said on April 23, his movement advised him against contact with Mr. Buthelezi so long as theviolence was raging. Mr. Buthelezi, in turn, is equally hesitant about talking in situations that will create the impression he is conceding political primacy to the ANC.   In the meantime, angry youths continue to fuel the flames.&quot;Mobilize, organize for the final offensive] All youth tobattle] All youth to the frontline]&quot; This was the way inwhich a recent conference of the UDF-linked South AfricanYouth Congress was reported by the ANC sympathizing newspaperNew Nation. At the moment, Inkatha appears to be morepowerful, or lethal, on the ground. The bulk of the refugeesin Natal come from communities sympathetic to the ANC.   No doubt the ANC-linked youth will remobilize to reversethe situation. An ANC leader in Natal, Harry Gwala, on May 1issued a call: &quot;Let us wipe them out if they attack us,&quot;reinforcing threats of massive retaliation against Inkathamade on the same day by the Confederation of South AfricanTrade Unions.   A prominent black journalist, Connie Molusi, said in arecent discussion organized by the South African Institute ofRace Relations, that his knowledge of black South Africanopposition politics convinced him that there was &quot;no groupwith a concept of political pluralism&quot; -- with an effectiveand not merely rhetorical commitment to the unpleasantdemocratic duty of accepting the political opponents have aright to mobilize and be heard.   In the past, before President F.W. de Klerk's leadership,the South African government hugely contributed to thislethal tradition in South African politics by its repressionof resistance movements. Unless a mood of at least reluctanttolerance of political opponents can take root in SouthAfrican society, current negotiations may yield power sharingbetween whites and some black power-groupings, but they willnot bring democracy in the sense that the West understandsit. Until all political groupings come to understand the viewthat democratic politics is about representation and notabout control, the killing will continue.   ---   Mr. Schlemmer is the director of the Center for PolicyStudies at the University of the Witwatersrand inJohannesberg.</TEXT></DOC>