<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911111-0176</DOCNO><DOCID>911111-0176.</DOCID><HL>   Domestic Dilemma:   Long Effort to Deport   Terror Suspects Raises   Difficult Rights Issues   ---   U.S. Won't Disclose Evidence   Against 8 Palestinians,   Citing National Security   ---   Lives Put on Hold for Years   ----   By Michael J. Ybarra   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   LOS ANGELES -- The brisk knocking jolted Khader Hamidefrom bed at 7 a.m. Immigration and Naturalization Service,the visitor said. Mr. Hamide, a longtime legal alien andaspiring U.S. citizen, inched open the door. Shoved from theother side, it flew wide, and the room filled with initials:FBI, INS, LAPD.   Mr. Hamide was a terrorist, they said, handing him anarrest warrant. Outside, police had blocked off the street; ahelicopter hovered overhead. Handcuffed, Mr. Hamide and hiswife, Julie, were taken away in separate cars.</LP><TEXT>   At a half-dozen locations in the Los Angeles area thatMonday morning in January 1987, scores of federal agentscrashed in on seven suspected Palestinian terrorists,including a Kuwaiti engineering student on his honeymoon, whoawakened to pointed guns. An eighth suspect was arrestedlater while taking a college chemistry exam.   For 23 days, six of the detainees sat in maximum securitycells. The INS sought their deportation under the ColdWar-era McCarran-Walter Act, alleging they belonged to agroup promoting world communism -- specifically, the PopularFront for the Liberation of Palestine, or PFLP, a violentMarxist splinter group of the Palestine LiberationOrganization.   More than four years later, and still unresolved, the caseof the &quot;LA Eight&quot; has come to symbolize the conundrumconfronting free societies faced with the threat ofterrorism: How can a government protect the public frompolitical violence without trampling the rights of those itsuspects of aiding or carrying out terrorist activities? Inthis case the answer may be hidden in the twilight zoneseparating advocacy of a Palestinian state with support forterrorism to achieve that goal.   The question, says Brian Jenkins, a terrorism specialistat the security firm of Kroll Associates, is, &quot;What is thetradeoff between public safety and civil rights?&quot;   None of the LA Eight have been deported. The courts haverefused to hear evidence that prosecutors say must be keptsecret to protect the identity of informants. But thegovernment has been tenacious. When the immigration law waschanged last year, the government changed the charges againstMr. Hamide and another man for the third time in four years.   Civil libertarians argue that the case cuts to the heartof the constitutional ideal of America, to the free speechand due process rights accorded even those with radicalideas. No one has accused the eight of any crimes, and alldeny belonging to the PFLP or having anything to do withterrorism.   But the government contends that its ability to protectnational security is threatened if it can't deport aliens itknows to be involved with terrorist groups, even if it darenot reveal its evidence. &quot;Do we wait for these people to blowup the federal building?&quot; asked William B. Odencrantz, INSregional counsel in San Francisco at the time of the arrests.The government contends, in filings in U.S. court in LosAngeles, that once deportation proceedings begin, &quot;theguarantees of the Bill of Rights are constitutionallyirrelevant.&quot;   There is no doubt the LA Eight are passionatelypro-Palestinian. Mr. Hamide, 37, moved to the U.S. from theIsraeli-occupied West Bank in 1971 to go to college. Hiswife-to-be arrived from Kenya four years later for the samereason. They met in the MBA program at the University ofOregon. She later worked as an accountant; he sold sun shadesfor windshields and sometimes worked as a waiter.   But politics is Mr. Hamide's life, as he says it is formost Palestinians. &quot;We eat, drink and sleep politics,&quot; hesays. &quot;Every Palestinian gathering turns into a politicaldiscussion. You don't choose to be a political person as aPalestinian -- you are a political person.&quot; Mr. Hamide voicedhis views publicly, writing letters-to-the-editor orappearing at small college forums. He also worked in thepresidential campaigns of Jesse Jackson. All the while, theFederal Bureau of Investigation was taking note.   After a delay of several years, the INS had told Mr.Hamide he could be sworn in as a U.S. citizen the last weekof January 1987. He was arrested instead.   Mr. Hamide thought one of the arresting agents lookedfamiliar. Have we met before, he asked. The man replied thathe had lived next door to Mr. Hamide's Glendale, Calif.,apartment. For eight months they had shared a thin wall.&quot;They knew every time I had sex with my wife,&quot; Mr. Hamidesays.   In papers filed in U.S. court here, the government hasadmitted tapping the phones of the defendants and theirlawyers. It won't say whether the monitoring continues, butMr. Hamide thinks it does. &quot;You never get used to that,&quot; hesays.   The INS, a part of the Justice Department, says the 1987arrests culminated a three-year FBI probe into a shadowynetwork that raised funds for terrorism abroad and threatenedto serve as a springboard for violence in the U.S. Accordingto the FBI, Mr. Hamide was the California head of an activebut furtive recruiting and support system for the PFLP.Although the PFLP hasn't been linked to terrorism in theU.S., its international record is long. It includes the 1976plane hijacking that was foiled by Israeli commandos atEntebbe airport in Uganda.   After the arrests, an INS lawyer acting on orders from theattorney general sought to block bail for the LA Eight byintroducing secret evidence linking them to the PFLP.Immigration Judge Roy Daniels in Los Angeles refused to hearanything in a closed session, and the government declined toreveal its material in open court, saying that would breachnational security. Mr. Hamide and four others were releasedon their own recognizance; the others posted low bonds.   All eight were first charged under the 1952McCarran-Walter Act, an effort to guard against subversionfrom Soviet-backed communism. It said aliens could bedeported if they belonged to a group advocating &quot;worldcommunism&quot; or other &quot;totalitarian&quot; doctrine. The law has beenused to bar thousands of foreigners because of their beliefs,actual and reputed, but hasn't been used often to expelpeople. According to the INS, 230 people were deported underthe law in the 1950s and 18 in the 1970s.   But with the fear of terrorism rising, 31 people weredeported in the 1980s under the statute. It was amid thisatmosphere, and growing concern about possibleLibyan-sponsored terrorism and disruption of the 1984Olympics in Los Angeles, that the case of the LA Eightunfolded.   Three months after the arrests, the INS dropped theoriginal charges. It instead sought to deport six of theeight on visa violations, ranging from taking too few classesto working without a permit. Mr. Hamide and Michel Shehadehwere also charged with belonging to a group promotingdestruction of property.   In December 1988, U.S. District Judge Stephen Wilson inLos Angeles dismissed the charges, saying the cited provisionof the McCarran-Walter Act was in discord with free-speechguarantees. The INS filed new McCarran-Walter charges againstMessrs. Hamide and Shehadeh, this time accusing them ofbelonging to a group that advocates assassinating publicofficials. Judge Wilson again dismissed the charges, but hisruling was overturned last July by the Ninth Circuit Court ofAppeals on the ground he had acted prematurely.   Enactment of the 1990 Immigration Act a year ago killedthe ideological provisions of the McCarran-Walter law byexplicitly giving aliens the same free-speech rights ascitizens. But the INS filed additional charges againstMessrs. Hamide and Shehadeh in April under the new law'sprovision allowing deportation of those who give &quot;materialsupport,&quot; such as financing, to terrorists. The INS didn'tsay what aid the men provided. &quot;We think they're deportableunder the 1990 act for terrorism,&quot; says a Justice Departmentspokesman. &quot;That's all we want to say.&quot;   The case of the LA Eight drags on. Mr. Hamide has touredthe country speaking about his case. Bashar Amer, apharmacology student, fought and won the government'schallenge to his visa status, but now faces an INS appeal.   Aiad Khaled Barakat and Naim Sharif filed for amnestyunder the 1986 immigration act in June 1987. Last year theysued to find out what was happening. In March the INS repliedthat it had secret evidence that they belonged to the PFLPand that they had 30 days to disprove membership or be deniedamnesty. Messrs. Barakat and Sharif then filed a second suit,challenging the grounds the INS used to deny them amnesty.   Whatever the truth of the charges against them, the livesof all eight have changed radically. Mr. Barakat owned amasonry business, making good money and working on theblueprints for a dream house. He says he lost contracts thethree weeks he was in jail, and the company later failed.After being laid off from a construction job in Virginia, headds, he now works as a short-order cook.   Amjad Obeid, the Kuwaiti whose honeymoon was interruptedby the INS raid, says he missed the funeral of a sister.Because of his arrest, he can't return to the U.S. should heever visit Kuwait.   Mr. Shehadeh says that his seven-year-old son sometimeswoke up screaming after seeing his father dragged off by theFBI, and that his wife lost her job at a day-care centerbecause of the taint of terrorism. &quot;At the beginning, friendsstart avoiding you,&quot; he adds. &quot;They didn't believe {thecharges} but they knew we were under surveillance.&quot;   For Mr. Sharif, who moved to the U.S. in 1978 and wasworking in a plant nursery at the time of his arrest, thecase sometimes seems to shadow every relationship. Co-workersjibed him, asking for bombing tips or ways to assassinate theboss. He lives with his parents, his brother and his family.He says he is afraid to start his own home with possibledeportation hanging over his head.   &quot;I never believed that this could happen in the UnitedStates,&quot; he says.</TEXT></DOC>