<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910708-0113</DOCNO><DOCID>910708-0113.</DOCID><HL>   International:   In Yugoslavia, Neighbor Fights Neighbor   ---   Growth of Town Militias,   Lack of Central Control   Aggravate Nation's Crisis   ----   By Mark M. Nelson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C12</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   VAJSKA, Yugoslavia -- Pero Lakic is one of a growingnumber of villagers who are taking things into their ownhands in the crisis in Yugoslavia.   After ferrying his wife, Maria, and his 13-year-old sonacross the Danube to safety here on the Serbian side of theriver, he and three other ruddy-faced men are returning todefend their homes in Brsadin, one of several hundredvillages in Croatia that has a majority population of Serbs.The town has been the site of some vicious fights between thetwo ethnic groups in the past few days.</LP><TEXT>   The federal army, police, and government that used to keepa lid on this country's nationalist tensions have all butfallen apart. Now in control in a growing number of areas arenewly organized groups of civilians, local army commanders,and policemen-turned-soldiers. The federal army, which wasdiscredited both here and abroad with a clumsy andunsuccessful attempt 10 days ago to retake the rebel republicof Slovenia, has been able to do little about the mountingviolence and is itself on the verge of splitting alongnational lines, according to military experts here.   The rise of local and republican militia groups is acrucial development because it further complicates efforts tofind a peaceful solution to the crisis. Late yesterday, threeEuropean Community foreign ministers reached an accord withfederal and republican leaders on a truce in Slovenia and acompromise over control of its borders. The agreement callsfor all federal and Slovenian armed forces to return to theirbases. But leaders here have already signed two previousagreements with the EC, only to find they were unable toenforce them.   The developments here are also worrying because they couldset an example for dissatisfied ethnic groups in other partsof Europe, which also are increasingly turning to guns andbombs. Romania has a large population of unhappy Hungarians;Czechoslovakia has barely managed to keep its ethnicallysplit nation together, and the Soviet Union is torn by dozensof nationalist groups that want to leave the union. Even inWestern Europe, ethnic groups such as the Basques in Spaincould be influenced by the Yugoslav crisis, diplomats inYugoslavia say.   The emergence of new powerful regional military forcesfirst became apparent in Slovenia. Ten days ago, federaltroops and tanks tried to retake border posts in thatnorthernmost republic. The local Slovene forces, which hadbeen trained to help federal troops in the event of aninvasion, instead fought off the federal army and held on tothe border posts. Since then, using weapons confiscated fromfederal storehouses or bought secretly from abroad, Croatsand even Serbs have been following the Slovenes, setting uptheir own local forces.   If a civil war does break out, the concern now is thatfighting would come in the shape of localized clashes insidethe six Yugoslav states, rather than the federal armyfighting against breakaway republics. &quot;You probably won't seehuge movements of troops or tanks across the country,&quot;predicts one Western diplomatic source. &quot;It won't be armyagainst army, but house against house and village againstvillage. And that will be very bloody.&quot;   Serbian militia and Croat security forces were involved ina nine-hour battle last night in eastern Croatia, BelgradeRadio said. Several people died and more than a dozen werewounded. Federal troops fired mortars, trying to quell thefighting, but came under fire themselves.   Croatia, which has 800,000 Serbs living among its 4.6million people, has the shortest fuse. But Yugoslavia's otherfive republics also are plagued by tensions among their manynationalities and religious groups.   Fighting between Croats and Serbs during World War IIclaimed more than a million lives, about twice the numberkilled fighting the Nazi invaders. &quot;The last time theYugoslavs started killing each other, they were very good atit,&quot; said the Western diplomat. &quot;A lot of people died.&quot;   Such memories help explain why people who live in theborder regions of Croatia are so frightened these days. Croatofficials say their buildup of forces in the region isnecessary because Serbian villagers are engaging in&quot;terrorist activities,&quot; plotting large-scale attacks onvillages which have minority Croat populations. For theirpart, Serbs from the region -- such as Mr. Lakic, who tookhis family across the Danube -- say the Croats are trying todrive them out.   A 40-year-old worker from the Croat village of Borovoselo,which has a Serbian majority, came across the Danube Saturdayby ferry to gather support for the &quot;troops&quot; back home. Givinghis name as Mladen and brandishing a revolver, he says hewill put together a group of men to retake some Serbianhouses now occupied by Croats.   &quot;The army should have quashed this whole thing before itgot started,&quot; he says. He takes a gulp of whiskey out of alarge bottle and passes it on to another of the six comradesnext to him who were discussing the next night's strategy.&quot;Now I have to defend my village with my own gun.&quot;   Both Croat president Franjo Tudjman and Serbian presidentSlobodan Milosevic warned their republics this weekend to getready for war. A Croat official said the events in Sloveniawould be &quot;like Disneyland&quot; compared with a war in Croatia.About four dozen people are believed to have died inSlovenia, mostly federal army troops.   Even if the federal army wanted to intervene in thisincreasingly dangerous affair, it probably couldn't do much.One reason is that the failure of the operation in Sloveniahas left the army split about what its proper role should be.Another, military experts say, is that the army is dividedalong national and generational lines: The older top guard ofthe army would like to reimpose Yugoslavia's federalstructure, while the younger officers are against using thearmy's power to take actions that they feel should beresolved politically.   Lack of trust in the federal army is another reason somecitizens and republics are seeking their own protection. Somepoliticians here say the army is the last remnant of theoppressive communist state they want to destroy. People inCroatia and Slovenia call the army a foreign power, and pointout that two-thirds of its officers are Serbs, compared withabout 40% of Yugoslavia's population. This makes Slovenes andCroats think the army will eventually side with Serbia andbecome the national army of &quot;greater Serbia.&quot;   For now, Serbian refugees from Croatia say the federalarmy is still trying to quell the violence there. When aCroat village is next to a Serb one, for example, the army'spolicy is to put troops in between. While this has reducedthe killing, life in the villages has ground to a halt.   Vlado Vuletic, a 28-year-old computer programmer who ishalf Serb and half Croat, said the clashing of armies inBorovoselo had made life there unbearable. Every day when hetried to go to work, he said, he had to pass through threeroadblocks. Anyone who tired to leave the village was checkedand often harassed first by Serbian guards, then by thefederal army, and then by the Croats. Because of his mixedorigins, he says he was suspect to all three. So Fridaynight, he brought his wife and two-year-old daughter to arefugee center here.   &quot;Our lives were in danger,&quot; he says, &quot;so we left.&quot;   In the past three months, Serbian officials say 10,000Serbs have left Croatia, usually moving in with friends orrelatives in Serbia.   Some people, of course, want the army to take more boldaction to stop the violence that is being perpetrated by thelocal armies. But others say any federal action at all wouldjust make things worse. This appears also to be the view ofmost Western governments. Some, like Belgium, have gone sofar as to say that any further violence by the army couldresult in recognition of breakaway republics as independentcountries.   Almost no one expects to put Yugoslavia back together asit was before. Even staunch federalists here concede thatSlovenia will leave the federation; part of Croatia will mostlikely follow. Most Western governments and even most leadershere are now hoping that tempers will calm long enough for adivorce settlement to be made without the totaldisintegration of the country.   &quot;Yugoslavia definitely has to change,&quot; says DragoliubMicunovic, a University of Belgrade professor who heads theopposition Democratic Party. &quot;It might change after a civilwar. Or it might change by people realizing they can get thesame results by talking about it.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>