<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910823-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>910823-0122.</DOCID><HL>   The Great Bluff   ----   By Garry Kasparov</HL><DATE>08/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   Military coup in Moscow]   Mikhail Gorbachev replaced as president]</LP><TEXT>   This news sped instantly round the world Monday. Whileprovoking rejoicing in Havana, Baghdad and Tripoli, ithorrified the entire civilized world. The resulting stockmarket panic reflected the feelings of the West, which feareda return to the Cold War. For three days this week the worldpondered the possible catastrophic consequences of Mr.Gorbachev's fall. The worst was expected.   Indeed, only a few hours after the first report of thechange in power in the Kremlin, the head of the CNN bureau inMoscow, Steve Hurst, in a condition close to hysteria,predicted the rapid and inevitable fall of the country'sdemocratically elected republican governments and a return toa communist dictatorship. How, the common wisdom went, couldanyone stop tanks sent to Moscow, Vilnius, Tallinn and Rigaby such &quot;all-powerful&quot; people as Defense Minister DmitryYazov, KGB Chief Vladimir Kryuchkov and Interior MinisterBoris Pugo?   Nevertheless -- how wonderful] -- the coup faltered, andRussian President Boris Yeltsin, whose hours, in the opinionof Mr. Hurst and many others, had been numbered, became a manwho, in the words of the same Mr. Hurst just 55 hours later,merited a rating of 10.5 on a 10-point scale of popularity.   All's well that ends well: The stock market panicsubsided, President Bush returned to his summer vacation, andthe West is switching its attention to other events.   But a serious analysis of what happened this week isessential -- not only for the Soviet peoples, but also torouse Western leaders from their long trance regarding Mr.Gorbachev. What must be put to rest are such questions as&quot;Was the coup a direct consequence of the G-7 countries'refusal to offer Mr. Gorbachev unlimited credit?&quot;   The time for final conclusions about the coup hascertainly not yet come, but there are some things we alreadyknow for certain:   First, the theory that Mr. Gorbachev is the only guaranteeagainst a return to power by the hardliners has been shown tobe groundless.   Second, history has given a clear reply to the question&quot;Who will come to power, if not Gorbachev?&quot; The hardlinecommunists suffered a crushing defeat in an open clash withthe young democratic forces. Standing in the path ofdictatorship was a powerful wall of people Westernpoliticians heretofore had preferred not to notice and Mr.Gorbachev had contemptuously described as &quot;so-called&quot;democrats.   Third, resistance to the coup was headed by a politicalleader whose name a year ago provoked a condescending smilein the West. Today, the name Boris Yeltsin is honored.   Fourth, we know that the coup leaders were men who hadrecently been promoted by Mr. Gorbachev to the highestechelons of power. They were the men on whom the Sovietpresident was relying in his unsuccessful struggle againstMr. Yeltsin and on whom he was pinning his hopes in hisstruggle to retain central control over the crumbling Sovietempire.   It must be remembered that all of Mr. Gorbachev'sreform-minded advisers had been forced to resign. FormerForeign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, announcing hisresignation last December, spoke unequivocally about the&quot;onset of dictatorship.&quot; Note that he did not warn about theoverthrow of Mr. Gorbachev, but of a new dictatorship.   Given his high position, Mr. Shevardnadze certainly musthave known a great deal about Mr. Gorbachev's plan forbringing &quot;stability and order&quot; to the country. Just what wasthat plan? A part was tested in January, when Mr. Gorbachevauthorized an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the lawfullyelected governments of the Baltic states. The &quot;Vilniusoperation&quot; was timed to coincide with the start of the Gulfwar.   Another part of the plan included decrees sanctioned byMr. Gorbachev at the start of the year allowing InteriorMinistry troops to patrol the streets of the country's majortowns and giving the KGB sweeping powers to carry outsearches of joint ventures and cooperative companies. Thesesteps were aimed at curtailing the democratic transformationof the country. At the same time, Mr. Gorbachev handedcontrol of the state television and radio to hardliner LeonidKravchenko. (Need it be said which camp Kravchenko joined onAug. 19?) Free-thinking journalists were driven from thescreen and from the microphone.   Finally, in March, supporting an attempt by Mr. Yeltsin'scritics to overthrow their leader at an emergency meeting ofthe Congress of Russian People's Deputies, Mr. Gorbachevissued a decree forbidding all demonstrations in Moscow for atwo-week period -- that is, there could be no demonstrationsin support of Yeltsin during the time the Congress was to beheld. For this purpose, 50,000 soldiers were brought to thecapital. In the end, Mr. Gorbachev decided against followingthe &quot;Chinese model.&quot; In the face of a demonstration by half amillion people, he ordered the troops to leave the city.   The troops acted differently, however, in the Caucasus andin the Baltic states, where a number of people lost theirlives. Those guilty of the murders went unpunished. Eachtime, the responsibility for the deaths was shifted ontolocal &quot;nationalists.&quot;   Not a bad service record for a self-described innocentvictim of a coup d'etat. Indeed, the scenario of this week'scoup gives rise to many questions, including one about Mr.Gorbachev's protestations of innocence.   -- Why did the conspirators not take advantage of thesurprise element and arrest Mr. Yeltsin, their most dangerousopponent?   -- Why did communications links between Moscow and theoutside world function normally?   -- Why was there so little bloodshed? (Did the leaders ofthe conspiracy seriously expect to frighten Muscovites withtanks?)   -- Where, at the moment of the coup, was the president ofthe Supreme Soviet, Anatoly Lukyanov, and Mr. Gorbachev'sother colleagues?   And so on. To obtain immediate answers to such questionsis not possible. One fact, however, is undisputed: The coupproved to be a bluff by a group of political dinosaurs,trying to stand in the path of history.   Circumstances have turned out well for Mr. Gorbachev,affording him the safety of ascribing all the crimes of thecentral government to his former companions. It is amazinghow adroitly he jumped from the footplate of the train,rushing full steam toward the abyss]   Only a public trial of the coup leaders can remove thesuspicion that Mr. Gorbachev played a role in the coup.Already one of the two ringleaders, former Interior MinisterPugo, has been reported to have committed suicide. FormerDefense Minister Yazov, the other ringleader, is in custody.Let's hope he keeps his health.   But even if Mr. Gorbachev is fully exonerated from anyrole in the conspiracy, the fact remains that he no longerhas any real political power. It disappeared this week,together with any illusions about the possibility ofconstructing &quot;socialism with a human face.&quot; Yet, what is thelesson that Mr. Gorbachev has drawn from the coup? These werehis words at yesterday's press conference: &quot;I am convincedthat socialism is correct. I am an adherent of socialism.&quot;   Mr. Gorbachev's perestroika has ended in failure. Now isthe time for real perestroika -- of the entire Sovietsociety.   This week's events have also made clear another failure:that of the West's policy toward the Soviet Union. Westernleaders should now recognize the folly of putting their faithin Mr. Gorbachev. They must also recognize how that folly hasled to an unrealistic appraisal of the current situation inthe Soviet Union, denying the Soviet democrats therecognition they deserve. It has lead, too, to a distortionof the real values of Western democracy in theconsciousnesses of the millions of Soviets who areanti-communists but who still have little conception of howdemocracy works.   In its influence over events in the Soviet Union, the Westis not restricted to economic aid. It has a decisivepsychological and political role. Words about the heroism ofMr. Yeltsin and his supporters are not worth much withoutreal steps on the part of Western governments. The best firststep would be to recognize the independence of the Balticstates. I urge the West to refrain from any attempt torestore the reputation of the politically bankrupt Mr.Gorbachev.   Today's &quot;new world order&quot; requires the West to base itsdiplomacy on firm democratic principles. The peoples of theSoviet Union, in defiance of this week's dangers, have showntheir adherence to the ideals of freedom and democracy. It isnow time for the West to make a move.   ---   Mr. Kasparov, the world chess champion and head of theMoscow region branch of the Democratic Party of Russia, is acontributing editor of the Journal.</TEXT></DOC>