<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910528-0068</DOCNO><DOCID>910528-0068.</DOCID><HL>   New Blueprint:   Bechtel, Hurt by Slide   In Heavy Construction,   Re-Engineers Itself   ---   It Gets Involved in Financing,   Bids for Smaller Projects,   Bets Its Fee on Timeliness   ---   A Promising Start in Kuwait   ----   By G. Pascal Zachary and Susan C. Faludi   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)GEORGIA (GA)ISRAEL (ISR)IRAQ (IZ)NEW HAMPSHIRE (NH)</RE><LP>   SAN FRANCISCO -- Bechtel Group Inc., long acclaimed forits skill in managing big engineering and constructionprojects, has had to spend a lot of time managing adversityin recent years.   When a world-wide slump started hammering it in themid-1980s, for example, privately owned Bechtel actedswiftly. It discharged 22,000 of its 44,000 professionals,generally with little or no severance pay. By doing so,Bechtel says, it avoided losses while archrival Fluor Corp.posted a $633 million deficit in 1985.</LP><TEXT>   Competitors &quot;tried to ride it out differently,&quot; butBechtel chose &quot;to do some pretty drastic things,&quot; concedesStephen Bechtel Jr., the chairman emeritus and familypatriarch.   The Bechtels have a reputation for being hard-nosed, aswell as for hard work, parsimony and engineering derring-do.&quot;Our message was: Whatever it is, we're going to develop thetalent to do it,&quot; says Charles Halligan, a senior executiveduring Bechtel Group's golden era.   Bechtel needs all its skills now. Times are tough forcompanies that design and manage heavy construction projects.Competition is clearly getting stiffer. Giant Japanesecontractors are especially formidable, significantlyoutspending San Francisco-based Bechtel and other Americanrivals on research into automating design and constructionwork. The U.S. market share of the world's major constructionprojects fell to 25% in 1988 from 50% in 1980.   In addition, Bechtel is being hurt by a global creditsqueeze and U.S. recession. A $5 billion project to build ahigh-speed train between Los Angeles and Las Vegas has beenput on hold because Bechtel and a German partner couldn'tarrange financing. And in March 1989 Bechtel lost a contractto build a huge bakery when RJR Nabisco, awash in leveragedbuy-out debt, slashed its spending.   Now Bechtel is landing orders only sporadically; lastyear, its backlog fell 12% to $4.8 billion. The company,currently less than half its former size, is mired in secondplace, behind Fluor, in the U.S. Meanwhile, critics havecomplained that Bechtel sometimes goes too far in catering toforeign clients' needs and whims.   But Bechtel, which in 1986 spun off a subsidiary withhundreds of millions in assets partly to safeguard familywealth, isn't quietly shrinking. It has become even morefleet of foot. It is diversifying into smaller projects,entering new lines of business such as design of theEuroDisney amusement park near Paris, and decentralizing togive its regional chiefs around the world more authority.   It also is taking more risks. For example, it is seekingpart ownership of some power projects, agreeing to raisefinancing, and accepting incentive clauses to win jobs. Ineffect, it is gambling that it can build plants on time andbelow budget.   &quot;It's a harder and more complex business,&quot; says RileyBechtel, Stephen Bechtel's 38-year-old son and his successoras chairman and chief executive.   So far, the new tactics appear to be paying off. From the1988 low point, Bechtel's revenue grew 26% to $5.63 billionin 1990. The company doesn't disclose earnings but has earnedroughly 1%, pretax, on the value of some projects it designsand manages -- the bulk of its business -- and more onprojects it actually builds and those involving incentiveclauses.   Riley Bechtel, the man leading the company down new pathssince last June, is himself something of a departure fromtradition. An attorney, he is the first chief executive whoisn't an engineer. And he isn't the eldest son. He was chosenin preference to his older brother Gary, 40, who is presidentof the construction subsidiary.   Not surprisingly, Bechtel retains its flair with bigprojects. It completed a large power plant for PhiladelphiaElectric Co. in 1989, eight months ahead of schedule and $380million under budget, and earned a $60 million bonus. If ithadn't beaten the deadline and the budget, Bechtel would havelost its basic management fee, worth millions of dollars.Last year, it completed construction, again ahead of scheduleand under budget, of one of the most advanced U.S.semiconductor plants, for International Business MachinesCorp.   Early last year, Bechtel was hired to trouble-shoot the$13 billion English Channel tunnel project, whose 10 Britishand French contractors were in disarray. Bechtel took overcrucial parts of the project, improved coordination and gotit on track. &quot;There are people who are convinced that theproject was an utter disaster until Bechtel came in andturned it around,&quot; says William Ibbs, an engineeringprofessor at the University of California at Berkeley.   And Bechtel seems to have retained its diplomatic skills.Before Iraq invaded Kuwait last August, the company wasbuilding near Baghdad a $2 billion petrochemical complex thatcould help in the manufacture of chemical weapons. Only sevenmonths later, nevertheless, Kuwait awarded Bechtel apotentially rich contract to help manage reconstruction ofthe oil facilities devastated by Iraq.   The Kuwait job is potentially its biggest coup sinceBechtel's good old days in Saudi Arabia. Under a letter ofintent signed with Kuwait Petroleum Co., Bechtel issupervising planning and procurement for rebuilding the oilfields from well-head to loading terminal. Riley Bechtelcautions that so far the company has only a preliminary roleand hasn't been awarded any major contracts. But competitorsfear that the planning work may give it a leg up in winningdesign and construction projects totaling billions ofdollars.   Moreover, Bechtel has another important edge: its 40-yearrelationship with the emirate. Bechtel built the country'sfirst refineries. And Riley Bechtel notes: &quot;We ran our wholeMiddle East operations out of Kuwait for many years. A lot ofpeople in the Kuwaiti government and the Kuwait Petroleum Co.had worked with us.&quot;   Much of Bechtel's work now involves cleaning up problemsat nuclear-power and weapons plants, a far cry from the headydays of designing or building them. In the U.S., its BechtelPower Corp. unit has captured 60% of the business ofreplacing generators and doing other maintenance work onnuclear-power plants. For example, it is helping decommissionLong Island Power Authority's Shoreham plant.   Bechtel has also spent 11 years working on the Departmentof Energy's biggest project, the waste-storage facility atthe Savannah River nuclear-weapons complex. Under anothercontract, it is cleaning up radioactive contamination in 17states.   Meanwhile, Bechtel Group is investing heavily in designinga new turnkey nuclear-plant system that it hopes the NuclearRegulatory Commission will adopt as a pre-approved design forU.S. utilities. &quot;We foresee the resurgence of nuclear power,&quot;says Adrian Zaccaria, Bechtel Power's president.   Bechtel also is going after work it would have rejected 10years ago. Last year, it outbid a tiny engineering firm, YEIEngineers Inc., to win a less-than-$90,000 contract toupgrade a pharmaceutical company's distribution system inEmeryville, near San Francisco. Lawrence L. Lam, a formerBechtel engineering supervisor and now a YEI vice president,recalls, &quot;At one time, the rule at Bechtel was that if it wasunder $5 million, we wouldn't touch it.&quot;   Bechtel has about 50% more clients than a decade ago, andthe average revenue per project is down to $3 million from$12 million. Small jobs &quot;position you for other projects,&quot;says Cordell Hull, executive vice president, international.   But competitors say Bechtel makes little money on manysmall contracts because of its overhead. And even they canlead to trouble. One such case: A $1.1 million contract toplan redevelopment of the decommissioned Pease Air Force Basein New Hampshire. Community officials accused Bechtel ofwinning the contract by currying favor with state and federalpoliticians and then doing a poor job of coming up withredevelopment ideas -- which included an &quot;Indian Village&quot;theme park and maple-syrup museum.   Bechtel's plan was &quot;loaded with errors&quot; and lacked suchstandard information as a full traffic study, says ThomasMorgan, the town planner of Newington, N.H. The developmentauthority initially withheld $300,000 of the contract andstill is withholding $60,000. &quot;They just clipped us for $1million and left,&quot; Mr. Morgan asserts.   Donald Graff, Bechtel's project manager, says that &quot;thework has been done&quot; and that Bechtel is still negotiatingwith the authority for the final payment. He denies thatpolitical ties played a role.   However, the strongest criticism of Bechtel's methods hasarisen from overseas activities. In 1976, the JusticeDepartment found that Bechtel had illegally complied with theArab League boycott of Israel. The company settled thecomplaint without admitting or denying guilt. The boycottissue hasn't arisen again, although Bechtel still does nobusiness in Israel.   But former employees complain that the company has anotherbias problem: deferring to Arab sexism. Wendy Baker, aBechtel Group landscape architect, sued the company in 1987,alleging that at a meeting in San Francisco her managerwouldn't let her present her landscape design for an airportto Saudi clients because she was &quot;a girl.&quot; She later droppedthe suit. A spokesman says Bechtel has no record of themeeting but that such an incident &quot;would be in violation ofour practices.&quot; Mr. Hull concedes that few female workers areput on Saudi projects because a worker's sex &quot;might be acriterion in a country like Saudi Arabia.&quot;   Bechtel's Iraqi ventures also have raised eyebrows foryears. In 1984, it sought a contract from an Iraqi-Jordanianagency to build an oil pipeline through the two countries tothe Red Sea. The Iraqis, fearing that Israel might somedaybomb the pipeline, asked Bechtel to guarantee it wouldn't beharmed. The company offered to cover part of any damage andeven hired a Swiss agent who unsuccessfully sought to winsuch reassurance from Israel. In the end, Iraq and Jordanabandoned the project.   Some are disturbed by Bechtel's role, now terminated, indesigning the petrochemical complex near Baghdad. (It isbelieved to have been in such an early stage of constructionthat it was not a U.S. bombing target.) Seth Carus, anarms-control analyst at the Institute for Near East Policy inWashington, D.C., noted in a June 1989 report that it wouldgive Iraq &quot;most, if not all, of the elements needed for anindependent production base of mustard gas.&quot; The facility,called PC2, could annually produce 50,000 tons of ethyleneoxide, which has many legitimate commercial uses but can bereadily converted into thiodiglycol, an essential ingredientin mustard gas. Iraq used poison gas against its Kurdishminority and in the Iran-Iraq war.   Mr. Hull, Bechtel's international chief, insists that PC2&quot;was a benign plant&quot; not intended for any military use.Others argue that restricting U.S. companies from buildingsuch commercial plants unfairly limits economic growth inpoor nations.   As for the ethics of dealing with Saddam Hussein at all,Stephen Bechtel says, &quot;If we think our client is of poorcharacter or does unethical things, we won't work for them.&quot;But even though Saddam Hussein's use of gas receivedfront-page play as early as 1984, Mr. Bechtel asserts, &quot;Ididn't realize it.&quot; Riley Bechtel says the same thing.   Nonetheless, George Shultz, the former secretary of stateand a Bechtel director, said publicly in February that thecompany decided before the Iraqi invasion to abandon theplant. He neglected to mention that Bechtel didn't plan toactually quit the project for up to another year. And Mr.Hull acknowledges Bechtel's concern that its role might proveembarrassing if Iraq became unpopular. He says a quicker exitwasn't possible because &quot;we had a contract with the Iraqis.&quot;At any rate, he notes, Bechtel was following U.S. governmentpolicy, which he says had been encouraging commerce withIraq.   But Elisa D. Harris, an analyst at Brookings Institution,believes that Iraq is a special and notorious case and thateven if the U.S. didn't object to the complex, &quot;that doesn'tmean companies don't have a moral obligation. Privateindustry needs to be more sensitive to the ultimate use ofthese chemicals. Iraq was a known chemical-weapons producerand user. Any company ought to be damn sure that there isn'tgoing to be diversion&quot; to military uses.</TEXT></DOC>