<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920109-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>920109-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   The Death of Capitalism   ----   By Herbert Stein</HL><DATE>01/09/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><NS>TAXES (TAX)</NS><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The beginning of the end of capitalism in America, whichwas also the beginning of the rise of totalitarian communism,came in 1913. This was about the same time as the beginningof communism in Russia. But whereas communism in Russia fadedaway early in the 1990s, it remained a threat in America.   Some students would place the beginning of the end ofAmerican capitalism earlier. They would date it from 1862,when the first federal income tax was imposed. As would bethe case with later tax increases, it was rationalized as awartime necessity. The circumstances are suggestive. This wasonly 14 years after the publication of Marx's &quot;CommunistManifesto.&quot; Also, Abraham Lincoln would soon show his truecolors by the strongest attack yet made on private propertyand free markets in America -- freeing the slaves andprohibiting trade in human chattels. But the Civil War incometax did not last long, thanks to the intervention of theSupreme Court, and this first attempt to undermine capitalismwas abortive.</LP><TEXT>   That is why the decline of capitalism should be dated from1913, when the 16th Amendment, authorizing the federalgovernment to impose an income tax, was adopted. The firstfederal income tax imposed under the amendment was at a rateof 2% and applied to the wealthiest Americans. Some would nowsay that was very little. But there were then somefar-sighted people, like Rufus Choate, who saw that thenation was on a slippery slope from which return would bevery difficult, if possible at all.   World War I, which, perhaps coincidentally, followed soonthereafter, was, of course, the occasion for an enormousincrease in rates of income tax. Then, in the 1920s, one ofthe great heroes in the struggle to save American capitalismappeared. That was Andrew W. Mellon, the secretary of theTreasury. It was Mellon who discovered what was known lateras the difference between the static and the dynamic revenueeffects of tax changes. That is, a 10% cut in tax rates wouldnot reduce the revenue by 10% but would reduce it bysomething less, because the rate cut would have a favorableeffect on the national income. Mellon did not have the fullepiphany of realizing that a tax cut would increase therevenue. That would come 60 years later with Arthur Laffer,but Mellon was on the way. Using this information he was ableto bring about substantial reduction of income tax ratesduring the 1920s.   This hopeful development came to a halt with the arrivalof Herbert Hoover. Hoover is a much misunderstood characterin American history, commonly considered to have been aconservative. On the contrary, he was something of anintellectual, read Latin and even published a translation ofa Latin book. He was also a feminist, because he did thetranslation in cooperation with his wife, Lou. He was verymuch a &quot;do-gooder,&quot; as evidenced by his efforts to feedstarving Belgians during World War I. He had also spent agood deal of time in Russia -- and even earlier in China --and was an avid collector of Russian documents. (Ironically,these documents later became the nucleus of a &quot;conservative&quot;think tank in California.)   Hoover took the first opportunity to get free of Mellon'sadvice. The liberal press was making much of the fact thatMellon had cheated on his income tax. This was blown out ofall proportion just because he was the secretary of theTreasury. The furor enabled Hoover to disregard Mellon andproceed to raise taxes. Whether he knew that this wouldconvert an ordinary recession into a Great Depression andbring about a permanent weakening of capitalism is unclear.   Conservatives at the time thought that they could rescuethe situation by getting behind the election of an amiableand ineffectual patrician from New York state for thepresidency. With him in office they could establish acorporate state on the model of the one Mussolini had inItaly, where the economy would be run by committees of CEOsand trade union leaders. For a while this came to pass in theform of the National Recovery Administration, managed by anarmy general, Hugh Johnson. This effort to resist theanti-capitalist tide, however, did not last long.   The Supreme Court chickened out on the NRA and Rooseveltturned out to be a weak reed. Influenced by his left-leaningwife and by a number of Brain Trusters subsequently exposedby Joseph McCarthy, he turned again and again, in 1935, 1936and 1937, to soak-the-rich tax increases. And then duringWorld War II, when in alliance with Joseph Stalin, he usedthe occasion to raise tax rates to levels never before seen.   Postwar history up to 1980 is the story of a strugglebetween the pro-capitalist, anti-tax forces and the pro-tax,anti-capitalist forces. The leading figures on the anti-taxside were Harold Knutson, Daniel Reed and John F. Kennedy.The first two were Republican chairmen of the House Ways andMeans Committee, one in 1947-48 and the other in 1953-54.Knutson pushed through a tax cut against the opposition ofPresident Truman and Reed did the same against the reluctanceof President Eisenhower. It is of some significance thatTruman called Stalin &quot;Uncle Joe&quot; and that Eisenhower, whencommander of Allied forces in Europe, allowed the Reds tooccupy Berlin.   Kennedy proposed a big tax cut in 1962. Although a Harvardgraduate, he had learned the virtues of free enterprise fromhis father, a well-known resistance fighter againstgovernment regulation of the importation of booze. Some ideaof the strength of the opposition to capitalist ideas isgiven by the fact that the Republicans lost control ofCongress immediately after Knutson's and Reed's victories,and did not win it again after Reed's. Within a year ofproposing his tax reduction, Kennedy was assassinated by amarksman who had spent time in the Soviet Union.   Despite this opposition the forces of tax reductionprevailed for a while, and the years 1948 to 1973 were to seethe most rapid increase of productivity in American history.This success did not last, however. Although thepro-capitalist forces controlled nominal tax rates, theanti-capitalist forces controlled real tax rates. This theydid through the maneuver of &quot;bracket creep.&quot; By causinginflation they would force people up into higher and highertax brackets, even though the rates were nominally the sameor even falling. The inflation was generated by twowell-known radical chairmen of the Federal Reserve, believersin &quot;economic planning,&quot; William McC. Martin and Arthur F.Burns. Thus, real tax rates rose after about 1965.   The capitalist forces seemed to have won a great, andpossibly decisive victory when Ronald Reagan came into thepresidency in 1981. He had campaigned on the promise of a bigtax cut and delivered one almost immediately. Conservativeswere jubilant. But 10 years later that victory seemed Pyrrhicand even Ronald Reagan became suspect. He had once been aDemocrat and the head of a labor union. Intimates later saidthat he had never really believed that cutting tax rateswould raise the revenue. He had gone along with tax increasesin every year of his administration except the first. Worstof all, he had laid his hands upon George Bush and pronouncedhim his heir.   Conservatives had always had their suspicions of Bush. Hewas a graduate of Yale, the institution whose radicalism hadbeen exposed by William Buckley in his famous book, &quot;God andMan at Yale.&quot; Bush had never been able to explain what he didduring his time in Communist China. And he had revealed aside of himself in 1980 by describing Reagan economics as&quot;voodoo economics.&quot;   But still, Bush's apostasy came as a shock toconservatives. In October 1990, encouraged by his Rasputin,the long-haired Budget Director Darman, he had conspired withcongressional Democrats to raise taxes. The anti-capitalistcoup that was to fail in Moscow a year later had alreadysucceeded in Washington. The result was to sweep away thebarriers that eight years of Reaganism had erected againstthe slide down the road to serfdom. The economy went intorecession, the Republicans were ejected from the White Housein the 1992 election, and no one knew when, if ever, therewould be another opportunity to revive economic freedom inAmerica.   During the 1992 election campaign the supporters of GeorgeBush tried to argue that the 1990 tax increase in which theyhad participated was not the cause of the recession. Theysaid that the tax increase had been very small, aboutone-half of one percent of GNP. They also claimed that therewere other, more important causes of the recession.Commercial construction and some other kinds of investmenthad been overdone during the 1980s, encouraged by laxregulation of financial institutions and financial markets.(This was, of course, a disloyal effort to put the blame forthe recession on President Reagan.) Monetary policy had beentightened too much and eased too late. European economies hadslowed down. The oil shock associated with the Gulf War haddrained purchasing power and created uncertainties. Defenseproduction had been curtailed.   But all of these claims could not cover up the basic fact.It is taxes that make the world go round -- or keep it fromgoing round. The decision to raise taxes in 1990 had been thefatal blow to capitalism, free markets and conservatism.   ---   A former chairman of the president's Council of EconomicAdvisers, Mr. Stein is an American Enterprise Institutefellow.</TEXT></DOC>