<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910508-0127</DOCNO><DOCID>910508-0127.</DOCID><HL>   Against the Odds:   As Others Scale Back   On School Integration,   Charlotte Presses On   ---   Parents Have Helped Create   A Model Busing Program;   Harmony Aids Economy   ---   Test Scores Remain a Problem   ----   By Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><RE>NORTH CAROLINA (NC)</RE><LP>   CHARLOTTE, N.C. -- Court-ordered busing evokes uglyimages: violence, tear gas, boycotts, white flight. It evokesBoston, Chicago, Detroit.   So how to explain Charlotte?</LP><TEXT>   On a spring afternoon at West Charlotte High School, atrio of teen-age girls -- two black, one white -- chatteraimlessly in the parking lot. Inside the building, amultiracial horticultural club decorates a foyer. The studentexecutive committee, a warm picture of integrated youngAmerica, convenes in a nearby classroom. Te' Ali Coley, ablack committee member of pro football proportions, deliversthe party line: &quot;If you're racist when you come here, youhave to change your ideas or put them under cover.&quot;   The school was all-black in the days before forced busingbegan in 1971. Now it is almost 40% white, yet signs ofracial strife are few and far between. &quot;I never thought I'dsee this in the South,&quot; says William P. Hamlin Sr., WestCharlotte Class of '63, specifically noting the school'sfestive and integrated homecoming parade.   Particularly in a city with a history of racialconfrontation, it does seem extraordinary. In many urbancenters, white flight has left school districtsoverwhelmingly black. The U.S. Supreme Court has given schooldistricts new latitude to end busing plans implemented aslong as 20 years ago, and some cities appear eager to revertto neighborhood schools. Not Charlotte. Its school board hassteadfastly rejected any proposals to end its forced busingprogram.   Charlotte's success with busing, in the face offrustration in cities such as Boston, may offer some lessonsfor other cities still seeking to integrate their schools.The Charlotte program is the product of parental commitment-- including a big boost from middle-class whites -- andperseverance. Above all else, says Roslyn Mickelson, aUniversity of North Carolina sociologist who has studied theschool system, it is the result of &quot;a consensus fordesegregation across class, across race and across politicalparties.&quot;   Busing for integration was necessary because Charlotte hassegregated housing patterns. The school board says 55% of thecounty's black students, but only 15% of white students, livewithin four miles of the center of Charlotte.   But, in terms of school integration, Charlotte hassomething going for it that most other cities can't match:Its school district includes both urban and suburban areas.This means that whites have only three choices: try to makebusing work, put their children in private schools or moveout of the entire metropolitan area. What they can't do isavoid busing by leaving the city for the suburbs because thesuburbs are part of the busing plan.   In the 1970s, some other cities tried to extend busingacross city-suburb borders, but the Supreme Court refused toallow it unless the school districts already were combined.In Boston, where the school district includes only the urbanarea, public school enrollment dropped from 90,000 to 56,000during 11 years of busing, partly because the separatesuburbs beckoned to whites. School districts in such citiesas Detroit, Chicago and Dallas also lost a majority of whitestudents.   In the Charlotte-Mecklenburg County district,public-school enrollment has dropped slightly since busingbegan, while private-school enrollment has increasedslightly. Before busing, the school system was 71% white;today, it is 58% white.   In Boston, paid experts with impressive academiccredentials devised a mathematical formula for pupilassignments, often neglecting community interests and ethnictensions. The result was chaos and violence. &quot;Boston dideverything wrong,&quot; says Gary Orfield, director of theNational School Desegregation Project at the University ofChicago.   In Charlotte, after a rocky start and sporadic violence,federal Judge James B. McMillan put the task of developing apupil assignment plan in the hands of parents. The parents'organization, called the Citizens Advisory Group, was abiracial coalition of mostly middle-class parents led byMaggie Ray, a white housewife who now teaches at WestCharlotte High. By 1975, four years after the Supreme Courtmandated busing in Charlotte, the coalition had developed afinal plan that addressed the fears of both blacks and poorwhites that their children would be bused disproportionatelyand the hopes of all parents that bus rides would be short.   The pupil-assignment plan for West Charlotte High,situated in a center-city black enclave about 10 minutes fromthe city's midpoint, answered parents' concerns. Bothaffluent and poor whites were bused to the school fromcommunities not farther away than a 20-minute drive. Inaddition, great care was taken to strengthen the school whilepreserving its legacy as a revered all-black institution thathad helped produce many of Charlotte's black professionals.   The school board made West Charlotte more attractive toboth white and black parents by adding the system's onlyopen-studies curriculum for advanced students. The schoolalso added the system's only English-as-a-second-languagecurriculum, further spicing up the school's multiracialculture.   According to the results of a poll by Louis Harris andamp;Associates, affluent whites and blacks tend to oppose busingmore than others out of fear that their children's educationwill suffer. But in Charlotte, the more affluent parentsembraced the integrated schools. &quot;Affluent whites havepower,&quot; says Ms. Ray, recalling how a needed fence waserected at one school only after white parents protested.&quot;That sort of thing began to happen all over the system.Integration dispersed the power of white parents,&quot; Ms. Raysays.   Some observers say the effort to forge the busing plantriggered a chain reaction. In his 1988 book &quot;The Dream LongDeferred,&quot; which chronicles Charlotte's busing story, FryeGaillard concluded that the pro-busing group set in motion abiracial activism that led to the political emergence ofHarvey Gantt, who was elected Charlotte's first black mayorin 1983 and barely failed to unseat Sen. Jesse Helms lastyear.   Ms. Mickelson, the sociologist, who has two children inCharlotte-Mecklenburg schools, says racial harmony helpedfuel the city's economic development by making the cityattractive to foreign businesses and major-league sportsfranchises. &quot;There's is a real different sense of communityhere,&quot; Ms. Mickelson says. &quot;It is very religious and it'salso very enlightened. There is a respect for the law.&quot;   The pupil assignment plan dictates that blacks should notmake up more than 50% of any student body, although about 20of the district's 104 schools exceed the limit. About 52,000students are bused daily; about 12,000 of those are bused toachieve racial balance. Most routes take about 20 minutes.   No one pretends that perfect racial harmony has beenachieved. Students say racial animosity is readily apparentat North Mecklenburg High, a nearby school with a large ruralstudent population. Indeed, when a black reporter approaches,one of about 20 white male teen-agers standing outside thecafeteria hollers, &quot;Black man, black man: What are you doingin our parking lot?&quot;   Michael Turner, the black principal of North MecklenburgHigh, says he can only guess that the student wasn't beingracist but reacting to a stranger. But he adds: &quot;I thinkwe've still got a lot of work to do. I don't care where youare in the South. We're no exception to that.&quot; Mr. Turnersays North Mecklenburg students are dealing with the school'simage. For instance, the school's mascot used to be a JohnnieReb; now it's a pirate.   Even at West Charlotte, the task of achieving bothintegration and social harmony is complex. Take theexperience of April Turner, a model student and daughter ofNorth Mecklenburg's principal. Two years ago, she wore aT-shirt to school that said, &quot;It's a black thing. Youwouldn't understand.&quot; Ms. Ray, the teacher who fought forbusing in the early 1970s, was insulted. &quot;I told her, `You'realienating me, I'm your friend,'&quot; Ms. Ray says.   That quickly led to an informal discussion about race andthe history of the civil-rights movement among a group ofstudents nearby. &quot;I didn't know that Ms. Ray had fought forcivil rights,&quot; says Ms. Turner, now a freshman at theUniversity of North Carolina. &quot;I felt bad about offending her-- but I wasn't sorry for wearing the shirt.&quot;   A couple of years earlier, Neil Schofield, who is white,ran for class president and sprinkled his campaign speechwith popular lines from rap songs as a way to reach out toblack students. Some thought that bordered upon racialstereotyping, and a controversy brewed. But blacks voted forhim just the same, and he won. &quot;If you want to get elected,you have to appeal to the black vote,&quot; he says, adding thatthe school has achieved a great deal because there are manymultiracial friendships. &quot;Everybody gets along,&quot; he says.&quot;When you come to West Charlotte, you feel like a WestCharlotte Lion.&quot;   Despite a good deal of interracial socializing, studentsstill tend to congregate with others of their own race in thecafeteria, though they say they are just sitting withlongtime friends from their mostly segregated neighborhoods.School dances are integrated but, some students say, notheavily attended because most whites don't go.   There is some interracial dating. Joy Berry, class of1988, remembers having a bad experience when she dated awhite student in her junior year. Her white girlfriendsstared at her incredulously, she says, and black studentsuttered malicious stage whispers when she passed them in thehall. Some of her black male friends tried to persuade herthat little good would come from dating a white. &quot;I spentpart of my senior year seeking some kind of acceptance thatdating Allan was OK,&quot; Ms. Berry says. The high-school romancebroke up later anyway.   When it comes to curricula and school performance, thereis also some tension. For one thing, blacks complain that theteaching of black history is relegated to February, blackhistory month. For another, blacks' test scores, a widelywatched measure of the effects of school desegregation, haveimproved just slightly since busing began. In 1978, blackninth graders in the system trailed their white counterpartsby 41 percentile points on standardized tests; today, whitestudents' scores are about the same, blacks' are a littlebetter, and the gap is 37 points.   Dr. Susan Henry, a school-system assessment specialist,says the gap is probably the result of class differences, notrace, and the board is studying the problem.   Some critics also say the board's policy of &quot;tracking&quot; --dividing students into fast track and slower learning groups-- undermines integration and does little to promote academicexcellence. At West Charlotte, more blacks than whites fallinto the slower classes. Until they take a core course thatis required of everyone, many whites have little contact withblacks in high-school classrooms. &quot;In math class, there wouldbe three blacks out of 25 students,&quot; recalls Candace Hamlin,a black student who graduated in the top 10 of the Class of'87.   Barbara Ledford, principal of West Charlotte, rattles offa list of top black graduates as evidence that tracking isn'tharming black students. &quot;We have many fine minoritystudents,&quot; she says. But she acknowledges that thenon-advanced classes are &quot;more heavily weighted with blackstudents.&quot;   The school board is attempting to address the variousparental concerns. Early this year, it hired Joseph Murphy,school superintendent at Prince George's County in Virginia,to run the schools. He hopes to improve minorities' testscores by adopting a version of the magnet-school programthat succeeded in improving scores among Prince George'sCounty students.   Magnet schools offer specialized curricula and attempt tolure students of both races to share in the enriched schoolenvironment. Theoretically, magnet schools foster integrationbecause students agree to be bused to them voluntarily.   But as long as the Charlotte-area neighborhoods remainsegregated, the board says it will have to maintain forcedbusing. A return to neighborhood schools will surely turnback the clock to one-race schools. And a majority of theboard -- particularly members who grew up in an officiallysegregated society -- don't want to see that happen.   Outside Charlotte, even some longtime warriors in thedesegregation fight seem to have soured on busing. HarvardLaw School professor Derrick Bell, who once spearheaded suitsaimed at requiring school busing, now says the bitter battlesover integration ended up disrupting the education system,hampering blacks' academic performance and making racerelations worse. Integration at any cost shouldn't be thegoal, he says; educating black students should be. &quot;Theintegrated culture has been basically a white culture,&quot; saysMr. Bell, who now supports efforts to create somewell-funded, locally controlled all-black schools instead.   In Charlotte, Joseph Martin, a conservative whiteRepublican member of the board of education, thinksotherwise. He says he became a convert to forced busing whenhe watched his daughter Elizabeth march in the West Charlottehomecoming parade in 1987. &quot;I recall thinking how wonderfulit was that my daughter had an opportunity to be part of amulticultural experience, since that opportunity had beendenied to me in the days of segregation,&quot; says Mr. Martin.   &quot;You can't separate education from integration,&quot; says hisdaughter, now a sophomore at Duke University. &quot;There's a lotmore to education than books.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>