<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900627-0027</DOCNO><DOCID>900627-0027.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Bush Delays Oil, Gas Drilling for Decade   In Large Areas Off California and Florida   ---   Move, Politically Charged,   Affects Fragile Areas;   Lawmakers Collaborate   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)INTERIOR DEPARTMENT (INR)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush made a politically chargeddecision to delay oil drilling in environmentally sensitiveareas off the California and Florida coasts. But he did soonly after employing a favorite tactic: He called in membersof Congress to collaborate on the call.   Lawmakers from California and Florida trooped into theWhite House on consecutive days last month, and, seatedaround a long conference table, gave Mr. Bush a tellingmessage. Neither delegation voiced much enthusiasm abouthaving drilling off its coast. Surprisingly, though, a fewCalifornians -- including Democratic Sen. Alan Cranston --said drilling in some carefully selected spots might beacceptable.</LP><TEXT>   As the decision Mr. Bush unveiled makes clear, thosemessages were pivotal. They galvanized the president'snatural inclination to tilt toward environmental andpolitical concerns in his decision, while offering aconsolation prize to his old friends in the oil industry.   After 16 months of deliberations, Mr. Bush said he ispostponing oil-and-gas leasing and drilling in a large areaoff Florida and nearly all of two large areas off northernand southern California until the year 2000. He also willpermanently ban drilling in California's Monterey Bay anddelay leasing until after 2000 in the Georges Bank area ofthe North Atlantic and an area off Oregon and Washington.   But in a small concession to oil interests, Mr. Bush saidthat 87 potentially lucrative tracts near existing drillingoff the California coast near Santa Barbara might be madeavailable for leasing in 1996, pending further scientificstudies of that area.   &quot;My goal is to create a much more carefully targeted(drilling) program, one that is responsive to local concerns,to environmental concerns, and to the need to developprudently our nation's domestic energy resources,&quot; Mr. Bushdeclared.   The drilling decision is among the most politically touchythat Mr. Bush will handle in this election year, because itdirectly affects the fortunes of Republican gubernatorialcandidates Pete Wilson in California and Robert Martinez inFlorida. Their elections are pivotal to GOP hopes ofcontrolling the drawing of as many as 10 new congressionaldistricts those states are likely to get as a result of thisyear's census.   And while Mr. Bush's decision falls short of the totaldrilling ban environmental activists want, it seems to tiltfar enough toward environmental concerns to insulate thosetwo candidates from attack by environmental groups on theissue.   California's Mr. Wilson, now in the U.S. Senate, has beenparticularly worried about the drilling issue, and at timesin recent months seemed to wish it would just disappear. Atone White House meeting with Mr. Bush, for instance, hecounseled the president against hasty decisions by remindinghim of the story of a death-row inmate who asked for somefresh strawberries as part of his final meal. When told thatstrawberries were out of season, the condemned man replied:&quot;That's all right, I'll wait.&quot;   The story of how Mr. Bush settled the offshore leasingissue speaks volumes about his decision-making style. Never asnap decision-maker, he tends to agonize over a tough call.Faced with a debate between warring factions, he invariablytries to split the difference. And before moving, Mr. Bushtries to draw all factions into his tent by meticulouslyconsulting them.   In this case, Mr. Bush's own advisers were split over howto finesse the delicate matter. Interior Secretary ManuelLujan angered White House aides at one point in thedeliberations by suggesting in a speech that moratoriums ondrilling are a bad idea and leaving listeners with theimpression he wanted to plunge ahead with development. Mr.Lujan was forced to issue a statement declaring he remainedcommitted to environmental protection.   Meanwhile, such advisers as presidential pollster RobertTeeter argued that the chances of actually drilling insensitive areas off California and Florida coasts wereremote, regardless of what Mr. Bush decided, becausecongressional action and environmental lawsuits would tie updevelopers anyway. Some White House aides contended it mightbe wiser for Mr. Bush to save his political capital for alater fight to begin drilling in the big Alaska NationalWildlife Refuge, which may have rich oil reserves.   The offshore-leasing decision was especially agonizing forMr. Bush, because he was torn between his love for theoffshore-drilling business, which he helped create as a Texasoil man, and his politically important promises to be an&quot;environmental president.&quot; During one meeting with lawmakers,an aide recalls, Mr. Bush posed a series of rhetoricalquestions that disclosed his inner struggle. &quot;If we go downthis pike,&quot; Mr. Bush asked, &quot;where are we going to get theenergy if we have another oil shock? Wind? Come on. Solar?&quot;Mr. Bush didn't answer his own queries.   The long odyssey toward a decision actually began on anairplane carrying presidential candidate George Bush to acampaign event in California in October 1988. Campaign aides,worried about staying on the right side of the environmentalconcerns prominent in that hotly contested state, gave Mr.Bush a draft of a speech in which he would declare that hefavored holding up drilling in both northern and southernCalifornia for more study.   Mr. Bush called the aides to his cabin on the plane andquestioned taking such a stand. &quot;Do we want to lock this in?&quot;he asked. But he was persuaded to do so.   Once he was in the White House, Mr. Bush tackled theproblem by turning to a time-honored method for putting off atough decision: He formed a task force, and called on it tostudy proposed lease sales in both California and Floridawaters -- technically known as lease areas 91, 95 and 116.   But simply forming a task force on these sensitive issuesproduced wrangling. Interior Secretary Lujan proposed that hebecome chairman of the group and that the EnvironmentalProtection Agency and the National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration be given merely advisory roles. White Houseaides were worried that under his configuration, Mr. Lujanand Energy Secretary James Watkins -- both generallyconsidered to be pro-drilling -- would be the dominant forceson the task force. So White House officials pressured Mr.Lujan to include the EPA and NOAA as full members of the taskforce, along with budget director Richard Darman.   The task force held hearings, read 11,000 pieces of mailon the issue and even sent submarines to study the oceanfloor. But all this failed to produce a consensus, as wasapparent when the task force finished up a thick report andgave it to President Bush at a White House meeting inJanuary. The report offered a wide array of options, whichaides say would have had the effect of delaying leasing ayear or two, five years or 10 years.   Mr. Bush wasn't satisfied with his choices, and he didn'tface any burning timetable for deciding. So he ordered WhiteHouse aides to go to work further defining options. Morepapers went back and forth to the president, filtered throughhis chief of staff, John Sununu, and it became clear thatwhat Mr. Bush was seeking was a way to slice the issue eventhinner -- a way to allow drilling in some parts of thecontroversial areas while blocking it entirely in others.   Meanwhile, lobbying intensified on both sides of theissue. In January, for example, Chevron Corp. Chairman K.T.Derr, a politically active friend of the president, sent athree-page letter saying he could understand delaying theCalifornia lease sale for as long as five years, becausedrilling there already has been slowed by state and localconcerns, but arguing that there wasn't any reason for adelay in Florida.   Last month, Mr. Bush called the task force back in formore deliberating, and met with the congressionaldelegations. Finally, about a month ago, Mr. Bush got a staffmemo outlining a decision he liked.   All that was left was timing the announcement. Ultimately,White House aides say, they decided to announce theoffshore-leasing decision, which they hope will satisfyenvironmentalists, on the same day they unveiled a decisionto allow logging to proceed despite concerns about thenorthern spotted owl, a decision environmentalists won'tlike.   As is often the case with attempted compromises, Mr. Bushdidn't entirely please either side on the drilling issue. Theoil industry reacted with bitter complaints. &quot;These decisionson offshore oil and natural gas leasing are harmful to ourcountry and economy,&quot; the American Petroleum Institutedeclared. &quot;Locking up these energy-rich lands at a time whenour dependency on foreign energy is escalating is a seriousmistake.&quot;   The National Ocean Industries Association, an organizationrepresenting the offshore-oil industry, declared that Mr.Bush has &quot;abdicated his responsibility to provide safe anddependable energy supplies for the American people.&quot;   Oil companies with significant offshore investments echoedthe petroleum institute. Phillips Petroleum Co. said thateven though none of its current plans are affected by themoratorium, it nonetheless is disappointed.   &quot;The oil industry has shown it can drill and produce oiloffshore in an environmentally safe manner. . . . Notdeveloping U.S. offshore oil and gas reserves can increasetanker traffic (for importing), a source of recent oil-spillproblems,&quot; Phillips said. The Bartlesville, Okla., companyearlier this year took a $280 million charge on its offshoreCalifornia investments where production has been stalled bySanta Barbara-based citizens groups fearful of transportationmishaps.   A spokesman for Chevron said, &quot;Our initial reaction towhat we're seeing in news reports is that the president'sactions seem to go too far. We'll need to take a look atwhat's actually been announced and study the details beforewe have any more to say.&quot;   Environmentalists generally expressed pleasure, but alsochided Mr. Bush for not calling for a permanent drilling ban.&quot;These are just temporary, politically expedient steps,&quot; saidthe American Oceans Campaign. &quot;If the president sincerelycares about the environment, he will join with those seekingpermanent protection for these and other important coastalareas.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>