<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911009-0143</DOCNO><DOCID>911009-0143.</DOCID><HL>   Ginnie Mae `Rental' Scam Hits Credit-Hungry Investors   ----   By Christi Harlan   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>INSURANCE (INS)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE RATES (MOR)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>LOUISIANA (LA)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)UTAH (UT)WISCONSIN (WI)</RE><LP>   For companies and individuals caught in the credit crunch,the lure was irresistible: For a fee, they could &quot;rent&quot;millions of dollars in government-backed securities that theycould then use as collateral to get loans.   But the seemingly foolproof financing gambit appears tohave been heavy on the fool side and light on proof.</LP><TEXT>   Government regulators and criminal investigators say theyhave uncovered a nationwide scam in which shady operatorsrent out mortgage-backed securities issued by the GovernmentNational Mortgage Association, or Ginnie Mae. For insurancecompanies, renting assets is accepted in most states, but inthese cases, there's just one problem: The brokers rentingout the Ginnie Maes neither owned nor controlled thesecurities.   The unscrupulous brokers, who appear to be operating byword of mouth, are taking advantage of the continuing creditcrunch to target, among others, small struggling insurers whoneed capital infusions to stave off regulatory action and whoaren't careful to check out the assets they so desperatelyneed.   The scheme works partly because Ginnie Maes are attractivesecurities for lenders and insurance regulators. Thesecurities are formed from pools of mortgages; payment oftheir principal is fully guaranteed by the U.S. Treasurythrough the Government National Mortgage Association, afederal agency.   The unscrupulous brokers offering Ginnie Maes back theirclaims with the serial numbers of genuine Ginnie Maes, easilyobtained from offering documents and investment newslettersthat track the securities. And as regulators and lenders arelearning, no one agency or company keeps track of who ownswhich Ginnie Mae securities, most of which are tradedelectronically on a book-entry basis, without certificates.   Charles W. Havens III, a Washington, D.C. lawyer, says,&quot;Somebody must have given a school for crooks and said thehot item this week is Ginnie Mae securities.&quot; Mr. Havensrepresents an insurer who has been stung by the Ginnie Maescam.   Federal criminal investigators in New Jersey, Louisiana,Texas and Wisconsin are looking into suspected fraud on thepart of the &quot;financiers&quot; who rent out the purported GinnieMaes and those who used them. In New Orleans, fiveindividuals and a Houston-based company are scheduled fortrial this month on federal criminal charges related to theiralleged attempt to borrow $2.76 million from a New Orleansbank using Ginnie Maes they didn't own as collateral for theloan.   Despite the spreading fraud, hardly anyone involved in theGinnie Mae business is offering much help, insuranceregulators and scam victims say. The Goverment NationalMortgage Association, which has known about the scheme for aslong as a year, only last month issued a letter of caution to19 trade organizations representing lenders, insurancecompanies and accountants, warning that in some casesdocuments showing Ginnie Mae ownership may be fraudulent.   The National Association of Insurance Commissioners'general counsel warned against the scheme in a speech latelast year. But even that was six months too late for Utahinsurance regulators.   The Utah insurance department had agreed in July 1990 toaccept a capital infusion of $4.7 million of Ginnie Maes onthe books of Commercial Surety Insurance Corp., along-dormant company that was trying to get back in business,says Bill Lovelady, chief examiner for the Utah insurancedepartment. Insurance companies are allowed to &quot;rent&quot; assetsin most states by swapping so-called surplus notes (which arebacked by an insurance company's expected future surpluscapital) for government securities or securities-backednotes. The swap adds assets to the insurer's books, allowingit to write more policies.   The owners of Commercial Surety had contracted withDallas-based Reliance Capital Associates (no relation to theReliance Capital Group unit of Reliance Group Holdings Inc.)to rent the Ginnie Maes, Mr. Lovelady says. Reliance Capitalsaid it was offering to rent the Ginnie Maes on behalf of aBeverly Hills, Calif.-based lawyer, who in turn held thesecurities in a trust on behalf of an heiress, he adds.   The Utah insurance department was never able to confirmthat the Ginnie Maes were controlled by either RelianceCapital or the Beverly Hills lawyer. The purported heiress,once she was located, couldn't prove that she owned theGinnie Maes, Mr. Lovelady says. As a result, Utah regulatorsbegan liquidating Commercial Surety earlier this year. Anattorney for Commercial Surety couldn't be reached forcomment, and Reliance Capital's phone is disconnected.   The Senate permanent subcommitte on investigations isscheduled to hold hearings next week on Ginnie Mae abuses inthe insurance industry. Senate staffers say they haveidentified 12 to 15 U.S. insurance companies that have beensucked into the Ginnie Mae scam or have been approached.   Senate investigators are focusing on the difficulty thatregulators and would-be Ginnie Mae renters have inidentifying the ultimate owners of the securities. The trailusually starts at Participants Trust Corp., a New York-basedclearinghouse for Ginnie Maes. It handles payments ofprincipal and interest to the owners of 85% of the $538billion face amount of Ginnie Maes outstanding, but keepsrecords only of its members, or participants, which includebanks and broker-dealers.   The participants, in turn, may be handling Ginnie Maes onbehalf of multiple layers of other lenders and brokers -- anearly impenetrable chain, according to one lawyer who hasbeen working for months to identify the owners of Ginnie Maesthat were offered to his client.   Consider the findings of the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation after a $1 million pool of Ginnie Maes,purportedly held in trust by a Dallas company, was offered ascollateral for a Milwaukee bank loan. The FBI traced the poolto Participants Trust, which said it held half of the poolfor a Chicago bank and half for a New York bank. Both banks,in turn, were holding the pieces of the Ginnie Mae pool onbehalf of yet another bank and a New Hampshire insurancecompany, respectively. (The FBI arrested the would-beborrower last November for allegedly pledging assets hedidn't own; formal charges haven't been filed, a Milwaukeeprosecutor said.)   In the case of many insurance companies, the rented GinnieMaes appear to have rarely reached the insurers' books,either because suspicious insurance regulators stopped thetransactions or because the deals fell apart on their own.But even when a deal collapses, regulators say the promisedtransactions can force regulators to delay closing anotherwise insolvent insurer, driving up the cost ofregulatory action and endangering policyholders.   In Tennessee, for instance, the state Department ofCommerce and Insurance sought a court order in March to takeover Universal Security Insurance Co., a writer of propertyand casualty policies, says Deputy Insurance CommissionerDavid Kumatz. A chancery judge held off regulators after thecompany argued that it had a capital infusion backed by $11million in Ginnie Maes, Mr. Kumatz said.   The Ginnie Maes never materialized. The chancery judge inAugust found that Universal Security was insolvent by $10million and permitted Tennessee regulators to place thecompany in rehabilitation, a proceeding similar tobankruptcy, Mr. Kumatz said. During the six months that thecompany had staved off regulators, it continued to writepolicies.   A lawyer for Universal Security, Barry Bollinger ofChicago, said the company backed away from the Ginnie Maesafter receiving a call from an FBI agent questioning theirvalidity. Mr. Bollinger said the company had lined up a buyerbut was seized by regulators. &quot;I never knew the ownership ofthese things was so hard to trace,&quot; he said.   The warning letter by the Government National MortgageAssociation may flush out more instances of Ginnie Maefrauds, according to investigators. But until lenders andinsurance regulators get a good look at all the Ginnie Maesin their portfolios, the extent of the fraud won't be known,they say.</TEXT></DOC>