<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900406-0153</DOCNO><DOCID>900406-0153.</DOCID><HL>   Debate About Tropical Forests Rages   ---   Southeast Asian Officials   Assail Conservationists   ----   By Raphael Pura   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)</IN><LP>   KUCHING, Malaysia -- Mention the fate of Southeast Asia'stropical forests these days and watch official hackles rise.   &quot;I'm not an environmental villain,&quot; protests Abdul TaibMahmud, chief minister of Sarawak, a steamy Malaysian stateon the north coast of Borneo. He challenges conservationistcritics to fly over his timber-carpeted domain: &quot;You'll belucky if you see any bald patches anywhere in Sarawak.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Like other government leaders across the region, Tan SriTaib has reason to be defensive. Like it or not, SoutheastAsia is being sucked into the center of a global controversyover the world's fast-diminishing tropical forests.   International environmental groups assert that unless theregion's governments and timber industry mend their ways,their actions will contribute to ecological problems thatultimately will affect the entire Earth. Rapid deforestationof the tropics, environmentalists say, threatens to wipe outspecies of plant and animal life, contributes to harmfulchanges in the global climate, and destroys forest-dwellingsocieties.   But Southeast Asian governments, committed to using timberearnings to help power their developing economies, arelashing back. They say their forest policies aren't as bad asthe critics charge, and they see protectionist motives behindthe critics' complaints. Malaysia's combative Prime MinisterMahathir Mohamad, for example, regularly blasts foreignenvironmentalists' criticism as a subterfuge intended to keepdeveloping lands economically subservient long after theindustrialized West and Japan have laid waste to their ownforests.   The confrontation threatens one of Southeast Asia'sbiggest industries. The region holds a quarter of theestimated one billion hectares of remaining tropical forestand controls about 80% of the world's $7 billion in annualtropical-timber trade.   In Tan Sri Taib's Sarawak state, for example, the forestprovides thousands of jobs, pays half the government's bills,finances local political dynasties and supports some ofAsia's richest, if most obscure, tycoons. One of the world'smain exporters of hardwood logs, Sarawak reaped an estimated$1 billion last year from timber sales.   &quot;If you stop logging tomorrow, you stop the whole state,&quot;says Sarawak's environment and tourism minister, James WongKim Min.   Southeast Asia's forests aren't facing extinction yet. Butall is not well. Recent studies -- as well as interviews withgovernment officials, timber-industry officials, academicsand conservationists throughout the region, and visits tologging sites and forest settlements -- make it clear thatcurrent methods of exploitation are shrinking the size anddegrading the quality of Southeast Asia's remaining forest.   &quot;The forests have been treated like mines,&quot; says aEuropean tropical-forestry expert based in Indonesia. &quot;Theyare exploited, not appreciated as a permanent resource.&quot;   The region hasn't suffered the wholesale destruction thathas marred some Latin American and African forests. Despiteheavy logging and an influx of settlers, huge areas ofSoutheast Asia -- especially in Indonesia, Malaysia and PapuaNew Guinea -- are blanketed in the ecologically richest rainforests in the world, lush in timber, plant and wildlife.   Independent experts say long-term preservation of theSoutheast Asian forests depends on whether they can bemanaged on an economically productive and ecologically soundbasis. That is technically feasible, they say, but the effortwill require fundamental changes in government and popularattitudes toward the forests, a firm commitment to newpolicies that place a higher value on the resource, andsophisticated forest management never before seen in theregion.   In the meantime, the outlook is for an increasingly bitterconfrontation between Southeast Asian governments scramblingto defend their policies and environmental groups seeking tocurtail commercial logging. The clash could cause headaches,too, for international lending institutions and Westernofficials who formulate trade and aid policies.   Last year, the World Wide Fund for Nature (formerly theWorld Wildlife Fund), the world's largest privateconservation organization, called for a halt, within fiveyears, to all international tropical timber trade that isn'tproduced by ecologically sound logging practices.   Only about 1% of tropical-timber output currently meetsthe fund's criteria. The fund chastised Japan, in particular,for abetting deforestation by being the largest importer oftropical timber, more than 90% of it from Southeast Asia.   Other environmental groups and &quot;Green&quot; political partiesin Europe want boycotts of tropical-timber products and arespreading their campaign to the U.S., where the issue hasattracted the interest of legislators. The activists wantsuch institutions as the World Bank and the Asian DevelopmentBank to stay out of development projects that they chargecontribute to forest degradation. They also want to makeWestern aid to timber-producing countries contingent on therecipient's environmental record.   The pressure appears to be producing some results. TheEuropean Parliament has called on the European Community toadopt regulations imposing quotas on tropical-timber imports,although the EC has yet to do so. In Indonesia,environmentalists are claiming partial credit for Scott PaperCo.'s recent decision to drop out of a $654 millionpulp-and-paper project, although the U.S. company says itacted for other reasons. In Malaysia, conservationists claimcredit for a central-government decision, announced inNovember, to stop the export of logs from its Borneo statesof Sarawak and Sabah. Both states are resisting the move,however, and no timetable has been set for itsimplementation.   Alarmed at the growing influence of the environmentalmovement, Southeast Asian governments and the timber industryhave mounted a public-relations counterattack. Last month,officials of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,which comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,Singapore, Thailand and Brunei, decided to send missions tothe EC, Japan and the U.S. to lobby against restrictivetimber-trade measures being advocated by environmentalgroups.   Officials contend that Western critics are, wittingly ornot, promoting trade restrictions in the guise ofenvironmental protection. &quot;If the world is really concernedwith tropical forests, then it should open its markets so wewon't be so dependent on forest industries,&quot; says Indonesia'senvironment and population minister, Emil Sa lim. &quot;Everybodytalks about tropical forests, but they don't talk aboutdevelopment.&quot;   At the same time, however, Southeast Asian policy makersconcede that their forests have suffered from poor managementand ill-controlled exploitation. In the Philippines andThailand, for example, most primary forests have been ravagedbeyond hope of rehabilitation by reckless logging and illicitsettlement.   Southeast Asian officials also privately acknowledge thatdespite adoption of logging and land-use policies that lookreasonable on paper, enforcement is haphazard and damagingpractices continue.   But officials in Malaysia and Indonesia say conditions intheir countries aren't as bad as portrayed by the critics.They assert that foreign activists, and small butincreasingly vocal domestic environmental groups, areill-informed and present a distorted picture of what is goingon. Between them, Indonesia and Malaysia account for about75% of the remaining primary-forest area in Southeast Asiaand are the region's main timber exporters.   Across Southeast Asia, officials say they are taking stepsto improve matters. For example, Indonesia's forestryminister, Hasjrul Harahap, has pledged to crack down onabuses by politically well-connected logging concessionairesand is backing policies designed to make the timber industrymore efficient and more ecologically responsible. &quot;Thequestion you're asking is, Can we control it?&quot; he says. &quot;Theanswer is yes. But give us time and give us help.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>