<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900906-0037</DOCNO><DOCID>900906-0037.</DOCID><HL>   Battle Plans:   If War Comes, the U.S.   Hopes to Make It Brief   With High-Tech Blitz   ---   But the Desert Could Force   American Troops to Fight   Iraq's Kind of Land Battle   ---   Untested Arms and Soldiers   ----   By Andy Pasztor and Bob Davis   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   RIYADH, Saudi Arabia -- If war breaks out in the PersianGulf, the U.S. hopes the fighting goes something like this:   In the air, U.S. pilots use electronic deception toconfuse distant Iraqi warplanes and then blast them withinfrared missiles. At sea, the battleship Wisconsin launchescruise missiles that devastate distant Iraqi command centers.Close to the ground, Apache helicopters fire laser-guidedHellfire missiles that cripple Iraqi tank columns still milesaway.</LP><TEXT>   Within days, Iraq's air force is destroyed, its army isragged and Saddam Hussein is in full retreat. Americancasualties number in the hundreds, rather than the thousandssome feared.   So goes the Pentagon's optimistic vision of an offensiveagainst Iraq and its troops in Kuwait: Fighting from afar andexploiting high-tech weaponry, the U.S. wins against an enemythat can't see its attackers. But this scenario of lots ofglory and little gore may prove more fantasy than reality ina modern war in the exposed desert. The U.S. may havesuperior air power and electronic weaponry, but Iraq, withits huge army and larger number of tanks and artillery, isstill powerful on land. A war could -- contrary to Pentagonthinking -- suck thousands of American troops into a killingfield.   The Arab-Israeli conflict in 1973 showed what can happenwhen large forces of planes and ground troops fight in theopen desert. In just two weeks of battle, 20,000 soldierswere killed or wounded and 1,500 tanks and 550 aircraft weredestroyed.   Can the U.S.'s technology advantage make a markeddifference? Clearly, it gives American troops an edge, buthow much of one no one really knows. Many of the weapons theU.S. is deploying, including the Hellfire missile, designedto destroy tanks, and the Patriot missile, designed to shootdown missiles and aircraft, have never been tested in battle.Neither have the vast majority of U.S. troops, whose trainingconsists of war games in the California and Egyptian deserts.   The U.S. will do all it can to avoid slugging it out inprolonged ground warfare, of course. The model for the way ithopes to fight is Israel's stunning 1982 victory over Syria'sair force in Lebanon. The Israelis used technology with keeneffectiveness. They first sent a series of unmanned aircraftoutfitted with sophisticated electronics over Syriananti-aircraft sites in the Bekaa Valley. The drones fooledthe Syrians into launching most of their missiles beforeIsraeli jets even arrived, and also detected the radarfrequencies the Syrians were using. Israeli F-4s then firedradar-guided missiles to destroy the Syrian radar antennaewhile F-16s and A-4s dropped cluster bombs that smashed therest of the sites. When the battle was over, the Israelis haddestroyed 17 Syrian missile sites and 85 Syrian jets. Israeldidn't lose a single aircraft.   &quot;This is what we'd like to do in principle,&quot; says retiredMaj. Gen. Gerald Carey, former commander of the Air Force'sTactical Air Warfare Center.   American planners believe the U.S. is deploying anoverwhelming arsenal on the Arabian peninsula but say that,if the U.S. ultimately does launch an offensive, it wouldn'tdo so for at least several weeks. In any engagement, saysGen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of American forces inthe Middle East, &quot;we would be using capabilities that are farmore lethal, far more accurate and far more effective thananything we have ever used.&quot;   The centerpiece of the U.S. arsenal is its capability towage the most sophisticated electronic warfare ever seen. AU.S. attack on Iraqi forces would begin with a wave of airstrikes against anti-aircraft missile installations. Thesuccess of the U.S. missions would turn largely on systemsaboard U.S. planes that jam enemy communications, warn ofenemy radar tracking U.S. planes and point U.S. missiles andbombs to enemy targets. In many cases, these advanced systemswould make many of the judgments about who the enemy is andwhen to fire at him.   The U.S. strike would also begin far from the targetitself. Outside the range of Iraqi anti-aircraft missiles,two U.S. EF-111 and EC-130 jamming aircraft would circle. TheEF-111 jet would direct waves of electronic signals at Iraqiradarscopes, which control the Iraqi surface-to-air missiles,burying the radar operators under a blizzard of electronicnoise that masks the advance of U.S. warplanes. At the sametime, the lumbering EC-130 turboprop would jam thecommunications links within the missile site and between thesite and command centers around Iraq. The Iraqi missile basewould then be blind, deaf and isolated.   Four U.S. warplanes -- one stubby F-4G &quot;Wild Weasel&quot; andthree sleek F-16 attack jets -- would then swoop into action.The F4G would launch HARM air-to-ground missiles, which homein on the Iraqi tracking beam from the missile site, andfollow it to the ground, destroying the radar antenna andrendering the missiles useless. The HARM missiles areespecially potent, says Gen. Carey: &quot;Either he {the Iraqi}shuts down his radar and his missiles are no good or he stayson and gets destroyed.&quot;   The F-4G also would relay targeting information to theF-16s, which then would drop a load of cluster bombs packedwith shrapnel. If all went according to plan, the missilesites would be destroyed in just 10 minutes.   That's what happens if the Iraqis don't have anyelectronics tricks of their own. HARMs can be fooled bymissile sites equipped with radar that can jump frequencies-- making it hard for the HARM to lock onto the telltalesignal -- or by sites that can launch decoys to distract theU.S. missiles. Gen. Carey doubts the Iraqis have suchsophisticated defenses, but it's impossible to know for sure.   Meanwhile, America's F-117 Stealth fighter, the newestaircraft to be deployed in the Gulf, would be used to attackcommand centers and other heavily defended sites wheresurprise and accuracy are key. The Stealth, which wouldlikely be used only at night, is notable for its ability toelude detection by radar.   The plane made its debut in Panama, where two dropped2,000-pound bombs. Although Defense Secretary Cheney boastedof the aircraft's &quot;pinpoint accuracy,&quot; it later became clearthat one of the jets missed its target by 160 yards.   Assuming at this point that Iraqi air defenses and commandcenters have been knocked out, the U.S. could begin itsoffensive against Iraq's forward ground forces. The firstmove would probably be a helicopter attack on Iraq's tanks atnight. In the past helicopters generally weren't used forthat type of engagement. They couldn't carry enough firepowerand had to get dangerously close to their targets and bepointed directly at them to score a hit.   The Army expects the twin-rotor, bulbous-nosed Apache,with its armor-piercing rockets and clusters of Hellfiremissiles, to revolutionize anti-tank warfare. Barrelingtoward its target at nearly 150 miles an hour -- fast for ahelicopter -- the Apache is designed to fly just 30 or 40feet off the ground for hours at a time. If its nose isn't inline with its enemy, the two-man crew can rely on advancedlaser-guided homing systems to guide its 16 Hellfire missilesto the tanks. Similarly, the Apache can hide behind, say, asand dune, and use the Hellfire's on-board computers to helpthe missiles jig over obstacles, identify a target that isn'tvisible to the pilots, and then lock on and destroy it.   Each missile costs about $30,000, so even veteran Apachepilots have fired relatively few of them in training. But thecrews say the desert's flat terrain and long distances areideal for the Apache's tank-killing capabilities.   &quot;We can take out 200 tanks easy in about two hours,&quot; ArmyLt. Col. Dick Cody, commander of an Apache batallion, toldreporters last month. &quot;It's a pilot's dream out here.&quot;   But it's a potential nightmare too.   To begin with, dodging dense Iraqi ground fire may beriskier than Saudi and American pilots expect. Israel usedhigh-tech weaponry in its Lebanon victory but also reliedheavily on intimate knowledge of Syrian capabilities andexhaustive practice of the raid. &quot;That's a lot different fromthe U.S. suddenly finding itself in Arabia,&quot; observes oneMarine general. &quot;We're still asking, `Now, what do we knowabout the Iraqis?'&quot;   What's more, the recent record of U.S. air efforts in theregion isn't reassuring. The 1980 attempt to rescue the U.S.hostages in Iran ended in humiliation when aircraft failedand crashed into each other deep in the Iranian desert,killing eight servicemen. In 1983, the U.S. bungled an attackon Syrian anti-aircraft guns and missile batteries inLebanon. It has had better luck shooting down Libyan jets intwo altercations in the 1980s, but in 1986, when the U.S.launched an air raid against Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi'sheadquarters, only two of the nine F-111 bombers involvedeven dropped their bombs; neither hit the targets precisely.One plane was shot down or crashed, and another mistakenlyattacked a civilian neighborhood.   American air crews face far tougher obstacles in the Gulfthan in Lebanon or Libya. Many U.S. pilots in Saudi Arabiaare still trying to learn the terrain, become familiar withcomplicated air-traffic control procedures and fly routinepatrols with Saudi aircraft. &quot;I haven't flown yet with theSaudis at all,&quot; Air Force Lt. Alan Kollien, a pilot with the1st Tactical Fighter Wing from Langley, Va., recently toldreporters.   The Iraqis are trying their utmost, too, to confuseAmerican pilots. U.S. officers say that in the past few weeksIraq has moved or changed the operation of some of the 300missile batteries the country is believed to have. Withoutup-to-date information about the batteries, American flyershurtling over an unfamiliar border could turn into vulnerabletargets.   Even commanders in the field acknowledge that aircraft andtheir sophisticated weapons can't do the job by themselves.Air power alone &quot;didn't work on the Ho Chi Minh trail, and itwon't work on the battlefield of the future,&quot; says Gen. EdScholes, chief of staff for most of the Army troops in SaudiArabia.   But ground forces, too, face huge obstacles, and even thebest technology probably wouldn't save them from heavylosses. Partly because many of its heavy tanks haven't yetarrived, and partly because it needs distance to take fulladvantage of its stand-off weaponry, the U.S. would fall backinto the Saudi desert if Iraq attacked, say militaryplanners. The Americans would then disrupt Iraq'scommunications and supply lines.   But this shoot-and-run maneuver counts on some of thelong-range weapons -- both on the ground and in the air -- tooperate exceptionally well despite their record of performingbadly in tough conditions. Panama's hothouse humidity, forinstance, created major difficulties for the Apache'stargeting electronics. In the Persian Gulf, helicopters builtto sit on airport concrete would have trouble operating fromthe rough desert floor for more than a few weeks, U.S.officers predict. Moreover, in many cases their engines haveto be flushed daily to prevent sand damage.   The desert's fine dust can jam machine guns, damage jetturbines and even wear down tank treads. Dust storms, whethercaused by nature or by the movement of tanks, would obscureenemy targets and could force U.S. troops to hold off firingtheir vaunted anti-tank TOW missiles, exposing the Americansto Iraqi tank fire.   Coordinating a broad ground and air offensive posesanother problem: communication between U.S. and allied Arabtroops and between different branches of the U.S. armedservices. That's a longstanding American weakness. InGrenada, some U.S. troops could see Navy ships offshore, butweren't able to communicate with them.   What's more, formal coordination arrangements stillhaven't been worked out between U.S. and Saudi commanders.Indeed, says one military electronics expert, the U.S. can'tuse its top-of-the-line radios, which hop frequencies toprotect against eavesdropping, because the Saudi governmentfears the equipment will interfere with Saudi televisionbroadcasts.   In the end, simple provisions such as food and water couldprove more significant in the Gulf crisis than an array ofsophisticated weaponry. In a lengthy standoff, soldiers wouldhave to be kept fit for action. U.S. intelligence officialssay that Iraqi soldiers already are stealing food, water andgasoline at gunpoint from fleeing Kuwaiti refugees,indicating shortages of essentials are occurring at thefront.   But retired Army general Elmer Pendleton, once thePentagon's top officer in Turkey, is quick to add anadditional word of caution. Even if Iraqi troops proveill-equipped and ill-trained, he argues, they amount to &quot;ahell of a lot of people, and they can do a lot of damage.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>