<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911111-0042</DOCNO><DOCID>911111-0042.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>11/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   YUGOSLAV FORCES MOUNTED a battle to capture a Croatianstronghold.   The Serb-led Yugoslav army and Croatia's rebels foughtstreet-to-street for control of Vukovar, a key battlegroundin the nation's civil war. As Vukovar appeared on the vergeof falling, the federal army also shelled Dubrovnik, withsome grenades falling in the historic city center. At least40 people were killed in the weekend fighting, despiteFriday's announcement of European Community sanctions againstYugoslavia and a surprise appeal by the Serb-dominatedYugoslav leadership for U.N. peacekeepers in the secessionistrepublic.</LP><TEXT>   With Croatia's situation deteriorating and a third of itsland controlled by the army and Serb irregulars, the republicimposed new media censorship rules to protect militarysecrets.   ---   A rebel leader in south Russia rallied his backers indefiance of a state of emergency imposed Friday by RussianPresident Yeltsin, and about 650 Russian soldiers werewithdrawn from the enclave. Gen. Dudayev, head of theChechen-Ingush autonomous region, has pledged to achieveself-determination for the territory.   ---   Gubernatorial hopeful Duke admitted he had been intolerantof blacks and Jews in the past. During an interview on NBC,he blamed a New Orleans crime wave on &quot;the liberal,socialistic welfare system.&quot; Duke, a former Ku Klux Klansman,is running as a Republican in Louisiana, though GOP officialsand Bush have disavowed him.   ---   Australian soldiers flew into Cambodia, the first of anexpected 23-nation U.N. force that will try to keep peacethere after 13 years of civil war. U.S. officials planned togo to Phnom Penh today to restore diplomatic ties severed 16years ago. Prince Sihanouk, chosen to lead an interimgovernment, is to arrive Thursday from Beijing.   ---   American and German Jews appealed to Germany's governmentto do more to protect Jews and foreigners threatened byneo-Nazis. On Saturday, rightists rallied in Halle andLeipzig to mark the anniversary of the 1938 &quot;Kristallnacht&quot;pogrom. In response, over 100,000 Germans later marched toprotest a rise in racial intolerance.   ---   Six thousand people probably died during last week'sfloods and landslides in the Philippines, the country's civildefense director said, as a new and stronger storm approachedthe island nation. Storm warnings were announced throughoutthe main Philippine island of Luzon for Typhoon Seth, whichis expected to hit today.   ---   Iraqi government troops attacked Kurdish guerrilla linesoutside the Kurdish city of Irbil, wounding three Kurds. Atone point during the sporadic clashes, two U.S. Air Forceplanes passed over the Iraqi troop positions, apparentlysignaling their support for the Kurdish rebels.   ---   An OAS delegation arrived at Haiti's internationalairport, where it was jeered by hundreds of opponents ofousted President Aristide. The Western Hemisphere delegationis seeking Aristide's reinstatement.   ---   France's Mitterrand announced that he would propose amajor reform of the nation's constitution, saying that theproposals would involve a reduction of the presidential termof office from seven to five years and an increase inParliament's powers. Mitterrand also hinted he might stepdown before his second term ends in 1995.   ---   Researchers said they are encouraged by the first humantrials of new drugs to prevent potentially deadly blood clotsfrom reforming soon after a heart attack. The medicines arethe first of a wave of experimental treatments designed tokeep open the coronary arteries that nourish the heart.   ---   British scientists reported that they produced power fromcontrolled nuclear fusion by achieving the first-everdeuterium-tritium reaction. The researchers said theyproduced 1.7 megawatts of power during an experimentSaturday.   ---   The FDA is preparing an overhaul of its drug approvalprocedures to speed up the marketing of prescription drugs.Under the plan, there would be a fast track for drugs thattreat life-threatening diseases. Private research labs andother outside contractors would be allowed to screen some newdrugs.   ---   South Korean President Roh declared Friday that thecountry will use nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposesand &quot;will not manufacture, possess, store, deploy or usenuclear weapons.&quot; Seoul defense officials said Roh'sannouncement covers U.S. nuclear weapons that are believed tobe in South Korea.   ---   Hong Kong forcibly repatriated 59 Vietnamese boat peopleon Saturday as relief officials said they face major problemsin sending back the 58,000 refugees living in the colony'scamps. The U.S., meanwhile, repeated its call for Hong Kongto stop forced repatriations, noting a rise in the number ofrefugees volunteering to return.   ---   Died: Yves Montand, 70, outspoken French singer and actor,Saturday, in Senlis, France, of a heart attack.</TEXT></DOC>