<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900814-0019</DOCNO><DOCID>900814-0019.</DOCID><HL>   Saudi Arabia   Refuses to Load   An Iraqi Tanker   ---   Kingdom's Move Indicates   It Is Enforcing Embargo   By U.N. Against Trade   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST FORGN FREST EUROP</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Saudi Arabia turned away a tanker attemptingto load Iraqi crude oil, the surest sign yet that the Saudishave shut down the export of Iraqi oil through a big pipelinethat crosses Saudi territory.   The refusal to load the Iraqi tanker, reported by oilindustry sources and confirmed by U.S. officials, indicatesthat the use of a naval blockade led by the U.S. won't beneeded for now to halt the flow of Iraqi oil from one of itsmajor export points at the Saudi Red Sea port of Yanbu. TheU.S. and Britain have said they are ready to begin usingwarships to block ships carrying Iraqi oil, but some othernations are voicing reservations about a blockade.</LP><TEXT>   Saudi Arabia's action also appears to reflect politicalresolve by its government to enforce a UnitedNations-sponsored trade embargo imposed against Iraq for theinvasion of Kuwait. U.S. officials were watching the tankerclosely for several days near Yanbu. They feared that if thetanker had been loaded and had attempted to leave, it couldhave forced a military move by the U.S. Navy and opened theway for deeper hostilities with Iraq.   Meanwhile, U.S. officials said the threat of an Iraqimilitary move beyond Kuwait to Saudi Arabia persists, despiteIraqi President Saddam Hussein's weekend proposal of adiplomatic initiative to reverse his occupation of Kuwait.Iraq now has about 150,000 troops in Kuwait, the Pentagonsaid, up from its earlier estimate of 120,000. The troops&quot;appear to be digging in&quot; but remain capable of going on theoffensive on short notice, State Department spokeswomanMargaret Tutwiler said.   Pakistan said it will send troops to Saudi Arabia to joinU.S., British, Egyptian, Moroccan and Syrian forces. Theaddition of Pakistan to the force is politically significant,because Pakistan is a Moslem nation, and the Saudigovernment, guardian of Islam's most holy sites, is sensitiveto charges of turning over defense of the nation tonon-Moslems.   The Pentagon said Defense Secretary Richard Cheney willtravel to Saudi Arabia to visit the U.S. soldiers and maystop in other gulf nations.   Concern is growing in the Pentagon about the cost of thehuge U.S. military operation, and officials said the Bushadministration plans to seek supplemental funding fromCongress to cover it.   White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Kuwait'sexiled government has asked all five permanent members of theU.N. Security Council to help enforce a trade embargo againstIraq. Along with the U.S., the permanent members are theSoviet Union, China, France and Britain.   But reports from Paris said that France, which has sentwarships to the region, won't participate in a naval blockadeof shipments to and from Iraq, arguing that by stopping shipsit would become a &quot;co-belligerent&quot; in the Persian Gulfconflict.   The Bush administration, when it received a request fromKuwaiti leaders, said it would begin stopping shipping to andfrom Iraq. Administration spokesmen said the interdictionwould apply to oil shipments leaving Iraq and shipments offood and other goods entering the nation. Pentagon spokesmanPete Williams said officials were drawing up general ordersfor an effort designed to prevent ships from reaching Iraq.   Enforcing the sanctions will be far easier if Turkey andSaudi Arabia don't allow oil through two pipelines that carryIraqi crude to ports for loading on tankers. The pipelineacross Saudi Arabia can carry 1.5 million barrels a day,though it had been shippping only about 800,000 barrels,financial sources said. The pipeline crossing Turkey to theMediterranean Sea has a capacity of about 1.8 million barrelsa day and had been carrying about 1.7 million barrels beforeTurkey blocked the flow of Iraqi oil last week. In addition,Iraq had been shipping 300,000 to 400,000 barrels dailythrough the Persian Gulf.   But one Iraqi lifeline may remain open. A small amount ofIraqi oil also is exported through a pipeline to Jordan, andsome is trucked to the Jordanian port of Aqaba for export.Reports from Jordan said the Jordanian pipeline remains open.And perhaps more important, there were reports that Jordanwould allow shipments of food and other goods destined forIraq to be unloaded at Aqaba for shipment to Iraq by truck.   U.S. officials said the Saudis indicated they refused toload the Iraqi tanker by not sending tugboats to guide itinto port. The Saudis didn't announce that the tanker hadbeen turned away, and the State Department's Ms. Tutwilersaid the U.S. would let the Saudis &quot;speak for themselves&quot; inexplaining why it wasn't filled.   Meanwhile, the Bush administration is beginning to come toterms with the cost of its military operation. President Bushplans to return to Washington from his vacation home in Mainefor meetings today and tomorrow, and among the issues he willaddress is how the gulf crisis affects the administration'sposition in budget negotiations with Congress. Both theunanticipated costs of the gulf operation and slower economicgrowth resulting from higher oil prices will affect theadministration's budget plans.   The administration earlier declared that because of thegulf crisis, parts of the Pentagon budget will be excludedfrom any budget cuts mandated by the Gramm-Rudmandeficit-reduction law.   The ultimate cost of the U.S. military operation -- andwho will pay for it -- is one of the thorniest issues facingthe White House and the Pentagon. Preliminary estimates pegthe Pentagon's cost at a minimum of $3 billion, if the crisiscontinues for just a few months. Some independent estimatesput the monthly cost at $300 million.   As a first step to cover the cost, Mr. Bush may announcethis week that he will seek additional appropriations fromCongress. A Pentagon official said the department'slegislative office was notified that the White House will askfor &quot;significant additional appropriations,&quot; but officialsdidn't provide details.   Acknowledging that the price tag could skyrocket iffighting breaks out or if there is a long standoff betweenU.S. and Iraqi forces, Pentagon officials said the U.S. isurging Saudi Arabia to pick up some of the cost. The Saudis&quot;have indicated a general willingness to work out acompromise,&quot; said a military official familiar with theissue. There also is likely to be pressure in the U.S. toforce Japan, more dependent than the U.S. on Persian Gulfoil, to pick up a big share of the tab.   As part of the same talks, U.S. and Saudi militaryofficials are discussing how to set up a coordinated chain ofcommand for the force in Saudi Arabia. The fact that troopsfrom different nations are involved raises questions ofnational pride, along with practical questions about how tocommunicate with officers and troops who speak differentlanguages.   According to Pentagon officials, they haven't reached anydecisions with the Saudis about the cost-sharing or commandissues.   ---   Andy Pasztor contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>