<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900810-0006</DOCNO><DOCID>900810-0006.</DOCID><HL>   Family Business:   Patriarch of Farah Inc.   Loses His Company --   And His Children, Too   ---   Now, After Years of Battles,   He Tries to Regain Control   Of Troubled Pants Maker   ---   A Son's Abortive Takeover   ----   By Alfredo Corchado   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FRA</CO><IN>CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)</IN><LP>   EL PASO, Texas -- In the old days, William F. Farah'sbirthday was a happy time at Farah Inc. Employees would takeup a collection to buy a cake -- in the shape of a pair ofFarah pants, of course -- and hire a mariachi band.Inevitably, Mr. Farah would request his favorite song, &quot;ElRey,&quot; which proclaims that, through persistence, the kingalways prevails.   In a tumultuous quarter-century as chief executive ofFarah, the king, indeed, always prevailed -- over severalpossible successors, over his own sons and over lenders whosought to keep him away from the company his parents created.</LP><TEXT>   But now, Willie, as everyone calls Mr. Farah, may befighting his last battle.   A year ago, the Farah board forced Mr. Farah out as chiefexecutive. In March, the board ousted him as chairman. Thecompany is wallowing in debt and red ink. Its sales, whichpeaked at $366.1 million in 1986, fell to $239 million in1989. Mr. Farah finds himself in a whirl of suits,countersuits and a bitter proxy battle for control of thefamily company he served for 53 years.   His three sons, who grew up with a vision of carrying onthe family business, have been driven out after clashes withthe family patriarch. His daughter, the only family memberstill on the board, voted to oust her father as chairman.   And even though Mr. Farah's 16% stake in the company isstill worth about $4 million, this week he and his wife,Betty, filed for bankruptcy protection. The petition, filedin federal bankruptcy court in El Paso, contains few detailsof the Farahs' finances, but Mr. Farah's lawyer said adecline in the price of Farah stock had led to the filing.Listed among the creditors are the Farahs' four children, towhom they owe an estimated $2.3 million.   Today, shareholders at a special meeting will vote on Mr.Farah's demand to dump seven of the nine directors. He sayshe would replace them with his own slate. This much iscertain: Willie Farah's dream of a family dynasty reigningover a billion-dollar apparel company is dead.   Mr. Farah recently celebrated his 71st birthday -- not athis company, surrounded by loyal employees, a mariachi bandand loving offspring, but at a Mexican restaurant,accompanied only by his wife. &quot;It's really a tragedy,&quot; saysKenneth Farah, one of the sons. &quot;In the end, Willie has nocompany and no love from his family. He sacrificed hisrelationship with his kids for the love of his company.That's a pretty tragic figure.&quot;   Responds Willie: &quot;Our kids have turned out to be decentand great human beings. So it's hard to understand why theyare so vindictive with their parents.&quot;   Farah Inc. was founded here in 1919 by Mansour and HanaFarah, a Lebanese immigrant couple. It was a small butthriving business when Mansour died in 1937 and his two sonstook over.   Jimmy Farah, the financial whiz, neatly complementedWillie, an engineer whose newly designed production linesestablished Farah as an early leader in automation. Thatpartnership lasted until Jimmy's sudden death in 1964. Tothis day, his desk and chair remain as they were.   Jimmy, considered the more flexible and compassionate ofthe brothers, was much beloved by employees. He often joinedworkers for a beer and a game of horseshoes, and he listenedto their suggestions.   Willie, on the other hand, was perceived as opinionatedand unbending. A super-patriot, he insisted on using onlyU.S.-made sewing machines and home-grown needles and thread.For a long time, he would hire only U.S. citizens -- not aneasy task in a town teeming with both legal and illegalimmigrants -- and he refused to build foreign plants, wherewages were lower. Once, he even insisted that a contractorpull out every Japanese-made nail used in the building of hishouse.   Nevertheless, Willie Farah presided over a period ofunprecedented growth at the firm. He shifted its emphasisfrom making private-label slacks for retailers to selling itsown, higher-priced Farah-brand casual slacks to specialty anddepartment stores. He took the company public in 1967. And by1970, sales had skyrocketed to $136 million from just $19million a decade earlier. The work force swelled to 8,000,making Farah El Paso's largest non-government employer.   Mr. Farah's children, who grew up cleaning floors andmanning the switchboard at the company, began takingpositions of responsibility. In 1970, oldest son Jimmy, freshout of Stanford University and the Wharton business school,started in the manufacturing department. Kenneth had earlierdropped out of the University of Texas at El Paso to work inthe customer-service department.   Just about then, things began to go bad for the company.In 1971, workers seeking to unionize launched a strike thatlasted two years and led to a crippling nationwide boycott ofFarah products before Mr. Farah relented.   Willie plowed $10 million into a new textile mill to makedenim, but in an industry plagued by excessdenim-manufacturing capacity, the new plant turned into anexpensive albatross. Mr. Farah also resisted makingdouble-knit slacks when they were all the rage, thenoverproduced them after the fad had peaked.   Mr. Farah won't talk about such specific issues. His sonssay the missteps all stemmed from Mr. Farah's inflexibility,and that he ignored them when they tried to warn him aboutthe problems.   As a result, relations grew increasingly tense. When sonspassed father in the hallway, employees say, few words wereexchanged. Kenneth soon resigned, convinced he could neverwork for his father. &quot;Willie does not tolerate these words:`I don't agree with you,' &quot; he says.   In 1976, Willie bypassed Jimmy and named William Leone, aFarah director, as president. Mr. Farah grew unhappy with hischoice in a matter of weeks and forced him to resign,complaining that Mr. Leone couldn't divine men's fashiontrends. (Mr. Leone couldn't be reached for comment.)   Fed up with Mr. Farah's quirky reign, directors --including son Jimmy -- voted to strip him of the title ofchief executive in 1977. But the act tormented Jimmy,eventually driving him to resign from the board and leave thecompany. &quot;I didn't want to oppose him,&quot; Jimmy says, &quot;but Ialso couldn't support him.&quot;   Willie Farah began to plot a comeback. But he was blockedby a consortium of creditors who threatened to declare a $22million loan in default and padlock the company if heregained control. He grudgingly yielded. But two successivereplacements, including noted turnaround consultant AndrewGalef, failed to revive the company. The new board, Mr. Farahcomplained, consisted of intellectuals who &quot;didn't know adamn thing about the garment industry.&quot;   In 1978, he regained control after a proxy contest andinitiated a purge. Armed security guards escorted Mr. Galefand his aides to their cars, and dozens of employees brandedas disloyal were dismissed.   Mr. Farah also sued the lenders who had sought to preventhis return -- and won a $14 million judgment, one of thefirst to punish lenders for interfering in their borrowers'businesses. Willie Farah was back.   But his empire was in disarray. When he and his latestheir-apparent, Ray Williams, a tough former executive vicepresident of V.F. Corp.'s jeans-making H.D. Lee division,took command, the company needed $350,000 daily to operateand had just $250,000 in the bank.   The two men cut expenses drastically, introduced some hotnew product lines and even went shopping themselves,acquiring trendy Generra Sportswear Co. for $35 million tobeef up apparel offerings.   Mr. Williams convinced Mr. Farah that the company had tomove jobs to other countries to stay competitive. Plants soonblossomed in Costa Rica and Mexico.   But relations between the two men eventually soured. Oneissue: Mr. Farah reneged, former executives say, on a promiseto Mr. Williams to keep the Farah children out of management.In 1979, Jimmy returned as sales manager, and son Robert waseventually named to head international operations. Kennethreturned later as an accountant.   A miffed Mr. Williams resigned in 1984.   For Mr. Farah's sons, the second time around didn't provemuch better than the first. &quot;Willie expected blindobedience,&quot; Kenneth says. The senior Mr. Farah bypassed bothKenneth and Jimmy and offered the presidency to youngest sonRobert. Robert declined, saying the job should be offered tothe oldest brother. Finally, Jimmy got the job. Neither henor his brothers will comment on the episode.   The squabbling continued. The senior Mr. Farah pushed foradded plant capacity that he felt would increase efficiency.Jimmy argued that the company already had high inventorylevels and too much production capacity. The father ended thedebate with a curt, &quot;I know what I'm doing,&quot; Jimmy recalls.   &quot;People say I was my father's whipping boy,&quot; he says.&quot;They were right.&quot;   The sorest point for the family was the patriarch'srefusal to discuss a plan of succession. The issue led tomuch screaming behind closed doors, company officials say.Family-business consultants were flown in for group therapysessions; family members urged Willie -- unsuccessfully -- toattend seminars on coping with family businesses.   Jimmy and Robert finally offered to sell their stock in1986, which their father interpreted as an act of disloyalty,says Jimmy. Kenneth, meantime, secretly began lining upcreditor support for a takeover bid. But word leaked to hisfather, who summoned him to his office.   In a tense meeting also attended by Jimmy and Robert,Kenneth Farah recalls, Mr. Farah searched his son's briefcasefor company documents and asked what the offer was going tobe. He was told $21.50 a share -- the stock was trading atabout $18 -- which he brusquely dismissed as too low.   Then he summoned security guards to escort the banishedscion to his car. &quot;I spent Thanksgiving and Christmas with myin-laws,&quot; Kenneth says. &quot;Holidays haven't been the samesince.&quot;   Soon thereafter, Robert and Jimmy were forced out as well.Mr. Farah was firmly in command again, but sales weredeclining and inventories growing to dangerous levels. Still,he inexplicably pressed for more production capacity.Eventually, he put the money-losing company on the auctionblock, but the only bid was quickly withdrawn. To avoid abankruptcy-court filing, the company sold its profitableGenerra unit to a managementled group for $27 million.   With troubles mounting, Mr. Farah agreed, in the summer of1989, to step down as chief executive in exchange for a $1.2million payment and $365,000 a year for three years ofconsulting. But senior company officials and board memberssay they warned the new CEO, Richard Allender, to expectconstant meddling from Mr. Farah, who remained chairman. &quot;Iknew what I was getting into,&quot; Mr. Allender concedes.   Indeed, within months, the two men were engaging inspirited -- and highly public -- debates about everythingfrom company strategy to painting the walls (Mr. Farahobjected to Mr. Allender's plan to change the wall color fromred to gray). Mr. Allender wanted to improve quality byabandoning automated production in favor of hand-stitchedgarments, an idea that enraged Mr. Farah, the father of thecompany's automated process.   Frustrated, Mr. Farah wrote angry letters to board membersin March, insisting that they either oust the new managementor step down themselves. The move backfired badly. His fellowdirectors booted him off the board and named private investorThomas G. Wyman chairman.   The motion was supported by Mr. Farah's then-pregnantdaughter Haleen, who had privately told other board membersthat she had &quot;no confidence&quot; in her father. She declines tocomment.   Mr. Farah filed suit in El Paso county court, seeking tohave the company restrained from limiting his role. Hecontended the Farah board was filled with &quot;spitefulconspirators&quot; out to ruin him financially. The companycountersued, contending Mr. Farah's fight was just a schemeto postpone payment on a $750,000 company loan. Both suitsare pending.   Mr. Wyman, the new chairman, complains that Mr. Farah&quot;walks around the building telling employees and executivesthat he will fire them if he regains control for supportingtop management. That doesn't do much for morale.&quot;   Mr. Farah, who still has an office in the building becauseof his consulting contract, won't comment on such specifics.But he says he has done nothing wrong. He says the company isbreaking under the weight of an inexperienced board and amanagement team that he derides as &quot;dummies.&quot; He blames thecompany's problems on poor quality, a bad delivery record andmisguided strategy.   At the center of the storm, Mr. Allender talks bravelyabout the new Farah, with its new lighting system, newcomputers and new training program in Mexico and Costa Rica.He boasts of new, higher-quality products for respectedretailers such as Macy's and Dillards that will forever shuckthe company's image as the king of polyester. By spring, hepredicts, Farah will be profitable.   That would be a significant turnaround. For 1989, thecompany had a net loss of $11.6 million. It is carrying about$68 million in debt. And after a $1.4 million second-quarterloss this year, its stock has skidded to less than $3 a sharefrom its 1990 peak of $8.   A tense Mr. Farah complains that his office phone istapped and that Farah officials changed the locks on severalsections of the building to keep him from mingling with keyemployees. He also claims the company is spying on him. Overbarbecued chicken and black coffee at a Dallas restaurant, hewarily eyes a customer reading a newspaper nearby. &quot;He's beenlistening to every word I'm saying,&quot; he says.   Mr. Farah says he has &quot;no relationship&quot; with Jimmy or withhis daughter, who, he adds, hasn't let him and his wife visithis daughter's new son. &quot;Haleen has been mad at me since theday I fired Jimmy,&quot; he says. &quot;But if Jimmy knew what he wasdoing, he'd still be running the company.&quot; He pauses, thenadds: &quot;We worked like dogs all of our lives for ourselves andfor our kids. We gave them one million shares {250,000 shareseach}. Maybe we gave them too much. In retrospect, I wouldhave given them the shares, but no voting power.&quot;   The sons, who once dreamed of inheriting the company, nowhave scattered. Kenneth sells baby furniture and Robert sellsphotographic equipment; Jimmy, who serves as a consultant toapparel manufacturers, recently completed his firstventure-capital transaction. Distance hasn't eased thetension. Last Christmas, when Jimmy showed up at a dinnergiven by Kenneth and his wife, Lysa, his father abruptly rosefrom the table and walked out of the house.   While his family celebrated the season inside, WillieFarah, the once and perhaps future garment king, stewed inhis car for three hours.   Jimmy talks haltingly about his father. &quot;If there'ssomething I really want to be quoted in this article assaying, it's that I really love my pop, I miss my pop,&quot; hesays. Why can't he say that in person? &quot;It's too difficult,&quot;he says. &quot;Believe me, I've tried.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>