<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900810-0063</DOCNO><DOCID>900810-0063.</DOCID><HL>   Real Estate (A Special Report): Origins   ---   Who's to Blame?   How Politicians Failed to Regulate Credit,   Allowing Borrowers and Lenders to Run Amok   ----   By G. Christian Hill</HL><DATE>08/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R17</SO><IN>REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)BANKS (BNK)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   BY NOW YOU'VE READ, in this special report and elsewhere,about the bust in both commercial real estate and theresidential market. But a couple of questions remain. Why didit happen when it did? And whose fault is it?   Too much easy credit and too much greed, leading to toomuch building, right? True as far as it goes, but it doesn'tgo very far.</LP><TEXT>   The fundamental cause of the real-estate bust of the 1980swas the way inept and perhaps craven politicians andbureaucrats destroyed an archaic but crudely effective systemfor regulating the flow of credit in this country. Thissingle series of events brought us a decade in which thrifts,banks, insurance companies, syndicators and developers ranamok.   It all starts back in 1933, when President FranklinRoosevelt got Congress to pass a law authorizing 100% depositinsurance. Most other industrialized countries only partiallyinsure accounts. As a result, they have just a comparativehandful of lending institutions, which are very large and areclosely supervised by a central bank or other nationalauthority. Conversely, because this country's 100% depositinsurance made size and capital strength irrelevant, the U.S.system had spawned more than 20,000 banks and thrifts as offive years ago. The maze was made even more complex because,in a bow to our peculiar federal system, deposit insurancewas offered to state-chartered institutions as well as to thefederally controlled ones.   The nation's nascent state and federal regulatory agenciescouldn't possibly supervise so many institutions veryclosely. But the banks and thrifts were reined in by ceilingson the interest rates they could pay to attract deposits; inaddition, thrifts could make only home loans. By federal law,banks and thrifts could offer no more than 5 1/4% to 5 1/2%on savings accounts, and the Federal Reserve Boardperiodically fought inflation by driving rates just abovethat level. Such Fed moves caused money to flow out of banksand thrifts and into Treasury bills; that dried up credit andcontracted the economy. Real estate, particularly residentialconstruction, was always the first to feel the pinch.   This arrangement worked relatively well until PresidentJohnson, President Nixon and Congress essentially inflatedthe economy starting in the mid-1960s to pay for both theVietnam War and the Great Society, a process of deficitfinancing that has never stopped. The government-inducedinflation often kept market interest rates above the levelthat depository institutions were allowed to pay. Then, inOctober 1979, to break the back of that inflation, theFederal Reserve Board decided to let interest rates risewithout intervening to hold them to a predetermined level.Those developments raised the prospect of perpetual creditcrunches.   Alarmed by the inability of banks and thrifts to eitherraise their own rates or make profits in an environment theythemselves had created, Congress and the Carter and Reaganadministrations from 1980 to 1982 dismantled all restrictionson the flow of money to banks and thrifts. Congress, led byDemocratic Rep. Ferdnand St Germain and GOP Sen. Jake Garn,passed laws that approved deposit insurance up to $100,000 anaccount, removed all interest-rate ceilings, and allowedthrifts to invest in real estate and make commercialreal-estate loans. To avoid large-scale defections bystate-chartered thrifts to a federal charter, the states withthe biggest real-estate markets quickly drove deregulationeven further, giving almost unlimited investment powers totheir savings and loan associations. Thus freed of such stateand federal shackles, thifts and banks could acceleratelending no matter what the Fed did. Most of that lendinggrowth was to come in real estate.   Congress then poured gasoline on this smoldering mess bypassing the Tax Reform Act of 1980, which provided powerfultax incentives for real-estate investment by individuals.There was no obvious need for more office buildings andapartments at that time. But through contributions and otherfavors, the real-estate lobby managed to persuade Congress todo the wrong thing, another process that hasn't ended.   The results were roughly akin to what happened whencommercial banks during the 1970s recycled Middle Eastpetrodollars into bad Third World loans. Lenders recycled anexplosion of deposits and investments into bad real-estateloans and wrongheaded developments. After the severerecession of 1981-82, real-estate lending and investmentsoared. Thrift assets grew from $700 billion in 1982 to apeak of $1.35 trillion in 1988. Bank real-estate loans morethan doubled, to $760 billion, from 1982 to 1989. Syndicatorsand insurance companies increased their lending by hugeamounts as well. The country entered its most sustainedperiod of real-estate boom. Single-family starts, forinstance, have exceeded one million units every year since1983, an unprecedented performance.   The Federal Reserve Board could no longer quickly stopthis kind of credit explosion. And the various regulators notonly failed to adequately supervise syndicators, insurancecompanies and depository institutions, but also allowed banksand thrifts to operate with less and less capital, their onlycushion against losses. Beginning with Federal Home Loan BankBoard Chairman Richard Pratt, thrift regulators even allowedinsolvent institutions to grow mightily. State regulators inCalifornia and Texas allowed any developer who could fog amirror with his breath to take over or start Sandamp;Ls, a mistakethat would prove even more grievous than the federalregulators'.   Other institutions that were supposed to help monitor thesystem also failed in their responsibilities. From 1983 to1987, investment banks raised $3 billion of equity for manymutual savings banks with no real capital, such as Meritorand Goldome, by taking them public. The $3 billion wasleveraged into more than $50 billion of loans, mostly in realestate. Without real capital, these institutions had littlehope of success and have mostly failed or are failing. TheSecurities and Exchange Commission took no action to warn thepublic of what was happening. A legion of lawyers,accountants, appraisers and economists also failed the systemin their putative role as fiduciaries. As an economicconsultant at the time, Alan Greenspan, the current Fedchairman, was among them, enthusiastically endorsing directinvestment in real estate by Sandamp;Ls. That endorsement came in a1984 study paid for by Charles Keating, the notorious thriftfinancier.   Driven by an endless supply of credit and tax incentives,a horde of builders and their lending institutions, many ofthem run by crooked or negligent developers, did what comesnaturally. Operating in a void created by Congress andlacking restraint from the Reagan administration and stateregulators, the builders threw up thousands of officebuildings, strip malls, apartment buildings and homes thatsoon far outran demand.   A bust was inevitable even without an economic downturn,but starting in the mid-1980s, regional recessions rolledthrough Texas and the rest of the energy belt, then throughArizona, then through the Northeast. Congress did its own bitto obliterate demand by passing the Tax Reform Act of 1986,suddenly removing all of the ill-advised tax incentives thathelped create the overbuilding in the first place. In 1989,Congress belatedly passed the thrift-cleanup legislation,which forced Sandamp;Ls out of real-estate development. The bankregulators likewise cracked down on their institutions lastyear, also way too late.   Now glut, illiquidity and spent demand characterize mostreal-estate markets in this country. Prices of manyproperties, including homes, have fallen by 25% to 30% indepressed areas -- more if inflation is counted. In 1989,thrifts lost $17.9 billion on real-estate loans, comparedwith $829 million in 1982; banks lost $3.43 billion, comparedwith $211 million. Insurance companies held $5.46 billion ofbad real-estate loans at year end, up from $1.68 billion in1982. The biggest losses of all will come over the nextdecade: $400 billion to $500 billion for the thrift-industrycleanup.   It was all predictable and avoidable, given a competentpolitical administration of this country's credit system.Economist Albert Wojnilower noted in 1980 that Congress hadsevered the Fed's ability to control credit and couldtherefore expect untoward consequences. And Mr. Pratt, thebank-board chairman, warned in writing, just before leavingoffice in 1982, that undercapitalized lenders would have tobe strictly supervised by a much enlarged regulatory staff, awarning ignored by both Congress and the Reaganadministration.   The mismanagment of our credit system becomes even moreobvious if contrasted with that of other countries. In theUnited Kingdom, for instance, home values have recentlyfallen by 5% to 25%, mainly because of high interest rates,and big commercial projects are suffering, because of therates and overbuilding. While small developers are failingand large ones are taking losses, the big commercial bankshaven't been severely hit. Relatively few in number, they canbe closely watched by the central bank, which periodicallyprods them into relative prudence. They were warned by theBank of England many months ago to ease up on real-estatedevelopment loans. They may eventually take losses, butnothing of the magnitude of the American commercial banks.   Moreover, none of the U.K.'s thrifts, called buildingsocieties, are failing. The deposit-insurance system there,which insures only 90% of accounts and then only below 18,000pounds (about $33,000), has never been used to pay off afailure. The thrifts were allowed to invest in commercialreal estate and other new areas starting in 1986, but wereheld to stiff capital requirements that protect the insurancefund. Mark Boleat, chief executive officer of the BuildingSocieties Association, also notes that there have only beeneight national thrift commissioners in 150 years, providingorder and expertise lacking in America's patronage system,which results in new thrift regulators every two or threeyears.   &quot;The American failure was the failure of regulation&quot; ofcredit, Mr. Boleat observes. Congressional hearings andregulators' pursuit of wrongdoers fail to put the blame whereit mostly belongs -- with congressmen, administrationofficials and regulators. &quot;If a department store leaves itsdoors open at night and piles of goods on the shelves,&quot; Mr.Boleat says, &quot;you don't blame the ransackers&quot; as the maincause of the problem.   ---   Mr. Hill, chief of The Wall Street Journal's San Franciscobureau, served as contributing editor of this Wall StreetJournal report.</TEXT></DOC>