<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910821-0075</DOCNO><DOCID>910821-0075.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Critique:   Shushing the Dead and the Dying   ----   By Raymond Sokolov</HL><DATE>08/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><LP>   In Third World countries such as the USSR, the first thinginsurgents do in a coup d'etat is seize control of words.They take over TV and radio stations, muzzle the press andcensor books. Really efficient governments monitor the saleof the means of verbal reproduction: Xeroxes, computers,faxes, typewriters and even ballpoint pens. Americans love todecry this kind of totalitarian squelching of intellectualfreedom, especially in a time of crisis elsewhere. Few thingsare so flattering to us as the reduction of Moscow radio toan all-music and KGB bulletin board, as it was on Mondaymorning.   Over here CNN kept on broadcasting non-stop, and if I wantto say I think that George Bush is a rascal, only my employercan stop me. We have privatized the control of information,left it ultimately to the individual but, in effect,permitted the real power to collect in the hands of theeconomically powerful media interests that decide what topublish or broadcast or distribute in movie theaters. This isour system, our civilization, with its intellectual/ moralbias toward freedom and its economic bias toward propertyrights. But it does not do away with the basic human desireto stifle free discussion. As current controversies in theliterary marketplace demonstrate with wearisome familiarity.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Anne Sexton: A Biography&quot; by Diane Wood Middlebrook(Houghton Mifflin, 488 pages, $24.95) is a full-dress accountof the life of a deeply troubled &quot;confessional&quot; poet whokilled herself in 1974. It would have caused a mild sensationunder any circumstances, because of its relatively explicitsexual revelations. The most remarkable of these -- in whichthe poet gets in bed with her daughter and, as the phrasegoes, abuses herself -- rest on the authority of directtestimony from the daughter herself, Linda Gray Sexton.   This scabrous material is not, however, what has set thetongues of commentators wagging. Ms. Middlebrook also makesuse of many hours of tapes recorded during Sexton'spsychoanalytic sessions with a certain Martin T. Orne. Dr.Orne gave the tapes willingly to Ms. Middlebrook, who usesthem freely in her book. Dr. Orne has also written a forewordto the biography, a repulsive little piece in which heasserts that if he had been able to continue as the poet'stherapist, even part-time after he left Boston forPennsylvania, she would not have killed herself.   For this arrogant claim alone, Dr. Orne might havedeserved the obloquy of newsroom moralizers. (Sexton's lifeis rich in material justifying the suppression ofpsychoanalysis as a learned conspiracy against the mentallyill: Outstanding is the therapeutic encounter with a satanicDr. Zweizung, who carried on an affair with Sexton whilecontinuing to charge his usual hourly fee). But the realoutrage has not been aimed at these subFreudian interlopersfor their destructive manipulations of a sad gifted person.Instead, Dr. Orne has been criticized for making the Sextontapes public.   What was wrong with that? To almost everyone who leapt outof the box yowling about it, it seemed obvious that Dr. Ornehad violated his patient's right to confidentiality. He hadabrogated what is known as the doctor-patient privilege. As amatter of law in our society, this privilege makes it illegalfor a doctor to reveal what he learns from a patient in thecourse of treatment. The privilege protects doctors fromsubpoenas and other official demands for testimony, but theprivilege is not absolute and immutable like the law ofgravity. It is meant to protect the patient, and the patientcan release the doctor and permit him to tell what he knows.   Yes, in this case the patient is dead, but she made herdaughter her literary executor, and even included fourtherapy tapes in the papers she explicitly left as herliterary estate. So as a matter of law -- and this has beentested in court -- the release of the Orne tapes to Ms.Middlebrook, with the approval of Linda Sexton, follows anorderly and normal procedure. It also seems in keeping withSexton's flamboyantly selfexposing life and poetic manner.   Not for nothing was Sexton known as a confessional poet.Writing in the early years of modern feminism, her tropeswallowed in gynecology. &quot;Menstruation at Forty&quot; is a famoustitle. So no Sexton biographer should think she was violatingher subject's sacrosanct privacy in coming out with even themost malodorous details. Indeed, Ms. Middlebrook would havebetrayed the Sexton spirit altogether if she had balkedfinically at telling everything. As it is, she seems to havecontinued and completed a job her subject wasn't strongenough to manage while alive.   The very strongest argument for the full and free use ofthe tapes is that they illuminate the work of an importantpoet (the entire enterprise would be a tawdry waste of timeif Sexton hadn't been important). I've argued previouslyagainst this kind of probing into the more conventionallymiserable life of the novelist Jean Stafford, becauseStafford's troubles don't have much directly to do with herwork. But Sexton's poetry was, in a concrete sense, caused byher therapy and, as Ms. Middlebrook so sensitively showsagain and again, it was written in reaction to her sessionswith Dr. Orne as well as to her blood-hot bouts with life.   So why would anyone want to suppress the Orne tapes? Whywas there such universal objection to their use? For onething, people were mistaken about doctorpatient privilege.They thought the doctor owned the right to reveal secrets,instead of the patient. And they projected themselves intothe situation. They would have wanted their secrets kept. Butthey weren't Anne Sexton.   Lucky them.   As penance for yielding unreflectively to the lust tocensor, they should read &quot;Selected Poems of Anne Sexton&quot;edited by Ms. Middlebrook and Diana Hume George (HoughtonMifflin, 266 pages, $21.95). If these would-be suppressorshad actually read the poems and the passages that stem fromthe Orne tapes in &quot;Anne Sexton,&quot; they probably would havegone about their business with some real things to thinkabout instead of pondering the basically empty question ofwhether Dr. Orne should have kept mum about his wretchedtapes. People generally work themselves up to a censoringmood when they haven't read the offending book or movie, likeall the millions of hysterical Muslims who refused to openSalman Rushdie's &quot;The Satanic Verses&quot; but joined unthinkinglyin the murderous ululations against its author.   Some of the same kind of people -- nice moral folks withother folks' best interest at heart -- also wish thereweren't a book for sale now that explains how to commitsuicide without pain or strain. But I can't believe many ofthem have actually opened Derek Humphry's &quot;Final Exit&quot;(Hemlock Society, 192 pages, $16.95). For the moment, theydon't have a chance, since it's currently sold out ofbookstores after having zoomed to the top of the bestsellerlist, no doubt partly because of the shock and fuss againstit, but mostly because of the sincere curiosity of thousandsof old people worried about being forced to live out theirlives as hydroponic vegetables tubed up to a survival systemagainst what will remain of their wills.   &quot;Final Exit&quot; is a morbid little handbook full of cheerfulhints about such matters as which pills to use and how to getthem. Mr. Humphry's preoccupation with getting the details ofother people's selfmurder right is funny in a macabre way. Atone point, he stops to correct a mistake in an earlier book&quot;in the light of experience and discussions with physicianswithin the euthanasia movement&quot;: &quot;It is preferable that theplastic bag not fit tightly over the head, but be moderatelyloose. It is very important that it be firmly tied around theneck with either a large rubber band or a ribbon. No more airmust come in.&quot;   There follows a discussion of the basic problems of thismethod, its discomfort, the need to combine it with&quot;fast-acting sleep inducers.&quot; And finally there is thequestion of what kind of plastic bag, clear or opaque. Alwaysupbeat about the ultimate downer, Mr. Humphry says: &quot;That's amatter of taste. Loving the world as I do, I'll opt for aclear one if I have to.&quot;   Loving good taste, as I do, I'll opt for not buying thisweirdly awful book as a gift for friends or family, but Ithink the weirdest part of this latest publishing phenomenonis the fear it has inspired among supposedly thoughtfulpeople who want it removed from bookstore shelves.   The will to censor and suppress never dies -- and is bornagain in places you'd least expect it, even among peopletrying to enjoy their vacations, as the fate of the mordantbroadside reprinted below demonstrates. It was removed frompublic view last week by a self-appointed anonymous defenderof deer and an unbidden protector of beachside neighbors hemust think gentler even than Bambi.</TEXT></DOC>