<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910107-0036</DOCNO><DOCID>910107-0036.</DOCID><HL>   Financial Casualty:   U.S. Recession Claims   Bank of New England   As First Big Victim   ---   Federal Regulators Take Over   After Company Warned   Of Large Impending Loss   ---   Depositors Rush to Get Funds   ----   By Kenneth H. Bacon and Ron Suskind   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   NEB ONE</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)EASTERN U.S. BANKS (BAE)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)CENTRAL U.S. BANKS (BAC)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   The recession has claimed its first big banking victim.   Federal regulators yesterday took over Bank of New EnglandCorp., the region's third-largest bank holding company.</LP><TEXT>   The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. assumed control ofBank of New England, the holding company's $13.2 billioncore; Connecticut Bank andamp; Trust Co., which has $7.7 billion inassets, and the $1.1 billion Maine National Bank. As part ofthe transaction, the FDIC injected $750 million into the twolarger banks.   Regulators acted Sunday after anxious depositors mobbedBank of New England offices to withdraw about $1 billion inthe wake of the bank's announcement Friday that it could loseup to $450 million in the fourth quarter, making itessentially insolvent. The failure, caused primarily bysouring real-estate loans, is the third-largest bank collapsein U.S. history.   Federal officials hope that their fast response to thefirst major bank crisis in the current recession will haltthe erosion of confidence in the banking system. Thearrangement will protect from loss all depositors, even thosewith accounts exceeding the $100,000 insurance ceiling. TheFederal Reserve System, operating through its discountwindow, announced that it is prepared to lend the banks themoney they need to meet their liquidity needs. The FDICstressed that all three banks will be open for businesstoday.   After a long weekend of meetings, the Comptroller of theCurrency declared the banks insolvent late yesterday. TheFDIC became the receiver for the banks and set up a so-calledbridge bank for each unit, which the FDIC will own and runwhile it works to sell the banks. The FDIC has startednegotiating with several potential buyers of the threeinsolvent institutions.   &quot;We have two active {potential} bidders, and otherwell-qualified bidders might apply,&quot; FDIC Chairman WilliamSeidman said at a Sunday-evening news conference. &quot;We expectto announce a transaction soon.&quot; Banc One of Columbus, Ohio,is believed to have expressed interest.   Robert Clarke, the Comptroller of the Currency, said thebank's management had been working hard to put the bank onsounder financial footing, but last week they told regulators&quot;that the losses were going to swamp them.&quot;   &quot;Our feeling was the best thing we could do for the bankand region was to step in and take control of it,&quot; he said inan interview. &quot;We wanted the message to be, `Look, thegovernment is prepared to step in and do what needs to bedone. You don't have to be concerned about leaving yourdeposits in a federally insured institution.'&quot; Earlier in theweek, depositors in neighboring Rhode Island were rattledwhen the governor closed 45 privately insured financialinstitutions after their insurance fund failed.   Mr. Clarke said that the stabilization move &quot;should helpattract outside capital to the region&quot; and that both biddersfor the Bank of New England are domestic banking companiesfrom outside New England. &quot;This should be read by themarketplace as a real vote of confidence in the region'sability to recover economically,&quot; the comptroller said.   But Banc One Chairman John B. McCoy expressed somehesitation, saying, &quot;The problem I foresee is that we haven'tseen the economy bottom out in New England, whereas in Texas,the economy had begun to turn around&quot; by the time Banc Onebought MCorp there in July 1989.   Federal regulators say the bridge-bank approach isparticularly well-suited for handling the additional big-bankfailures that some expect a recession of unknown length andseverity to bring. It is a swifter-yet-gentler approach thansome federal takeovers of the past. By leaving the bank undercurrent management with FDIC supervision, they hope topreserve the bank's resale value and minimize the disruptionto the bank's operations and to the regional economy.Finally, they hope to set up a rescue plan that ultimatelyinvolves both public and private investment.   The FDIC used bridge banks in Texas when it sold MCorp toBanc One and First Republic Bancorp. to NCNB Corp. In bothcases, the acquiring bank started with a small equityinterest for its investment and agreed to buy out the FDIC'sshare over time. As part of the deals, the FDIC agreed totake over some bad loans and other assets.   The agency estimates that it will have to take over $5billion to $6 billion in bad Bank of New England assets inorder to make the acquisition of Bank of New Englandproperties attractive. As far as possible, Mr. Seidmanexplained over the weekend, &quot;We need to capitalize thesebanks with private money or a combination of public andprivate.&quot;   This strategy is designed to stretch the FDIC's dwindlingBank Insurance Fund. Mr. Seidman estimated that the Bank ofNew England bailout will cost the FDIC a total of $2.3billion, making it one of the costliest in history. Under theFDIC's procedure of anticipating losses, the cost of the Bankof New England rescue was included the $4 billion theinsurance fund calculated it would lose in 1990.   Mr. Seidman made it clear in an interview that the urgencyof the rescue transcended the bank's difficulties. &quot;We'relooking at an eroding economy, particularly in New England,&quot;he said.   The bank, the region's most aggressive real-estate lenderduring the 1980s boom, has been teetering for a year as manyof those loans soured in the declining economy. The recessionhas exacerbated its problems, with more and more developersdefaulting on projects ranging from commercial offices tocondominiums.   During the late 1980s, the Bank of New England grew to$31.5 billion in assets by buying smaller banks across NewEngland and aggressively lending into the region'sthen-robust real-estate market. All seemed to be going welluntil the end of 1989, when in the fourth quarter the banksuddenly revealed it had nearly $2 billion of bad loans andwould post a $1.1 billion loss for the year. The bankrecently settled charges by the Securities and ExchangeCommission that it made false disclosures about its financialcondition.   &quot;No institution in New England is as concentrated in realestate as the Bank of New England,&quot; said Lawrence Fish, whois resigning as chairman and chief executive of the holdingcompany but will keep those posts at the three failed banks.He added: &quot;This is a classic illustration of riskdiversification -- or the lack of it.&quot;   Over the past year the bank has shrunk its assets, broughtin new managers led by Mr. Fish, cut costs and repairedliquidity, only to see any gains overwhelmed by a worseningNew England recession, which caused rising losses as more andmore of its real estate loans went sour.   Though more than a dozen New England banks failed in thepast year, most of them have been under $1 billion, and otherlarge banks in the region are clearly in better shape thanBank of New England.   Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc., Shawmut National Corp.and Bank of Boston Corp. each have large amounts ofnonperforming assets, and some have cut their dividends andreported losses. But all remain solidly solvent. The Bank ofBoston, for instance, reported a $255 million loss for thethird quarter but still had capital, measured by shareholderequity, of $1.85 billion.   Yet, the demise of the Bank of New England will probablypush real-estate values down even further and cause thedeterioration of loan portfolios at other banks toaccelerate.   But the federal rescue is designed to stop an economicallydestructive chain reaction: Falling real-estate values causebanks to write down loans, which lowers their earnings andsiphons off cash that banks might otherwise lend to fueleconomic growth.   Over the weekend, government officials stressed the needto improve credit conditions in New England to slow economicdeterioration there. The stabilization move &quot;should helpattract outside capital to the region,&quot; said Comptroller ofthe Currency Robert Clarke, noting that interested suitorsaren't from New England. &quot;This should be read by themarketplace as a real vote of confidence in the region'sability to recover economically.&quot;   Some economic policy makers have worried that the WhiteHouse, preoccupied with Iraq, isn't paying enough attentionto a rapidly worsening economy. But Treasury SecretaryNicholas Brady, who spent yesterday with President Bush atCamp David, followed the FDIC's deliberations carefully byphone and presumably kept Mr. Bush informed.   The Bank of New England, which is based in Boston, becameinsolvent when losses, primarily from real-estate loans,eliminated its equity capital. The insolvency of ConnecticutBank andamp; Trust, of Hartford, was triggered partly by loanlosses, and Maine National failed because it couldn't pay tothe FDIC, as required by law, its share of the liabilityincurred in connection with the failures of its sister banks.   In acting quickly to address Bank of New England'sproblems, the FDIC examined a range of options -- allinvolving a cost to the government and none of themparticularly palatable. The goal was to find &quot;the least-cost,most privately funded&quot; solution that would reduce thepotentially huge public cost of a rescue, Mr. Seidman said.   Perhaps the most expensive -- and therefore a lessattractive -- option was for the FDIC to simply take over thebank, in a move similar to its agreement to put $4.5 billioninto and assume ownership of Continental Illinois Bank andamp;Trust Co. in 1984. Since that takeover, the FDIC has soldmost of its interest and reduced the cost of the rescue toabout $800 million.   Another approach was offered by the holding company'sbondholders, who proposed swapping their debt into stock.That would have sharply reduced debt, cut interest paymentsby $60 million a year and created $706 million of equitycapital. But the FDIC chose an approach designed to protectthe banks and their depositors, rather than the holdercompany's stock and bond holders. The bridge banks didn'tassume any of the holding companies' liabilities. &quot;If we werein the business of saving holding companies, we'd be busted,&quot;Mr. Seidman said.   Mr. Seidman wants to find a way to head off a repetitionof the banking crisis in Texas, where 349 banks and nine ofthe state's 10 largest banking organizations failed between1980 and 1989. And he thinks that early capital support,combined with tighter supervision, could be cheaper thanresolving failures later.   Federal regulators had to act quickly because of thedamage to depositor confidence caused by Bank of NewEngland's announcement on Friday -- closely following thefinancial crisis in Rhode Island. Then, as word of Bank ofNew England's deepening woes spread Friday and into Saturdaymorning, panicked customers began with drawing deposits,jamming bank offices and straining the liquidity of the $23billion bank.   Paul Samuelson, the Nobel Prize-winning economist, said,&quot;I didn't think I'd live to see again the day when there areactually bank runs.&quot;   So delicate was the situation that Mr. Fish, the bank'schairman, began driving from branch to branch to assureworried customers that their money was safe.   At some branches, nevertheless, customers refused to takebank checks as they closed their accounts; they insisted oncash. At a Dedham, Mass., branch of Bank of New England onSaturday morning, Marybeth Agostinelli demanded the full$3,475 from her savings account, in cash. &quot;Well, we'rerunning short on cash,&quot; a teller responded, offering her acashier's check.   &quot;Forget it. How do I know this check is good?&quot; Ms.Agostinelli said. After talking to the branch manager, shegot $1,000 in cash. &quot;Now, where do I go from here?&quot; shewondered. &quot;Is there a safe bank left in New England?&quot;   The most severe blow to the bank's liquidity was theannouncement Friday by Connecticut's banking commissionerthat $170 million in state and municipal funds will be pulledfrom its Connecticut Bank andamp; Trust subsidiary. Because of itsparent's problems, the Connecticut bank's capital will dropbelow 3%, making it against the law for the state to keep itsfunds there.   Even some sound banks with federal insurance felt theundertow of fear. Eastland Bank in Woonsocket, R.I., neededtwo truckloads of cash rushed from the Federal Reserve Bankof Boston to meet an outflow of funds after questions aboutit cropped up on a local radio talk show, Rhode Island Gov.Sundlun says. &quot;I'm telling people their money is a lot saferin a federally insured credit union or bank than in themattress,&quot; he warns. &quot;There'll be a lot of breaking andenterings, muggings, robberies as people start pulling outtheir cash.&quot;   ---   Paulette Thomas contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>