<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910805-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>910805-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   In Arab Boycott Inquiry, Baxter   Drags Its Feet After Pledging Help   ----   By Thomas M. Burton   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   BAX CCI T.CM U.LLO WNEWS</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)SECURITIES (SCR)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><RE>CANADA (CN)EUROPE (EU)ILLINOIS (IL)ISRAEL (ISR)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)SYRIA (SY)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)TEXAS (TX)</RE><LP>   DEERFIELD, Ill. -- Baxter International Inc. iscooperating less than enthusiastically with a federal grandjury inquiry into whether it violated U.S. law when it gotitself dropped from the Arab boycott list.   The company has publicly proclaimed an eagerness tocooperate with the criminal investigation. But it recentlyhas asserted attorney-client privilege in seeking to blockcooperation by its former deputy general counsel. Moreover,two former Baxter executives are asserting their FifthAmendment right not to provide testimony.</LP><TEXT>   A grand jury in Chicago, working with federalinvestigators from the U.S. Commerce Department, has beenseeking to learn whether the company paid bribes to removeitself in 1989 from a list of companies being boycotted byArab nations because the companies did business with Israel.The grand jury has also been looking into whether Baxter's1988 sale of an Israeli plant was merely an economictransaction or was meant to curry favor with the Arabnations, in violation of the United States' anti-boycott law.   The two former Baxter executives, Thomas Russillo and JohnSaboura, have declined to testify before the grand jury,invoking their Fifth Amendment right againstself-incrimination, according to people familiar with thecase. These people say Baxter, the world's largest hospitalsupply company with more than $8 billion in revenue, ispaying legal fees for the two men. (Companies frequently paysuch fees for present and past officials, but they aren'tobligated to do so.)   William Conlon, the Chicago attorney for the two men,declined comment. Mark Rotert, the assistant U.S. attorney incharge of the case, also declined comment. Baxter denies anycriminality, and a spokesman says generally that the companyis &quot;being forthright with the government.&quot;   Testimony from Messrs. Russillo and Saboura is consideredespecially significant, according to people familiar with thecase, because they were privy to Baxter negotiations with theSyrian government that were pivotal to getting Baxterexempted from the boycott.   G. Marshall Abbey, Baxter's general counsel and seniorvice president, made several trips to Damascus, Syria, tomeet with Syrian government officials. Those visits had atleast two objectives: to seal a deal to build an intravenousfluids plant for the Syrian army, and to convince the nationsof the Arab League, through the Syrian contract, to removeBaxter from the blacklist.   Baxter announced in June that, because of pressure fromU.S. Jewish groups, it has dropped plans to build the Syrianplant.   The company has used the principle of attorney-clientprivilege previously in the boycott case. In November, itrefused to make public an investigative report prepared forBaxter's board by Stephen Shulman, a Washington attorney. Indoing so, it cited the privilege.   Currently, Baxter claims work by its former deputy generalcounsel, Arthur F. Staubitz, on the sale of the Israelifacility, is covered by attorney-client privilege. Mr.Staubitz, now general counsel of Amgen in Thousand Oaks,Calif., says government investigators contacted him in recentweeks to interview him but that Baxter claimed the privilegewith respect to his role in the Israeli matter.   Legally, the privilege is designed to allow a client tospeak freely in private with a lawyer. The client -- in thiscase Baxter -- could waive that privilege and allow thematerial to be presented to the government.   Corporations under investigation have frequently claimedattorney-client privilege, but experienced criminal defenseattorneys note that that doesn't automatically mean a judgewill agree. Prosecutors could counter that Baxter waived theprivilege by giving the Shulman report to U.S. CommerceDepartment investigators. They might also contend a lawyer'swork was primarily business-related, not legal.   Lawyers also note that the witnesses who are citing theFifth Amendment could be compelled to testify if thegovernment offers them immunity.   ---   DREXEL BANKRUPTCY ACCORD faces wide range of objections athearing.   A so-called fairness hearing on the settlement isscheduled for Friday in federal court in Manhattan, and atleast 16 objections to the proposal have been filed. Thesettlement, reached in May between Drexel Burnham LambertGroup Inc. and its major creditors, cleared the way for thecompany's bankruptcy reorganization plan. The company filedfor protection from creditors on Feb. 13, 1990, under Chapter11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. If the settlement isapproved, the company expects to put its reorganization planto all creditors for a vote later this year.   Most of the objections claim that the settlementcircumvented bankruptcy law and that many creditors wereunfairly excluded from the negotiations. Those objecting --from former employees that face possible lawsuits by Drexel,to banks claiming they were defrauded in junk-bondtransactions -- also accuse the settlement's negotiators ofputting their own clients ahead of other creditors.Bankruptcy law requires that all similar creditors be treatedfairly.   The settlement was reached under pressure from U.S. JudgeMilton Pollack, who is presiding over the case with federalbankruptcy court Judge Francis Conrad. Judge Pollack islargely credited by attorneys in the case with pushing theparties to reach an agreement rather than allowing themassive and costly litigation to continue.   &quot;We expect to fully answer any of the issues&quot; raised inthe objections, a spokesman for Drexel said. &quot;We believe theplan fully conforms with the law.&quot;   Among the objections, Citicorp's Citibank unit, LloydsBank PLC and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce said thesettlement improperly excluded them from negotiations. Theyhave filed a claim accusing Drexel of securities fraud andseek a total of $17 million for losses in a junk-bondtransaction.   &quot;The proposed settlement must be rejected because of theunfairness of the procedures that produced it,&quot; the bankssaid in their filing. &quot;The exclusion of claimants from thenegotiating process hopelessly tarnished the negotiationsthat produced the settlement.&quot;   Investors accusing Drexel of fraud in transactionsinvolving Integrated Resources Inc. claimed that they wereunfairly placed in a group of securities-litigation claimantsthat will have to divide a much smaller pot of money fordamages than other claimants.   &quot;No justification exists for the grossly disproportionateallocation, other than the whims and wishes of thenegotiating parties,&quot; the investors said in their objection.They said they also were excluded from the settlement talks.   In the most strongly-worded objection, Sylvan Schefler, aformer managing director at Drexel, accused the negotiatorsof reneging on an agreement not to sue him for $2 million inDrexel stock he received from the company. Mr. Schefler wasalso a member of the bankruptcy creditors' committee,representing about 1,000 former Drexel employees who wereowed about $339 million in Drexel subordinated notes.   In his filing, Mr. Schefler said the release protectinghim from being sued was withdrawn because of &quot;my personalfriendship with Michael Milken,&quot; formerly head of Drexel'sjunk-bond department. He said the settlement &quot;isfundamentally tainted by deceit . . . and breaches of rulesof ethics&quot; by the attorneys involved.   Mr. Milken, who is serving a 10-year sentence for sixsecurities-related felonies he admitted to last year, alsofiled an objection to the settlement. As part of thesettlement, Drexel will team up with thrift regulators andsecurities-litigation claimants to sue former employees, suchas Mr. Milken, for damages. A new lawsuit against Mr. Milkenis expected to be filed by the thrift regulators and Drexelwithin a few weeks.   ---   NOTED:  Alison L. Smith has rejoined the Houston office ofthe 500-attorney firm Vinson andamp; Elkins as a partner in thebusiness litigation group. Ms. Smith had taken a two-yearleave of absence to serve as a deputy assistant attorneygeneral for the U.S. Department of Justice. In that role, shesupervised the antitrust consent decree that broke up theBell telephone system and helped develop national antitrustpolicy on banking, airline and hospital mergers. . . .William J. McSherry Jr. has accepted a partnership at BattleFowler, a 78-attorney firm in New York. Mr. McSherry was theexecutive director of the United States Football League in1984 and 1985 and had most recently been a partner in the NewYork office of Bryan, Cave, McPheeters andamp; McRoberts.</TEXT></DOC>