<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901221-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>901221-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Kremlin Tumult:   Shevardnadze Quits,   Jolting Gorbachev   And U.S. Gulf Policy   ---   Soviet Minister's Resignation   Worsens Left-Right Split   That Imperils Perestroika   ---   Warning of New Dictatorship   ----   By Peter Gumbel and Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   MOSCOW -- President Mikhail Gorbachev has paid an enormousprice for his attempt to impose more authoritarian rule onthe U.S.S.R.   Yesterday, in an emotional public speech, Foreign MinisterEduard Shevardnadze resigned, excoriating the political rightwing and warning darkly of a new &quot;dictatorship&quot; taking shapein his country. His move deprives Mr. Gorbachev of one of hisclosest and most liberal allies and dashes the president'shopes of quickly forging a consensus between left and rightto deal with the social and economic crisis seizing thenation.</LP><TEXT>   Though Soviet officials say the resignation won't changethe course of the country's foreign policy, the suddenresignation is likely to affect Soviet relations with theWest, particularly the U.S. At the very least, it deals ablow to the twin pillars of George Bush's foreign policy --his new relationship with the Soviet Union and his coalitionarrayed against Iraq. Mr. Shevardnadze said he quit partlybecause his tough stance against Baghdad was being severelycriticized at home. The resignation also points up thevulnerability of the highly personal diplomacy of Mr. Bushand Secretary of State James Baker, who in less than twoyears in office met with Mr. Shevardnadze more than 25 times.   For both the Soviet Union and the West, the question yetto be answered is whether Mr. Shevardnadze's departure willstrengthen the hand of reactionary Soviet conservatives,particularly in the military, or whether it will pull Mr.Gorbachev back to a more conciliatory position with hisliberal critics. The former could usher in a dark new erathat would make the Soviet Union a far more unreliableinternational partner, while the latter would speed a breakupof the U.S.S.R. by forcing the Soviet president to cede manyof his powers to the 15 republics.   &quot;This is a very serious crisis for the president, thecountry, and the whole of perestroika,&quot; said SergeiStankevich, a liberal democrat who is deputy mayor of Moscow.&quot;I think Gorbachev should take Shevardnadze's step as a veryserious signal that he's too far from the mainstream of thereal reform process.&quot;   Sergei Blagovolin, a military expert at a leading Moscowthink tank, described the resignation as &quot;a tragedy not justfor us, but for everyone.&quot;   Mr. Shevardnadze made his surprise announcement in aspeech before the Congress of People's Deputies, the nation'ssupreme legislature. Many of the legislators immediatelyasked him to reconsider. But his spokesman, Vitaly Churkin,called the decision irreversible, adding that only twopeople, whom he didn't identify, had known about it.   Mr. Gorbachev wasn't one of them. Looking grim, the Sovietpresident told deputies: &quot;Personally I condemn ComradeShevardnadze for acting so without consulting the president.&quot;He said he had held two telephone conversations with Mr.Shevardnadze following the speech, but still needed time toanalyze the reasons for his resignation. He seemedparticularly upset because, as he revealed, he had been aboutto nominate Mr. Shevardnadze to be his vice president, a newpost that he wants to establish as a way to strengthen hisexecutive powers.   The resignation may well not spell the end of Mr.Shevardnadze's public role, however. It may not be acceptedby the congress, and if it is he could wind up back ingovernment, perhaps as vice president, should Mr. Gorbachevchange tack. A commentator for the TASS news agency evensuggested the decision was more of a tactic aimed at shiftingthe domestic political debate rather than a serious showdownwith Mr. Gorbachev.   Mr. Shevardnadze, 62 years old, gave a variety ofexplanations for his action. By far the most damaging to Mr.Gorbachev, with whom he has worked closely for almost sixyears, was his bitter indictment of the nation's increasinglyauthoritarian political mood -- a mood fostered by thepresident himself. He warned: &quot;A dictatorship is in theoffing -- I tell you that with full awareness. No one knowswhat this dictatorship will be like.&quot; At the same time, hecalled Mr. Gorbachev his friend and pledged continued supportfor perestroika, the policy of reform that he helpedimplement.   In recent weeks, Mr. Gorbachev has adopted a harder linetoward the problems of economic decline and nationaldisarray. In numerous decrees, he has sought to recentralizeeconomic management and restore law and order, even replacinghis liberal interior minister with a hard-line KGB official.But most of his instructions have been ignored orcontradicted by the nation's republics, which considerthemselves &quot;sovereign&quot; states in charge of their own affairs.   Such conflicts have come to a head over a new &quot;uniontreaty,&quot; which Mr. Gorbachev originally wanted to havecompleted by the end of this year, and over a new politicalstructure that would give the president much greaterexecutive powers. Four of the 15 republics have explicitlyrefused to sign the union treaty, and at least six others,including Russia, say they have severe reservations about somuch power being centralized in the Kremlin. Likewise, thenew presidential power structure has been attacked by manyrepublic leaders. Boris Yeltsin, the powerful president ofthe Russian republic, on Tuesday accused Mr. Gorbachev oftrying to accumulate more power than even Joseph Stalin.   Infuriated, Mr. Gorbachev has insisted he isn't adictator, though at the same time he has threatened tooverrule decisions made by the republics. Top militaryofficials and the KGB secret police have strongly supportedhim, raising widespread fears that a crackdown could beimminent.   But until Mr. Shevardnadze's resignation, the Sovietpresident was still attempting to forge a consensus on theneed for stronger central rule and his own more authoritarianstance. It isn't clear how Mr. Shevardnadze dissented. Butmany Soviet analysts say his decision to quit is aimed atmoving the pendulum the other wayforcing Mr. Gorbachev toreconsider his new alliance with the military and otherhard-liners.   Galina Sidorova, a foreign-policy commentator for theSoviet magazine New Times who has covered many of Mr.Shevardnadze's foreign trips, said she believed he resignedin order to galvanize moderates into action against theconservative wave. Others, including Mr. Yeltsin, said theynow expect Mr. Gorbachev to shift ground back to the center,and thus regain some of his diminishing authority. Still,many fear that the momentum for a crackdown has now grown toostrong to stop.   Whatever the domestic repercussions, Mr. Shevardnadze'sdeparture seems bound to affect Soviet foreign policy. Thesoft-spoken minister has played a crucial role in helping toend the Cold War, allow Eastern Europe to go its own way and,above all, establish a warm and cooperative relationship withthe U.S. Spurning the traditional ideology and dourness ofhis predecessors, he has also frequently denounced the Sovietmilitary for its past adventures in places such asAfghanistan. His support of the alliance against SaddamHussein, a former Soviet ally, further enraged the military.In his speech yesterday, Mr. Shevardnadze called the fightwith conservatives over Gulf policy &quot;the last straw&quot; in hisdecision to quit.   In Washington, news of the resignation stunned Bushadministration officials, who have been preoccupied with theGulf crisis. Secretary of State Baker tried and failed toreach Mr. Shevardnadze by phone and hurried to the WhiteHouse to discuss the event with President Bush.   Mr. Baker also scrambled to minimize the damage of theannouncement. In a rare on-camera press conference, herepeatedly cited Mr. Gorbachev's pledge that Soviet foreignpolicy won't change, insisted he wasn't concerned that Iraqwould take comfort from the move, and said that he, like Mr.Shevardnadze, worried about repression in the U.S.S.R.Reflecting on Mr. Shevardnadze, Mr. Baker added, &quot;I am proudto call this man a friend. . . . I'm going to miss him.&quot;   Nonetheless, many officials in Washington worry that Mr.Shevardnadze's resignation is sure to be read in Baghdad as asign that the coalition is weakening, that Iraq still haspowerful friends in the Soviet military and that Moscow mightnot support an American-led military strike. So it mayencourage Saddam Hussein to stay in Kuwait, increasing thechance that the White House would have to resort to war tooust him.   &quot;It's a victory for Saddam Hussein,&quot; said MarshallGoldman, a leading Soviet scholar at Harvard University. &quot;Itputs our Persian Gulf policy into doubt because the {Soviet}military was out to get Shevardnadze and many in the militaryhave supported Iraq.&quot;   The close relationship Messrs. Bush and Baker had with Mr.Gorbachev and Mr. Shevardnadze, forged in meetings in Moscow,Malta and Jackson Hole, Wyo., and in many telephone calls,became the fulcrum of U.S.-Soviet policy. Until now, thoseties pushed into the background concerns over Mr. Gorbachev'srecent embrace of repressive figures and tactics at home.   Even though Mr. Gorbachev said foreign policy won'tchange, he may be forced by exultant hard-liners to install amore hostile figure in the foreign ministry. &quot;It'll besurprising if we get a clone of Shevardnadze,&quot; said Harvard'sProf. Goldman. &quot;Gorbachev is probably going to have to findsomebody less accommodating to the U.S.&quot;   One man getting mentioned as a candidate for the job isYevgeny Primakov, an ambitious academic and Arabist who isone of Mr. Gorbachev's advisers. The Saudi Government isknown to dislike Mr. Primakov, which could complicate mattersin the Gulf.   Beyond the Gulf crisis, the resignation casts doubt uponthe future of broader diplomatic issues such as the strategicnuclear arms treaty now being wrapped up. Earlier this year,the military leadership forced Mr. Shevardnadze to withdrawsome Soviet concessions on the treaty, but they were laterlargely restored. Now, the generals may be emboldened again,even though the arms pact is largely complete.   In any case, if Mr. Bush travels to Moscow as planned Feb.11 for a summit meeting, the focus is no longer likely to beon signing the arms treaty, but on finding out where Mr.Gorbachev stands. In resigning, Mr. Shevardnadze implicitlyasked Mr. Gorbachev whether he is siding with the forces ofdemocracy or dictatorship.   The summit may also be forced to dwell on the prospect ofan internal crackdown by Mr. Gorbachev. Any move of this sortwould almost certainly force the White House to shun theSoviet leader, no matter how agreeable he remains on issuesbeyond Soviet borders.   The Bush administration for months has ignored and evenplayed down Mr. Gorbachev's efforts to assuage the militaryand KGB by acting tougher with dissenters. Last week, Mr.Bush went ahead with an aid package for the Soviet Unionsolely on Mr. Shevardnadze's pledge that any crackdown wouldbe strictly aimed at quelling crime and ethnic violence, andwouldn't be used to quash peaceful dissent or fledglingcapitalism.   But the resignation is sparking wide suspicion among U.S.experts that, even as he publicly assured the Americans, Mr.Shevardnadze privately feared a tough crackdown was coming,including one in his native republic of Georgia.   &quot;It looks like the deal Gorbachev wanted to impose on therepublics wasn't acceptable to Shevardnadze,&quot; says JerryHough of Duke University. &quot;Shevardnadze may have a clearsense that ugliness is going to occur in Georgia and he wantshistory to know he opposed it.&quot;   Within hours of the resignation, Mr. Baker began placing anew emphasis on concerns about a crackdown. &quot;Our newrelationship with the Soviet Union depends on its continuingcommitment to democratization and to reform,&quot; he said at hispress conference. &quot;We would obviously be foolish, I think,not to take the warning in Minister Shevardnadze'sresignation statement seriously.&quot;   Officials in Washington consider the resignation aprofound event partly because Mr. Shevardnadze and Mr.Gorbachev have until now generally seen eye to eye. Only lastmonth, Mr. Gorbachev himself disclosed in a speech that hisforeign minister had been a key figure in initiating theentire policy of perestroika. Mr. Gorbachev recalled how thetwo had met on vacation during the dark days of LeonidBrezhnev, and had talked frankly about their concerns -- at atime when such discussions were politically dangerous. &quot;Thisis when Shevardnadze said that everything was rotten,&quot; Mr.Gorbachev said.   After a career spent mainly in the republic of Georgia,where he eventually rose to head the ruling Communist Party,Mr. Shevardnadze leapt to national prominence in July 1985,when Mr. Gorbachev took office. In two days he was promotedtwice, to full membership in the party's Politburo and thento foreign minister, a field in which he had no priorexperience but excelled.   Outside the legislative hall yesterday, the public seemedto sympathize with the man and his decision to resign.&quot;Shevardnadze fought a good struggle,&quot; said AlexanderChernoshyov, a 21-year-old industrial worker, &quot;but heunderstood that it was in vain because an individual dependson the state, not the state on an individual, so there wasnothing he could do.&quot;   ---   Laurie Hays, Elisabeth Rubinfien and Andrea Rutherfordcontributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>