<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911018-0140</DOCNO><DOCID>911018-0140.</DOCID><HL>   The Moderate Democrat's Curse   ----   By Fred Barnes</HL><DATE>10/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Democratic Sen. Ernest Hollings of South Carolina washardly a dove. He'd opposed both nuclear arms controltreaties, SALT I and SALT II. He defended the war in Vietnam.He endorsed most Pentagon spending. But when President Reaganordered the invasion of Grenada in 1983, Mr. Hollings balked.Instead he asked his staff what position he should take. Mosturged him to oppose the invasion, and that's what he did. Hedenounced Mr. Reagan for indulging in &quot;macho politics.&quot;   This puzzling conduct has a simple explanation: He was aDemocratic presidential candidate at the time. And he didwhat moderates invariably do in the heat of a Democraticpresidential race. He neglected his moderate base and wooedliberal voters. It didn't work. Mr. Hollings failed toinspire moderate voters in the primaries and caucuses, and hedidn't get many liberal votes either.</LP><TEXT>   The moderate alternative always loses nowadays. Sometimesthe loss is ignominious. Sen. John Glenn of Ohio, the formerastronaut lionized in &quot;The Right Stuff,&quot; was billed as themoderate Democrat with the best shot at winning the 1984nomination. But, like Mr. Hollings, he concentrated onpressing liberal buttons (he criticized the Grenadainvasion). He lost badly.   Despite the disastrous examples of Mr. Glenn and Mr.Hollings, the moderate alternatives in 1988, Sen. Albert Goreof Tennessee and former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, tookroughly the same tack and suffered the same result. Now Gov.Bill Clinton of Arkansas is positioned as the moderatealternative for 1992. He faces the temptation to appease theparty's liberal wing. If he does, he'll soon be history.   What causes moderates to cloak their moderate views whenseeking the Democratic presidential nomination? It's animportant question. Because Democrats, who've lost five ofthe last six presidential elections, desperately need amoderate nominee to challenge the Republican candidate in theSun Belt and West, where George Bush, Ronald Reagan andRichard Nixon amassed their electorate majorities. A liberalwho suddenly becomes a moderate (Walter Mondale, MichaelDukakis) in the fall isn't credible there. A true moderatewould be. The problem is that moderates panic in theprimaries, hide their identity as moderates, and lose thenomination. How come?   They're afraid. The party's liberal elite dominates thenominating phase, and moderates are wary of crossing them.The activists who take a keen interest in presidentialpolitics, sign up for campaign jobs, or show up for candidateevents are mostly liberals. Thus there's not much positivefeedback for moderate positions. Mr. Hollings got little fromhis campaign staff. Rep. Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, whobriefly considered a 1992 race, got a cool reception when hegave a moderate pitch to the Democratic National Committeelast month. An aggressive moderate candidacy would makeliberals furious. Moderates have been unwilling to risk that.   The nomination process is stacked against the moderatecandidate who sticks to his guns. The important thing isearly momentum, and it comes from collecting endorsements andmoney. &quot;It's the institutional left and the institutionalliberal interest groups that give money and endorsements,&quot;says Mike McCurry, the former spokesman for the DemocraticNational Committee. They don't give either to noisymoderates.   What's worse for moderates, hordes of moderate voters haveabandoned the Democratic primaries. In 1976, 20% of eligiblevoters in Florida participated in the Democratic primary.Jimmy Carter, the moderate alternative that year, won. In1988, 13% voted. Mr. Dukakis, the liberal favorite, won. Someof the missing Democratic voters have become Republicans.Others have given up on politics. Getting them to vote inDemocratic primaries again is no easy feat. Mr. Glenn triedto organize disaffected Democrats in the Iowa caucuses in1984. Not many showed up to vote, but then he didn't givethem much reason to. Mr. Babbitt tried again in 1988 andfared no better. Now Mr. Clinton is eager to attract them.   It can be done, but not by a fainthearted moderate whomimics liberals. To be successful, a moderate must play uphis moderate positions relentlessly and use them as a weaponagainst opponents. Liberals may boo, but that will signalmoderate voters there's a kindred spirit in the race. InCalifornia, Senate candidate Dianne Feinstein was booed byliberal Democrats in 1990 when she endorsed capitalpunishment and lauded President Bush's tough posture againstSaddam Hussein. She lost liberal votes, but attracted manymore from moderates. John Anderson got a boost in the 1980Republican presidential race when he was booed at a forumsponsored by gun owners.   A moderate should be thrilled if liberal activists areangry. That means clear distinctions are being drawn betweenthe moderate and his or her liberal rivals. Of course thedistinctions have to be ones that appeal to the moderateDemocratic electorate, mostly middle-class whites. Mr. Glenn,Mr. Hollings and Mr. Babbitt stressed economic austerity. Itwasn't well received. &quot;I haven't seen a market yet for toughchoices,&quot; says Stan Greenberg, Mr. Clinton's pollster. Gov.Douglas Wilder of Virginia is running in 1992 as a fiscalconservative. That has little resonance with Democraticvoters.   Four clusters of issues are available to a moderatealternative who pursues a strategy of differentiation. Mr.Clinton has touched vaguely on all of them in recentspeeches.   The Party. Disaffected Democrats are looking for a signthat &quot;they weren't wrong in rejecting Democrats in four ofthe last five presidential elections,&quot; says Will Marshall ofthe Progressive Policy Institute, a moderate Democratic thinktank. This can be telegraphed by blaming liberalfundamentalism for scaring away moderate Democrats and losingelections. Mr. Clinton came close to saying this in May. &quot;Toomany of the people who used to vote for us, the very burdenedmiddle class we're talking about, have not trusted us innational elections to defend our national interests abroad,to put their values into our social policy at home, or totake their tax money and spend it with discipline,&quot; he said.But he hasn't repeated that lately. He needs to, now thatvoters are beginning to listen. Certainly no other Democraticcandidate is likely to zing the party.   National Security. It's crazy for a moderate Democrat toyield this issue. There's fertile ground to plow to the rightof President Bush on foreign policy. A moderate Democratcould criticize him for failing to oust Saddam Hussein, forcozying up to Mikhail Gorbachev while ignoring democraticleaders like Boris Yeltsin and delaying recognition of theBaltics, for recklessly cutting America's nuclear arsenal,for being soft on Chinese communists. The only Democrat who'sworked this angle is Mr. Wilder. And he backed off after hiscomment about killing Saddam stirred controversy. Alone amongannounced Democratic candidates, Mr. Clinton backed DesertStorm. That gives him entree to criticize his opponents asisolationists for balking at the use of force and, later, togo after Mr.Bush.   Race. Democratic candidates either steer clear of thissensitive issue or say what the civil rights lobby wants tohear. A Democrat who aggressively questions affirmativeaction and quotas will be treated as a pariah by liberals.But a moderate candidate who ducks the issue won't be takenseriously by disaffected Democrats. To them, race iscritical. Mr. Clinton's current stance won't win moderates.He dismisses the quota flap as a cynical attempt by Mr. Bushto divide white males from the Democratic party. Maybe so,but middle-class moderates don't see it that way.   Values. Abortion, pornography and the flag don't mattermuch in the Democratic race. Welfare, crime and theunderclass do. Moderate voters are looking for a candidatewho reflects their revulsion. Mr. Marshall says he's beenshocked by &quot;the violence of feelings&quot; against welfare infocus groups of Democratic voters. In a vague way, Mr.Clinton is trying to tap this by talking up &quot;personalresponsibility.&quot; In announcing his candidacy Oct. 3, he said,&quot;we should insist that people move off welfare rolls and ontowork rolls.&quot; That's a start, but he'll have to flesh it out.   Should all else fail, there's a surefire way to be noticedby disenchanted moderates: get in a feud with Jesse Jackson.This thought has crossed Mr. Clinton's mind. Even if Mr.Jackson doesn't run, he'll still be on the sidelineskibbitzing. To white moderates, Mr. Jackson is the symbol ofall that's wrong with the Democratic party. But in 1984 and1988, Mr. Jackson's foes gave him a free ride. Mr. Babbittsaid everyone should lay off Mr. Jackson because &quot;there hasbeen so much racism in this society.&quot; A moderate alternativewho treats Mr. Jackson like that will lose every time.   ---   Mr. Barnes covers the White House for The New Republic.</TEXT></DOC>