<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910802-0142</DOCNO><DOCID>910802-0142.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:   Beyond NATO and the Warsaw Pact   ----   By Robert D. Hormats</HL><DATE>08/02/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7</SO><LP>   In revolutionary times, events unfold so rapidly andrelentlessly that it is virtually impossible fully tocomprehend their implications or determine where theyultimately will lead. The French Revolution followed by theNapoleonic era, and World War I accompanied by the RussianRevolution, were two such periods in Europe. TheantiCommunist revolution that began in the late 1980s isanother.   In such periods of radical change, attempting to establishnew institutional arrangements that serve national interestsis an extremely ambitious task. Yet that is what Richard H.Ullman has sought to do in &quot;Securing Europe&quot; (PrincetonUniversity Press, 183 pages, $19.95) -- and what he hasmasterfully accomplished. His thoughtful analysis of thealtered European political landscape and innovative proposalfor a new security order are enormously importantcontributions to thinking about the new Europe and America'srole therein.</LP><TEXT>   As Western Europe aims to build its single market by theend of 1992 to conform to new economic realities, so must itseek to modernize security relations to reflect the newpolitical and security realities. Both world wars weakenedthe old order in Europe as well as those forces on theContinent that might have created new and strong postwarorders. The U.S. ultimately had to play the preponderant rolein the region's security. But today, Western Europe is strongenough to take the lead in shaping security arrangements thatserve its interests and those of its neighbors.   Neither Germany nor the U.S.S.R. now has claims againstthe other, nor interests that can be furthered only at theexpense of the other, writes Mr. Ullman. And he believes thatviolent conflicts in countries such as Yugoslavia areunlikely to escalate, as in the past, into wars involvingmajor powers.   Mr. Ullman is not pressing for abandonment of NATO nordenigrating its usefulness while the U.S.S.R. remains aformidable military power. He is, however, concerned that ifchange continues in the Soviet Union, with further armsreductions and troop withdrawals, public support for NATO inthe West, especially in Germany, could decline, leaving thealliance an anachronism.   To maintain European security in this environment, theauthor envisions the creation of a European SecurityOrganization (ESO) embracing members of the currentConference on Security and Cooperation in Europe: the U.S.,the U.S.S.R., Western Europe and Eastern Europe. It wouldestablish a collective defense obligation: Were a signatorystate to be attacked, it would receive from others &quot;all themilitary and other aid and assistance in their power.&quot; Theseare stronger words than in the NATO treaty, but they lack thebackup of NATO's integrated command -- a factor the authorjudges less necessary in the future in light of thecongruence of interests emerging in Europe.   The ESO would draw on verification precedents in the CFEand START agreements, and the concept of the long-abolishedAgency for the Control of Armaments (ACA) built into theoriginal Western European Union in order to limit Germanforces. The new ACA would investigate and monitor all ESOmembers' military forces and activities; a potential threatcould be revealed and countered. The ESO also would aim towall off and damp conflicts among or within smaller states,utilizing, for instance, economic sanctions as leverage.   The author argues that American troop strength in Europewill diminish significantly no matter what the futuresecurity structure, due both to domestic politics in the U.S.and German desires to reduce the size of foreign forces ontheir soil. He believes that an ESO will enable the U.S. toevolve from &quot;onshore organizer of security to offshoreguarantor.&quot;   Because it would need to incorporate the Soviet Union, theESO would only become a possibility when that country becomesdemocratic. Democracies, Mr. Ullman argues, based as they areon the accountability of governments to the people, areunlikely to be able to hide military preparations, and thusthere would be greater confidence that plans for war could bedetected at an early stage.   The author's blueprint for a new European securityarrangement is based on optimistic but not unrealisticassumptions. He makes strong arguments to show why neitherGermany nor the U.S.S.R. today has an interest in alteringthe status quo, and comes out persuasively for locking theSoviet Union into arrangements that require intrusiveinspection. He also favors maintaining the West's cohesionand strength under an ESO through regional groupings amongallies, and ensuring the continued availability of American,British and French nuclear arsenals as a &quot;safety net.&quot;   If misconstrued by overly euphoric Europeans, Mr. Ullman'sproposal could, prematurely, lead some to seek quick creationof an ESO as an immediate substitute for NATO. But the SovietUnion is still a wild card. The degree to which the U.S. andits allies can move toward Mr. Ullman's idea, or some variantthereof, will depend largely on whether that country willmeaningfully and steadily reduce its enormous militaryestablishment, evolve peacefully into a federation orconfederation, and eschew coercion of its neighbors. It woulddepend, too, on the ability of the NATO allies to agree onways to maintain bonds among them within an ESO that arestrong enough to counter decisively any recidivist Soviettendencies.   An ESO or similar institution also will need to give theU.S. a significant enough voice so that it remains committedto European security. Many Americans will argue that the U.S.commitment to European security is too burdensome, and thatif Western Europe wishes to make the major decisions relativeto its security the U.S. should not maintain much of a trooppresence there. Growing trade tensions could add to thissentiment. If Europe is to rely on the ultimate use ofAmerican troops and strategic weapons, the Americanconnection will remain vital.   The creation of a new European order that is genuinelyeffective in guaranteeing the security of nations divided byrivalries since the Roman Empire would be a remarkable stepforward. &quot;Securing Europe&quot; sets our sights on that goal andraises issues that must be addressed to launch the process.   ---   Mr. Hormats is a former assistant secretary of state foreconomic and business affairs.</TEXT></DOC>