<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900713-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>900713-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Shadow Life:   Hollywood Figure   Has Criminal Past, Alleged   Links With Mobsters   ---   Dino Conte, a Co-Producer   Of `Another 48 Hours,'   Denies Such Assertions   ---   A Prison Term for Conspiracy   ----   By John R. Emswhiller   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><LP>   HOLLYWOOD -- D. Constantine Conte lives in two worlds.   One is filled with the big money and beautiful people ofHollywood, where Mr. Conte, a six-foot, 200-pound man,hobnobs with movie stars and movie makers, such as Nick Nolteand Dino DiLaurentiis. In this world, Mr. Conte, known asDino to friends, is a successful Hollywood producer, whosecredits include &quot;48 Hours&quot; and &quot;Conan the Barbarian.&quot; He'sthe man who co-produced &quot;Another 48 Hours,&quot; the just-releasedsequel starring Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte. And he's the manwho, friends say, is generous and trustworthy, who always hasa kind word for a secretary and whose mother lives at hishome. &quot;There will be a seat reserved in Valhalla for DinoConte,&quot; says John Milius, the movie director.</LP><TEXT>   But then there's the other world. In this one, Dino Conteis a convicted felon and onetime confederate of a reputed NewYork City mobster. He also has been the subject of periodicsurveillance by law enforcement authorities worried that mobinfiltration of Hollywood is increasing. Their internalreports allege that Mr. Conte has had associations withreputed mob figures.   Mr. Conte declined to be interviewed about his past or theallegations about him. His lawyer, Allan Sigel, would onlycommunicate by letter. He says his client is a &quot;respectedmember of the movie industry&quot; and the victim of&quot;misinformation and false statements of fact.&quot;   Yet the suggestion that Mr. Conte hasn't associated withcriminal figures is repeatedly challenged by law enforcementreports, business records and, in at least one case, by aformer criminal himself -- Dennis Tinerino. Mr. Tinerino wasconvicted of conspiracy in 1978, about the same time heshared an office address with Mr. Conte in Beverly Hills.While Mr. Conte's lawyer says Mr. Conte doesn't know the man,Mr. Tinerino remembers otherwise: &quot;I used to see Dino all thetime,&quot; Mr. Tinerino says in an interview. &quot;We used to hangout together at Pips Club,&quot; a Los Angeles restaurant andsocial club. Mr. Conte also tried helping him with amovie-related business venture, he says.   Mr. Conte hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing since hemoved west. He also went to the police in 1982 to assure themhe doesn't have any ties to the mob. At the same time, hecomplained to the police about what he felt were untruestatements they had made about him, according to a 1984police report.   Nonetheless, law enforcement officials have beeninterested in his activities for years. What theirexaminations have revealed, as recently as 1988, aresuspected connections -- some direct, some merely indirect --between the well-known producer and organized crime figures,according to law enforcement officials and internaldocuments.   Police concern about mob infiltration of Hollywood has along history. Back in the 1930s, the Chicago mob, whichinfiltrated Hollywood's unions, extorted hundreds ofthousands of dollars from studios in return for promises oflabor peace, according to &quot;Dark Victory,&quot; a book on theentertainment industry by Dan Moldea. In the 1940s a topindustry official and two labor leaders were sent to jail forthe mob-related payoffs, and, in the years since, scandalsinvolving organized crime have periodically hit Hollywood.   As for Mr. Conte, he has drawn police attention because ofhis success, his past and the company that authorities say hehas kept. For instance, a 1988 Los Angeles police departmentreport asserts that the movie maker has a &quot;close association&quot;with Vincent &quot;Jimmy Blue Eyes&quot; Alo, who, according to areport submitted to the U.S. Senate by the New York PoliceDepartment, is a reputed top member of New York's powerfulGenovese crime family. A 1983 Los Angeles district attorney'soffice internal report identifies Mr. Conte as a suspected&quot;associate&quot; of the Genovese family who reports to Mr. Alo.And a 1984 Los Angeles police report says that, in hismeeting with police officers, Mr. Conte admitted to&quot;numerous&quot; meetings with Mr. Alo but said they were simply todiscuss doing a movie or novel about Mr. Alo.   However, Mr. Sigel, Mr. Conte's lawyer, says his clienthas &quot;never attended a meeting with a Mr. Alo&quot; or been a&quot;business associate.&quot; Mr. Alo couldn't be located for commentand a lawyer who has in the past represented him declined tocomment.   William Jordan, a private investigator who says he hasworked on movie projects with Mr. Conte and who has in thepast helped the producer try to counter allegations about mobconnections, says in an interview that Mr. Conte isn't inbusiness with mobsters. He adds, though, that Mr. Conte hasmet with suspected &quot;low-level&quot; mob figures. &quot;He told me hewas just meeting with neighborhood friends from hischildhood,&quot; says Mr. Jordan, who adds that he advised theproducer to stop seeing those friends and believes Mr. Contefollowed that advice.   Mr. Jordan also adds that his familiarity with Mr. Contegoes back only to when the two met on a movie project in theearly- to mid-1970s. What happened before that, he isn'tentirely sure. &quot;I don't know much about his past,&quot; he says.   There are also indications that at least part of themovie-industry establishment is aware of law enforcementofficials' interest in Mr. Conte. Several years ago,investigators for the Los Angeles county district attorneyprivately warned an outside attorney for Paramount Picturesabout Mr. Conte, according to a person familiar with themeeting. Around the same time, Michael Eisner, thenParamount's president, was contacted by policeorganized-crime detectives who wanted to discuss Mr. Conte.Mr. Eisner is now chairman of Walt Disney Co.   Mr. Eisner, through a spokesman, says he only barelyrecalls meeting with police and hasn't any reason to besuspicious of Mr. Conte. Similarly, a Paramount spokeswomansays her studio hasn't any reason to think Mr. Conte isanything other than a respected movie producer.   Mr. Conte keeps a relatively low profile. Studio releasesabout his movies offer scant information about him, and evenhis friends say they know little about his private life. &quot;Inall the years I've worked with him, we haven't talked abouthis past,&quot; says Kurt Neumann, an executive at Warner Bros.   But from what can be pieced together from law enforcementrecords and dozens of interviews with police, friends andassociates, Mr. Conte's biography goes something like this:   A Greek-American, Mr. Conte was born in 1933 in New YorkCity. In one letter, Mr. Sigel, the attorney, says Mr. Contewas &quot;educated in Greek theater and drama,&quot; but didn'telaborate.   In his early life, Mr. Conte sometimes used the name DinoHarris. As Dino Harris, he began working in the late 1950s atvarious Manhattan bars. Roughly during this period, Mr. Contegot to know Salvatore &quot;Sally Burns&quot; Granello, who isidentified in law enforcment reports as a member of theLucchese crime family. Mr. Conte is identified in lawenforcement documents as a suspected bodyguard for Mr.Granello.   In 1964, Mr. Conte and Mr. Granello were charged in NewYork state court in Mineola, N.Y., with the attemptedextortion of a Long Island jukebox distributor. According toNew York state court records in the case, Mr. Granello andsome associates beat the businessman's wife with a pistol. ANassau County police officer, who reviewed the court records,says Mr. Conte apparently wasn't present for the beating.   Mr. Conte pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy tocommit extortion and was sentenced to six months in thecounty jail. Mr. Granello was convicted and sentenced to 18months in jail. But Mr. Granello would soon meet a savageend: In 1970, he was found dead in the trunk of a car inlower Manhattan, garrotted and shot four times in the head.   Separately that same year, Mr. Conte also encountered newtrouble. Along with four others, he was indicted by a federalgrand jury in New York in connection with the interstatetheft of $271,000 in traveler's checks. Mr. Conte and hisco-defendants were part of a broader, nationwide securitiestheft ring with ties to organized crime, according totestimony presented at a 1971 Senate hearing by the confessedleader of another theft ring, and according to materialsprepared by the staff of the Senate permanent subcommittee oninvestigations.   Mr. Conte again pleaded guilty to one conspiracy count andin 1972 was sentenced to three years at a maximum-securityfederal prison in Atlanta. He was released March 14, 1974,with time off for good behavior.   Around this time, Mr. Conte apparently began his filmcareer. A 1984 press release from Universal Pictures about aConte movie says Mr. Conte had been in the &quot;production end offilm making for the past 14 years.&quot;   An early patron was film maker  Dino DeLaurentiis, sayfriends and associates of Mr. Conte. Larry Gleason, aParamount official, says Mr. DeLaurentiis once told him thathe and Mr. Conte first worked together on the 1972DeLaurentiis movie &quot;The Valachi Papers,&quot; a true-life story ofa mobster turned government witness. Mr. DeLaurentiis &quot;didn'tsay what Conte was doing on the movie,&quot; Mr. Gleason adds. Mr.DeLaurentiis declined to be interviewed.   By the late 1970s, Mr. Conte was working out of Mr.DeLaurentiis's Beverly Hills office, according to a 1977police report and movie-industry people who saw him there. Ona 1978 DeLaurentiis movie, &quot;Brink's Job,&quot; Mr. Conte &quot;was likethe troubleshooter . . . keeping an eye on things for Mr.DeLaurentiis,&quot; recalls Domingo Rodriguez, a United ScenicArtists union official who says he dealt with Mr. Conte.   Law enforcement reports also assert that Mr. Conte hasbeen a close associate of an actor named Jude Farese, and wasconnected through him to his brother Thomas Farese, who,according to a 1988 report by the Senate permanentsubcommitee on investigations, is a member of New York'sColombo crime family. A 1978 Los Angeles police report, forinstance, says Mr. Conte was the &quot;exclusive&quot; driver of aCadillac leased in the name of Jude Farese at a Floridaaddress used by Thomas Farese for a now-defunct company hecalled Olympic Film Productions. The report says policesuspected Mr. Conte was helping run Olympic's Los Angelesoffice for a time.   Mr. Conte's lawyer says Mr. Conte has never heard ofOlympic Film. The producer didn't respond to an inquiry fromthis newspaper about his alleged contact with the Fareses.   Jude Farese, through his agent, declined to be interviewedabout Mr. Conte. &quot;He says he knows where your questions aregoing to lead and isn't interested in talking about it,&quot; theagent says.   Thomas Farese is currently in a Florida federal prison forconspiracy to distribute marijuana. He couldn't be reachedfor comment.   Then there's Mr. Tinerino, who went to jail for conspiracyand whom Mr. Conte, through his lawyer, says he doesn't know.According to Los Angeles police reports and California statecorporation records, which list business addresses, Mr. Contehad the same office address as Mr. Tinerino, who was aprincipal in a large out-call massage service.   In 1978, Mr. Tinerino pleaded guilty in a Los Angelesstate court to conspiracy to force acts of prostitution andserved four months in the county jail. Today he is in thefitness-equipment business in the Los Angeles area. He saysthat, though he shared an office address with Mr. Conte, itwas for separate companies and that Mr. Conte wasn't involvedin the out-call business. &quot;He was very nice to me,&quot; says Mr.Tinerino. He adds that Mr. Conte tried to help him marketsound equipment to the movie business and that the producereven introduced him to Mr. DeLaurentiis. &quot;I never asked himhow he got into the movie business and he never talked aboutwhat he did before the movie business,&quot; says Mr. Tinerino.   Mr. Conte's jump into the big time in motion pictures camein 1982, when he received his first producer credits, onthree movies. Two were DeLaurentiis productions, &quot;Conan theBarbarian&quot; and &quot;Fighting Back.&quot; The third, &quot;48 Hours,&quot; was aParamount production.   The Los Angeles County district attorney seemedparticularly interested in Mr. Conte's involvement in &quot;48Hours.&quot; A person familiar with the matter says the districtattorney's office was concerned how someone with Mr. Conte'sbackground could gain such a prominent role on a major movie.   Two district attorney investigators eventually met withAlan Croll, an outside attorney for Paramount, to deliverwhat one person familiar with the meeting calls &quot;a friendlywarning&quot; to the studio about Mr. Conte. Over lunch at thePlayboy Club, the district attorney's men laid out Mr.Conte's criminal past and suggested Paramount might want todo its own review of the producer, says this person. Mr.Croll thanked them for the information but never got back tothe investigators, this person adds. Mr. Croll declines tocomment on the meeting.   The movie &quot;48 Hours&quot; would prove a big hit for Mr. Conteand for its co-star, Nick Nolte. By all accounts, Mr. Nolteand Mr. Conte are very close friends, and the producer attimes acts as an unofficial agent for the actor. Matt Cimber,a local television producer, says Mr. Conte once told him,&quot;if I ever got anything good for Nick {in the way of scripts}to get it over to him right away.&quot;   During these years, Mr. Conte was also getting to knowpeople such as Donald Simpson. Mr. Simpson is currently oneof Hollywood's hottest producers, thanks to big-hit creditssuch as &quot;Top Gun,&quot; &quot;Flashdance&quot; and &quot;Beverly Hills Cop.&quot; Mr.Simpson was the head of production at Paramount in the early1980s, and it was back then that he allegedly went to Mr.Conte seeking help in a dispute with a man named MartinBacow.   The 68-year-old Mr. Bacow freely admits to having knownorganized-crime figures for most of his life, though heinsists he has never been involved in illegal activities. Hehas also been under federal investigation over whether heused organized-crime and union ties to extort money frommovie companies in return for labor peace -- a charge hedenies.   Mr. Bacow says in an interview that in the early 1980s hewas doing work at Paramount when he and Mr. Simpson had afalling out over business issues. Mr. Bacow claims that Mr.Simpson was sufficiently worried that he sought protectionfrom Mr. Conte.   Mr. Bacow says he first learned of the alleged meetingbetween Messrs. Simpson and Conte from two members of the LosAngeles police organized-crime unit he knew. &quot;They told methey had gone to see Simpson and that he admitted it. He saidhe was afraid I was going to have him killed,&quot; says Mr.Bacow, who adds that the fear was unfounded.   One of those police officials, David Powers, confirms thathe and his partner did interview Mr. Simpson and, separately,Mr. Eisner, who was Mr. Simpson's boss at the time. Mr.Powers says police department rules preclude him fromdiscussing either meeting. Mr. Simpson, through a spokesman,declined to be interviewed. Mr. Eisner, through a spokesman,says that he &quot;vaguely&quot; recalls the meeting and that &quot;it hadsomething to do with Mr. Simpson and a threat.&quot;   Mr. Bacow says that, in a later confrontation, Mr. Simpsonadmitted to him that he went to Mr. Conte for help. Twopeople who say they witnessed that confrontation essentiallyback up Mr. Bacow's account. Through his lawyer, Mr. Contesays such a meeting with Mr. Simpson never occurred.   Word of law-enforcement interest in Mr. Conte appeared ina June 1983 Los Angeles Times article headlined &quot;PoliceInvestigate Producer; He Calls It Mistaken Identity.&quot; In hisinterview in the Times, Mr. Conte suggested there must beanother man named Conte with the criminal associations. TheTimes quoted Mr. Conte as saying, &quot;I'm not part of no Mafia.Ask anybody you want in this town. I haven't done nothing tonobody.&quot;   The article also quoted Mr. Simpson as saying that Mr.Conte had been instrumental in getting Mr. Nolte for &quot;48Hours&quot; and quoted Mr. Eisner as saying Mr. Conte appeared tobe &quot;in the mainstream of the motion picture business.&quot;   Mr. Jordan, the private investigator, says the Timesarticle was a setback to Mr. Conte's career. The studios toldMr. Conte &quot;they felt they couldn't deal with him until thecontroversy died down,&quot; says Mr. Jordan. When it did, thedeals started up again, he adds.   In one of his letters to this newspaper, Mr. Sigel, theproducer's attorney, says the Journal's inquiries in recentmonths are also damaging Mr. Conte's career. Mr. Conte hasbeen put on an industry &quot;blacklist&quot; where &quot;his access toproduction and distribution outlets has been curtailed and insome instances denied,&quot; Mr. Sigel says. The lawyer didn'telaborate.   Yet if Hollywood does have Mr. Conte on a blacklist, itdoesn't appear to have affected his career. Recently, DailyVariety columnist Army Archerd wrote that Mr. Conte has threenew movies in the works. Disney would distribute one.Paramount is reportedly considering distributing another. AndMr. Nolte would star in all three.</TEXT></DOC>