<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920129-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>920129-0081.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Justice Thomas's Major Opinion   Allies Him With Conservative Bloc   ----   By Paul M. Barrett and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/29/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B9</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)FILM, TELEVISION andamp; MUSIC INDUSTRIES (MOV)PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)TAXES (TAX)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TAIWAN (TW)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Clarence Thomas's opinion favoring employers over unionorganizers Monday was his first major contribution as aSupreme Court justice. But taken together with his otheropinions and votes, the 6-3 decision permits some preliminaryobservations about Justice Thomas's three months on the highcourt.   He has allied himself with the court's dominantconservative bloc -- most notably by writing the labor-lawdecision and joining the majority in a 6-3 decisiondiminishing the protection afforded minorities by the VotingRights Act. In a separate 6-3 case, he joined the majority inlimiting the opportunities for asylum available to refugeesfrom war-torn countries who fear being forced to take uparms.</LP><TEXT>   It is too early for conclusive pronouncements aboutJustice Thomas's philosophy or method. But his work offershints about his inclinations. He has maintained a tendencytoward limiting judicial authority, which surfaced in hisbrief career on the federal appeals court in Washington, D.C.And he also has shown an affinity for the views of the highcourt's most intellectually free-wheeling member, JusticeAntonin Scalia.   One question about Justice Thomas raised by critics longbefore Anita Hill's sexual-harassment allegations was hiscompetence: Did the judicial neophyte have the skills to getthe job done? Judging from his four written opinions to date,the answer is yes. His writing is workmanlike and generallyto the point; he has a refreshing aversion to footnotes.   &quot;I see a justice who has a good deal of self-confidence,&quot;says Timothy Dyk, a Washington-based Supreme Court litigator.   In the labor-law case, Justice Thomas declared hisallegiance to the conservative majority's preference forsimple, &quot;bright-line&quot; rules, as opposed to the more nuancedmultifactor &quot;balancing tests&quot; generally associated withJustices John Stevens and Harry Blackmun. As a rule, JusticeThomas wrote, employers may keep union organizers who aren'temployees off of company property. He rejected more flexiblepositions urged by the National Labor Relations Board and theBush administration.   Business advocates couldn't be happier. &quot;He took a veryliteral approach&quot; to the issue of property rights, notes MonaZeiberg, a lawyer with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. &quot;We werepleasantly surprised.&quot;   Though leery of drawing premature conclusions, ElliotMincberg, legal director of the liberal group People for theAmerican Way, said he was disappointed but not surprised tosee Justice Thomas staking out a position on the right.   While adjusting to his new job, Justice Thomas hasimpressed lawyers by finding the time to write a concurringopinion and a dissent in other cases. Both of these effortsshare Justice Scalia's independence of spirit and tersenessin expression. In his concurrence in a criminal case fromIllinois, Justice Thomas adopted the Scalia approach ofjustifying a narrow reading of defendants' rights byexploring how those rights are rooted in U.S. history.   There is one striking difference, however, betweenJustices Scalia and Thomas: The latter has said only a fewwords in oral arguments while Justice Scalia takes pleasurein jousting with almost every lawyer who steps up to thelectern.   ---   LAW FIRM sues two partners for conspiring to defect.   The lawsuit, filed early this week by Hill, Betts andamp; Nashof New York, accused two members of its management committeeof breach of fiduciary duty, interfering with the law firm'srelations with its employees and financial fraud. Hill Bettsis a 94-year-old law firm specializing in maritimelitigation, including cases arising from the Titantic, AmocoCadiz and Exxon Valdez shipping disasters.   According to the complaint, filed in state court inManhattan, partners Marlene D. Daniels and Gary J. Wolfeviolated a partnership agreement requiring 90-day noticebefore withdrawing as partners by not telling the firm oftheir plans to defect. The complaint alleges that Ms. Danielsand Mr. Wolfe released proprietary information to other lawfirms, improperly used the law firm's money for personal use,avoided paying their share of the firm's rent, and recruitedother lawyers and employees, all in a secret scheme todefect. Ms. Daniels and Mr. Wolfe resigned Monday, after thesuit was filed.   The complaint comes at a time when many law firms aresuing to enforce partnership agreements as a defense againstpartners who abandon ship and take clients with them.Typically, these agreements deter defections by delayingretirement benefits, stringing out capital payments overseveral years, and allowing a firm to dissolve and make thedefecting partner share in all firm debts.   Last month, the California Supreme Court let stand a lowercourt ruling that such partnership agreements are generallyvalid if they still allow a partner to practice elsewhere.Three years ago, New York's highest court ruled thatnoncompetition provisions in law-firm partnership agreementsweren't valid and violated legal ethics in a case involvingLord Day andamp; Lord, Barrett Smith.   Harvey Stone and Richard Dolan, partners at Schlam Stone andamp;Dolan, which represents Hill Betts, said the New York highcourt's ruling applies only in cases where a partnerwithdraws. Ms. Daniels and Mr. Wolfe were still partners ofthe firm when all the alleged actions took place, so the NewYork law doesn't apply, the lawyers said.   Sutton Keany, a partner with Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam andamp;Roberts, which represents Ms. Daniels and Mr. Wolfe, however,said the suit does fall under the Lord Day ruling.   &quot;The lawsuit is totally without merit,&quot; Mr. Keany said. &quot;Iwouldn't be surprised if the suit is withdrawn in duecourse.&quot;   ---   PROPERTY'S POTENTIAL VALUE can't decide tax assessment,court says.   A New York state court in Manhattan found that New Yorkcity erred in taxing seven residential and office propertieson the basis of their development potential. One lot in thecluster of Upper East Side properties, owned by the estate ofdeceased businessman Sol Goldman, was taxed as highly as anadjacent lot that was twice as big.   The court criticized the city for assessing &quot;based on astill nonexistent theoretical use of the property.&quot; Althoughthe property's use has been the same for seven years, thecourt noted, its tax assessment has almost tripled.   The decision could affect many owners who bought New YorkCity property in the 1980s with the intention of developingit, said Israel Schecter, a property-tax lawyer whorepresented Mr. Goldman's estate. &quot;The economics of themarket haven't borne out those rosy outlooks,&quot; he said. &quot;Thecourt said you have to tax based on the current use.&quot;   The court ruled that the city overtaxed Mr. Goldman, whodied in 1987, by at least $3 million.   An attorney for New York, Mortimer Traktman, said the cityhadn't decided whether to appeal.   (Estate of Sol Goldman vs. Commissioner of Finance, NewYork Supreme Court, IA Part 24)   ---   U.S.-TAIWAN trade treaty still valid, despite end todiplomatic ties, court rules.   U.S. diplomatic recognition isn't necessary for aninternational commerical treaty to be valid, the federalappeals court in Manhattan said, as long as the treaty iswith a nation that has a defined territory, permanentpopulation and government.   The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said a 1946commercial treaty between Taiwan and the U.S. can remain inforce, even though in 1979 the U.S. ended diplomaticrelations with Taiwan in favor of the mainland People'sRepublic of China.   The challenge to the treaty arose out of a more thanthree-year-old copyright-infringement case dealing with NewYork's Mandarin-Chinese speaking television market. New YorkChinese TV Programs Inc. sued U.E. Enterprises Inc. forselling video tapes of Taiwanese television soap operaswithout permission. New York Chinese TV Programs has anexclusive license to sell the tapes in the New York-NewJersey area, and it argued that the 1946 treaty recognizesthe Taiwanese copyrights.   U.E. Enterprises countered that the treaty lost the forceof law once the U.S. ended diplomatic relations with Taiwan.A lower court disagreed, assessing more than $1 million indamages and attorney's fees. The appeals court last weekupheld the lower court ruling.   The case drew the attention of large U.S. corporations andtrade associations, such as Microsoft Inc., Lotus DevelopmentCorp. and the Motion Picture Association of America, whichargued that the treaty should remain in force. &quot;The decisionrecognizes the commercial importance of Taiwan,&quot; said FrankWang, of the San Francisco law firm Wang andamp; Wang, who prepareda friend-of-the-court brief for the major companies.   Stephen Gleit, who represented U.E. Enterprises, said hisclient is considering whether to appeal the matter further.   ---   AD AGE LOSES libel case, after judge reverses juryverdict.   The judge, in federal court in Chicago, ruled that anAdvertising Age article libeled Richard E. Meyer, ex-chiefexecutive officer of Jovan Inc., formerly a perfume unit ofBritain's Beecham PLC.   The case involved a 1988 article that, among other things,portrayed Mr. Meyer as a frequent user of cocaine, who hadbeen fired by Beecham. Mr. Meyer, who is no longer with thecompany, filed a $10 million libel suit.   On three of five statements Mr. Meyer challenged, the juryfound in favor of Ad Age, published by Crain CommunicationsInc., but found Ad Age knew or should have known theremaining two statements -- that Mr. Meyer had been fired andhad used cocaine on the job -- were false. The jury, however,said Mr. Meyer's reputation hadn't been damaged by the falsestatements.   Judge James B. Zagel said that under the law ofCalifornia, where Mr. Meyer resides, the jury shouldn't havebeen allowed to decide whether the false statements weredefamatory. A jury will be asked to set damages next month.   David P. Sanders, one of the defense attorneys, said JudgeZagel's decision &quot;disregards the clear intention of thejury.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>