<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910531-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>910531-0005.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   A Martyred Colombian Hero to   Whom the World Owes a Debt   ----   By Andrew C. Quale Jr.</HL><DATE>05/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><RE>COLOMBIA (CL)</RE><LP>   Enrique Low Murtra -- former Colombian minister ofjustice, member of the Council of State, ambassador andnational director of taxes -- was assassinated on April 30 inBogota at the age of 52. He was shot twice in the face,presumably by hit men for the Medellin drug cartel as he leftthe university where he was dean of economics. He was aquiet, self-effacing and dedicated public servant. It is notsurprising, therefore, that his death went unnoticed in theU.S.; just another of the thousands of victims of Colombia'smindless and endless drug and guerrilla wars.   But Enrique was a friend of mine (almost 25 years ago wehad worked together to reform Colombia's tax laws), and Ibelieve that Americans should know his story. It's a story ofintegrity, selflessness, loyalty and, most of all, courage.</LP><TEXT>   Enrique dedicated his life to the Colombian nation and toeducating its youth. Throughout his government service, hetaught law and economics, imparting his intellectual rigorand passion to thousands of young Colombians. A youngColombian professional whom I met by chance two weeks agotold me with deep emotion: &quot;He was my professor; the bestprofessor I ever had; he was my idol.&quot; There were likelyhundreds of Colombian youths whose lives Enrique so touched.   As a member of the Council of State, Enrique was in thePalace of Justice building when, in 1985, it was seized byM-19 guerrillas. In the shootout that ensued, 100 people werekilled, including 15 judges who were slain in cold blood. ButEnrique survived, carrying to safety one of his gravelywounded colleagues. Others less courageous might have fledColombia, and justifiably so. But Enrique stayed on. Havingbeen miraculously spared, he felt he had a mission tocontinue serving his country.   In September 1987, then-President Virgilio Barco askedEnrique to be minister of justice. This is one of theriskiest, most vulnerable positions in the country. In fact,seven years -- to the day -- before Enrique was slain,Justice Minister Rodrigo Lara Bonilla was killed by drugtraffickers because he courageously signed an extraditionwarrant to send a Colombian drug trafficker to the U.S. fortrial. Nevertheless, Enrique accepted the appointment withouthesitation saying: &quot;I could not turn the president down.&quot;   Enrique's friends feared for him when he took on thejustice-ministry position, particularly because he -- likeMr. Lara Bonilla -- supported his government's policy ofextraditing drug lords to the U.S. for prosecution. Wewondered whether he was signing his own death warrant, as wehave when other friends have accepted sensitive governmentalpositions. Fear is omnipresent for many Colombians -- notonly government officials, judges and policemen, but alsoreporters, businessmen, landowners and their families.   Within months of Enrique's taking office, a major drugtrafficker was released from prison without governmentalauthorization (presumably by bribing or threatening prisonauthorities). The government determined that until theColombian justice system could guarantee swift and surepunishment of convicted drug traffickers, extradition ofthese criminals to the U.S. was necessary. Enrique pushed forthis and signed orders for the arrest and extradition of fiveprincipal Medellin cartel members. The threats to his lifemounted from then on, and in June 1988 the government, forhis own protection, sent him to Switzerland as ambassador.   But the drug war knows no borders. Just as with formerMinister of Justice Enrique Parejo -- who was shot on astreet in Prague -- it followed Enrique Low to Switzerland.In a bizarre twist, the Medellin cartel, attempting atentative reconciliation with the Colombian government,warned that it had given orders for Enrique's assassinationto a Basque terrorist movement and that there was no way tocountermand these orders. Fortunately, the Swiss governmentwas vigilant in its protection and intercepted terrorists ina dynamite-loaded car, intended for Enrique. Not long after,the Swiss police had to remove a coffin draped with aColombian flag and dripping with sheep's blood that appearedone morning in front of his house.   In light of these intimidating events, perhaps he shouldhave stayed in Switzerland. Perhaps he should have surroundedhimself with bodyguards. But, he did not. He was too proud,too simple, too gentle, and, perhaps, too naive.   In any event, Enrique did return to Bogota in January.Fortunately, the drug-trafficker violence seemed to beabating. Several key drug leaders surrendered to theauthorities relying on a promise that they would not beextradited. The Constitutional Assembly now meeting in Bogotaseems inclined to prohibit extradition in the newConstitution. The danger to Enrique would appear to have beensubsiding. Then, suddenly, the cartel reached back to thepast and wreaked revenge on Enrique. As a noted Bogotajournalist commented: &quot;They never learn and they neverforget.&quot;   Colombians are on the front lines of the drug war, but thewar is not only Colombia's; it is our war, it is everybody'swar. It crosses borders quietly and insidiously.Distribution, money laundering and even processing of drugsnow take place throughout Latin America and other parts ofthe world. The U.S. has provided valuable assistance toColombia, but we cannot expect Colombians to persist in thisstruggle, and to continue risking their lives, if we are notable to provide more effective assistance.   Colombia needs help to strengthen the security andintegrity of its judicial and law-enforcement systems. Italso needs greater freedom from the duties, quotas and othershackles that prevent its exports from reaching our shores --and other foreign markets -- unfettered. Free trade andeconomic growth are critical if Colombia is to prevail.   Without support, Colombia cannot endure such lossesindefinitely, but will be forced to accommodate the drugtraffickers, as will other countries that may be less willingto make the sacrifices Colombia has. Enrique Low was the bestany nation can hope to produce. His death should not gounnoticed; his death should not be in vain.   ---   Mr. Quale is a lawyer in New York City. He served as anadviser to the Colombian government on a tax-reform missionfrom 1967 to 1969.</TEXT></DOC>