<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911227-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>911227-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Deadly Survivors:   The Cold War Is Over,   But Leftist Terrorists   In Germany Fight On   ---   `Red Army Faction' Keeps   Refining Its Operations   And Eluding Authorities   ---   Lecturing a Palestinian Group   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><RE>EUROPE (EU)GERMANY (GE)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   HAMBURG, Germany -- The attractive young couple metfurtively each week in quiet corners of wine bars in thisharbor city's best sections. They dressed well, to melt intothe society they despised.   He had loved her since high school, but she was alwaysdistracted by radical causes. After years of separation, shecalled to talk about old times, and, after months ofever-more-intimate meetings, she invited him into her world-- the Red Army Faction. But she wouldn't let him attend thediscussions. She wanted to keep the contacts private so thatwhen he was needed underground, she said, the police wouldn'tknow of his ties to the group.</LP><TEXT>   The authorities, eavesdropping on the discussions,followed the development of this potential terrorist (whomthey won't name) until he got cold feet and backed off. Theywere convinced that a new kind of terrorist was beingcreated. The Red Army Faction even gave the recruits a nameadapted from English: &quot;Die Coole Personen&quot; -- the Cool Ones.   The group &quot;has reached maximum efficiency,&quot; according toPeter-Juergen Boock, a 39-year-old former RAF member in theseventh year of a life sentence for murder. Taking a breakfrom his job as prison librarian, he explained why theterrorist war has lasted so long in Germany.   &quot;It is because we are Germans,&quot; he said. &quot;We have thiskind of `Endsieg' mentality.&quot; His English is impeccable, but,for emphasis, he chose Hitler's word for &quot;battle to thedeath.&quot; He added: &quot;In other countries, the government hasnegotiated with such groups. In Germany, it is stillimpossible to think about it.&quot;   Former Interior Minister Gerhart Baum, who foughtterrorism in the late 1970s, agrees. Such a continuingbattle, between two sides that realize that victory isn'tpossible, &quot;could happen only in Germany,&quot; he says. &quot;There isa certain rigorousness in German thinking.&quot; Another theoryholds that German youth, put off by Germany's history, can'tfeel a healthy attachment to the country.   Italy, by contrast, has almost crushed its Red Brigades,and France's Action Directe is broken. The end of the ColdWar has deprived such groups of help from the East-and, itseems, of any hope of success. Yet the RAF -- in its 21styear Europe's longest-surviving leftist terrorist group --has grown more elusive and more deadly.   Germany is currently preoccupied with attacks byright-wing youths on foreigners, but the police quietlycontinue to focus great attention on the RAF. &quot;When the RAFkills, it usually gets the sort of people who are impossibleto replace,&quot; a federal investigator says.   Police complain that they haven't had a major breakthroughagainst the RAF since they thought they had crushed it in1982. And they haven't found a significant clue in the twomost recent RAF murdersthose of Deutsche Bank Chairman AlfredHerrhausen in late November 1989, just three weeks after theBerlin Wall fell, and, this April, of Detlev Rohwedder, whohad become the symbol of capitalist takeover as head of theagency privatizing eastern German industries.   Today's terrorists have &quot;learned well from our mistakes,&quot;Mr. Boock commented. And the Federal Criminal Office itselfsays the RAF changes its methods of operation faster than thepolice can change their investigative techniques. &quot;Theyclosely study every court case against them to discover theirweak spots,&quot; says an official, who requests anonymity toavoid becoming a target himself.   At one time, fingerprints could be found on the bottomside of toilet seats and inside refrigerators. Now, most RAFmembers use a special ointment on their fingers that, afterdrying, prevents fingerprints. And after discovering that apolice lab had removed the paint from a falsified licenseplate to find a fingerprint on the copper, they switched toless sensitive plastic.   Moreover, the frustrating effort to unmask RAF members hasbeen set back by the recent death, from a heart attack, ofChristian Loechte, who had long fought against the RAF aschief of the Internal Intelligence Office in Hamburg. Mr.Loechte feared that the RAF could be helped by unification --more precisely, by out-of-work intelligence agents. Hebelieved that one or more members of the former East Germanstate security apparatus, who were responsible for handlingcontacts with Western terrorists, have gone underground.   &quot;The working hypothesis is that agents whoseresponsibility was to nurture contacts with RAF members mayhave slipped into these circles, not as a group but on anindividual basis,&quot; he said in his last major interview.&quot;These sorts of intimate contacts don't just end because theBerlin Wall falls.&quot;   Johannes Gerster, a member of the Bundestag, says he hasevidence of such contacts, though he won't cite it. He addsthat some 1,000 of the former 85,000 fulltime workers forstate security have disappeared, including 20 or 30 from thesection responsible for terrorism. &quot;It is known that a numberof Stasi people have gone underground,&quot; Mr. Gerster says.(Stasi was East Germany's secret police force.)   The Stasi man most talked about is First Lt. Helmut Voigt,a paunchy 48-year-old who headed the Central Directorate XIIsubdivision responsible for terrorism. On the morning federalpolice seized five of his subordinates, he slipped away.&quot;There's a good possibility that he has gone to theunderground,&quot; according to Mr. Loechte, who said Mr. Voigtwas the East German contact to the legendary terrorist,Carlos. &quot;Such Stasi people disappeared with millions in cashand with weapons -- and with international contacts.&quot;   But former RAF members say the organization never wouldaccept such a risk, an outsider without their training andideology and without going through their lengthy clearingsystem. But Mr. Loechte said the new RAF has become lessideological and more cold-blooded. He cited the shooting ofMr. Rohwedder. In the past, the RAF tried hard to avoidunintended casualties, but when Mr. Rohwedder was killed by asharpshooter who fired through a window at his home, his wifewas injured.   The investigation into the Herrhausen murder, moreover,hasn't yielded a single suspect, even though at least eightpeople were involved in setting off a light-activatedexplosion as the banker's car passed by. Some faces werespotted -- a jogger acting as a spotter and a woman laughinghysterically at the blast. &quot;But none of the descriptionsmatch any of the people on our wanted posters,&quot; a policeofficial says. &quot;We don't even know whom to look for.&quot;   The RAF also has broadened its activities. In 1982, itdrew up a strategy paper creating the &quot;militant illegals,&quot;who carried out actions short of the high-risk assassinationsand kidnappings. Intelligence sources believe that the RAFnow operates with three groups: the &quot;military&quot; undergroundcommandos, the militant illegals and the politicalsupporters. Police estimate the underground force at 12 to 20people, with the total RAF group between 200 and 300. The&quot;Coole Personen&quot; may shift their activities between themilitant illegals and the underground.   But what most alarms German officials is the danger of acombination of RAF members and some former East German statesecurity officials. New investigations show the historiclinks between the groups to be closer than at first thought.The most troubling revelations thus far:   -- Eastern German agents helped train RAF members --Christian Klar, Helmut Pohl and Adelheid Shultz -- in early1981 to use rocket-propelled grenades. The training wasapparently in preparation for a Sept. 15, 1981, attack on thethen-commander of U.S. forces in Europe, Gen. FrederickKroesen. Although the attack failed, German authorities wereshocked at the level of sophistication.   -- Stasi officials held strategy meetings with RAF membersin 1980 at which they devised new tactics to regain momentumafter a series of setbacks. The aim was to reach out to alarger slice of the radical left. They also agreed during themeetings to provide intelligence on the West German &quot;militaryindustrial complex.&quot;   Helmut Voigt, who was responsible for these contacts,talked to Spiegel TV before he disappeared. He said themeetings, held in a vacation house, were punctuated bymistrustful exchanges. Because of a pending election in WestGermany, the Stasi engaged the RAF members in several weeksof strategy debates, Mr. Voigt said, to safeguard HelmutSchmidt's campaign against conservative Franz Josef Strauss,who would have gained votes after any terrorist actions. Whendiscord flared up at the meetings, the parties withdrew to agarden and chomped on the fruit of a plum tree as they talkedof terrorist strategy.   Mr. Voigt and former RAF members recalled an especiallystrained moment between the East Germans and the RAF duringthe grenade training. To make the attack more realistic, anold Mercedes-Benz that served as the RAF target was filledwith four straw human dummies and a live German shepherd. TheRAF group attacked the car, but their East German hostsdidn't understand people willing to take human lives butdismayed by seeing the dog slowly die.   Yet two former RAF members interviewed for this articleseem amused by the emphasis on RAF contacts with EastGermany. &quot;It was really quite limited compared to contactswith other East European intelligence organizations,&quot; onesays. &quot;The Soviets never totally trusted the Germans workingtogether.&quot;   The two former members say meetings took place regularlywith these organizations -- without East Germans present.&quot;They would discuss what they thought might be good ideas,and we might respond to these ideas, but they would neverdirectly ask us to do anything because they knew that wouldonly be counterproductive,&quot; one member says.   RAF members often ran into difficulties with otherliberation groups because the RAF members felt ideologicallysuperior -- the avant-garde of the revolution. Mr. Boockrecalled a meeting where RAF members scolded the PalestinianFront for the Liberation of Palestine about its strategy. ThePalestinians had decided to stop international terrorism,which had achieved the global attention they wanted, and toconcentrate on the home front. RAF members thought thatmissed the point: To them, the head of the imperialistmonster was the U.S., and Japan and Germany were thenext-best targets. Israel was less important.   &quot;We told them how to do their freedom fight, and theyweren't impressed,&quot; Mr. Boock said. He added that they wouldbe friendly at the meeting, but over drinks later on &quot;they'dask me if we weren't a little crazy.&quot; His small group,lecturing a national liberation group, &quot;had no match in thearea of self-confidence,&quot; he said.   Whatever the reasons for the stubborn self-confidence,only nine of the 30 former commando members now in prisonhave recanted. The rest show no remorse and, in fact,continue to provide ideological guidance to the forces in thefield, often through their lawyers.   Mr. Boock described the painstaking process of picking anRAF underground member from left-wing political groups, whichare formed around protests about prison conditions forarrested terrorists. Only several years after being part ofthe Baader-Meinhof crowd did he get his first assignment --to steal four bicycles.   &quot;You can't imagine how disappointed I was,&quot; he said,although he was happier after the bicycles were used in abank robbery -- one of the main ways the RAF is financed. Hisnext job was to pilfer a local library's books on inorganicchemistry, to help make explosive devices. The third was torent an apartment under his own name; whenever theunderground wanted it, they asked him to leave.   Only after passing all these tests did the RAF ask him torob a bank. &quot;When that went well, and, only then, could Ibecome a member of the group,&quot; he said.   What also sets apart the RAF from similar groups is itssurprisingly high percentage of female members. They havegone from being the majority at the start to two-thirds ofthe members, Mr. Loechte said. The explanation seems to bethat the feminist movement in Germany is bigger and moreradical than that elsewhere in Europe, thus providing a largepool from which most radical women emerge.   The late Mr. Loechte's office traced the development of anRAF cell back to the early 1980s, when a women's group wasformed to protest plans for a high-rise housing project. Theybegan a campaign based on a bizarre theory that the projectwas a NATO scheme to put together people of different classesand thus undermine revolutionary tendencies.   &quot;From a core group of 20, some 10 became RAF members, andthey've remained so to this day,&quot; Mr. Loechte said. &quot;Theseare legal members. They live where they are registered, theylook after the prisoners, and a few maintain contact to theunderground.&quot; Some are thought to go underground when needed.   So, what lies ahead? Read my book, said Mr. Boock,referring to his novel, &quot;Abgang&quot; (&quot;Exit&quot;). It tells of akidnapping of an American general, a deed that has long beenone of the RAF's fondest hopes. Mr. Boock believes that theRAF will now return to this core enemy. &quot;The aim of the RAFfrom the beginning was to combat the U.S. and the influenceof the U.S. in Europe,&quot; he said. &quot;It is only natural thatthere will be more actions against Americans and theirinstallations.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>