<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910415-0183</DOCNO><DOCID>910415-0183.</DOCID><HL>   Law:   Prosecution of Child-Molestation Cases   Grows More Wary in Wake of Acquittals   ----   By Ann Hagedorn   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><LP>   Prosecutors nationwide are pursuing child-molestationcases with greater caution in the wake of acquittals andreversals during the past year.   They have become especially wary of the large-scaleprosecutions that characterized the 1980s. And since theacquittals last year in the highly publicized McMartin casein California, there are signs that judges and juries areresponding to allegations of sexual abuse of children withgreater sophistication -- and skepticism.</LP><TEXT>   The swing of the pendulum away from zealous prosecutionscomes despite the continued rise in reports of childmolestation. Some child advocates worry that a few highlypublicized failed prosecutions may cause a backlash in thelegal system and a return to the days when the charges ofchildren were ignored.   Nevertheless, many defense attorneys and prosecutors saythe attitude toward child-molestation cases is now morebalanced. Nearly everyone agrees there were injustices in the1980s, as communities engaged in frenzies of accusations,sometimes based on scant evidence.   &quot;I think it's safe to say the era of the witch hunts inchild-molestation cases {is} over,&quot; says Michael Morrison, anArizona attorney who has represented both plaintiffs anddefendants in such cases. &quot;All the way from hospitalpersonnel to prosecutors, there's a greater cautiousness andthere's a new wisdom in weeding out the bad cases.&quot;   Karen Steinhauser, Denver's chief deputy district attorneyfor domestic violence, says, &quot;All of us are so much moreaware of the potential problems in these cases. . . . And weknow now that the children are the ones who pay the price forbungled cases. We are trying to avoid that.&quot;   Law-enforcement officials are exercising more care intheir techniques for interrogating alleged victims and tryingto reduce the number of times children are interviewed. Thereis also a growing awareness, in psychological and legalcircles, that children are vulnerable to leading questionsand may lie or embellish to please adults.   Last year, when prosecutors in several counties nearDenver began investigating sexual-abuse allegations involvinga church worker and as many as 30 children, they devised astrategy aimed at preventing local hysteria. They requiredthat the children be questioned in separate rooms, byseparate investigators. The children were not told there wereother potential victims, and investigators were cautioned notto volunteer any information during the interviews. Now thereare pending cases involving 11 alleged child victims.   The Colorado prosecutors learned from the experience ofprosecutors in the McMartin case, says Arapahoe Countyprosecutor Manson Jolliffe. In that case, one investigatorquestioned all the children and allegedly passed on detailsfrom one child to the next, thus sparking a brush fire ofallegations in the community.   Concerns about unfair prosecutions are also reflected inappeals-court reviews of earlier convictions. Late last year,a California appeals court overturned the 1985 convictions ofseven defendants who had been in prison for more than fiveyears on 377 charges of child molestation. The case, whichwas one of eight big child-molestation cases that jolted KernCounty, Calif., in the early 1980s, had resulted in thestiffest sentences ever for child abuse.   In its decision, the appeals court found there was &quot;ablind quest to convict.&quot; The Kern County district attorneydecided not to retry the case, partly because three of thechild witnesses had recanted their testimony. One child --now a teen-ager -- complained that investigators hadpressured her into making false charges. There have been atleast four other convictions reversed in the Kern Countycases, says Oakland appeals attorney Michael Snedeker.   Jurors, too, are tougher to convince. Last fall, the SanDiego district attorney dropped charges against a substituteteacher after two juries failed to convict him of molestingthird and fourth graders. After the first trial, jurors weredeadlocked. Jurors in the second trial acquitted the28-year-old teacher on 10 out of 16 counts and were leaningtoward acquittal on the remaining deadlocked counts. Jurorslater said they doubted the credibility of the childwitnesses.   The teacher's attorney, Kay Sunday, says, &quot;After McMartin,we learned that we don't have to believe everything that kidstell us. The jurors {in this case} said the techniques usedto interview the kids crossed the lines into coaching.&quot;   The McMartin case attracted more publicity than anychild-molestation case in history. It began in 1983 with thecharge of one parent whose child wasn't part of the finalcase because the complaint lacked credibility. The allegationled to other complaints; and at one point there were sevendefendants and 42 alleged victims.   The allegations of the McMartin children have been gristfor defense attorneys in subsequent abuse cases. Some of thechildren testified that teacher Ray Buckey had stabbed cats,killed a horse with a baseball bat and forced toddlers todrink the blood of dead rabbits to scare them into silence.No evidence was presented to support such stories.   Rampant fear of child molestation first took hold in theearly 1980s, as child-welfare professionals and othersrealized that many children are indeed molested. A widelypublicized California study showed that one out of every fourgirls is molested before the age of 18.   At about the same time, many states enactedmandatory-reporting laws that required professionals involvedwith children, from pediatricians to school-bus drivers, toreport suspicions of abuse to local authorities. They couldbe held civilly or criminally liable for failing to reportabuse. The result was a reporting frenzy.   Meanwhile, a psychological theory known as theaccommodation syndrome was gaining credibility. According tothe theory, a molested child accommodates the abuser bykeeping quiet and denying it. Coaxing is necessary to breakthe silence, and children who have been threatened requirereassurance and praise to encourage them to divulge theirsecrets.   By the mid-1980s, massive cases had begun in Minnesota,California, Nevada and other states. The move away from suchcases coincides not only with the end of the McMartinproceedings and the $14 million price tag for thatprosecution, but also with new research. The U.S. Departmentof Health and Human Services in 1988 released a study of 19U.S. counties showing that 3.9 females out of every 1,000were molested and 2.2 children of both sexes out of every1,000 were sexually abused.   Also, medical studies have shaken the credibility of someexpert witnesses. In the early 1980s, a group of Californiadoctors established what they believed was a medical standardfor detecting sexual abuse. But in the past two years, newstudies have shown that certain physical characteristicsconsidered to be signs of sexual abuse are normal in a largepercentage of children.   And although the accommodation syndrome is still accepted,there is a growing awareness that children, when coached,easily stray from the truth because of pressure or loyalty orthe need for love.   Since McMartin, several psychological studies havecriticized the use of dolls with sex organs and of questionsrequiring only a yes or no answer. In July, a study expectedto be the most conclusive about children and the power ofsuggestion will be published by the American PsychologicalAssociation.   &quot;Though we still think that child molesters should beshot, most of us are getting hip to the fact that what kidstell their parents or investigators is not always true andthat they can be mislead,&quot; says Mr. Morrison, the Arizonaattorney.   Says Lesley Wimberly, president of VOCAL, Victims of ChildAbuse Laws: &quot;We won't be seeing the big cases like we did.Though it's a slow process, there's some awareness {that}when a case is based on hysteria and not on the merits, it'snot just that innocent people go to jail, but also thechildren become helpless victims of the legal system.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>