<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910920-0093</DOCNO><DOCID>910920-0093.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Nicaragua: A Case Study of Democratization   ----   By Nina Shea</HL><DATE>09/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><RE>CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)NICARAGUA (NU)</RE><LP>   Perhaps the most difficult problem faced by formerlycommunist-controlled governments is how to wrest control oftheir infrastructures from the party apparat. A case study ofsuch difficulties can be found in Nicaragua. Despite gains inhuman rights, education and controlling inflation, much ofthe government remains in the hands of the MarxistSandinistas, who are blocking the country's fulldemocratization. Until this changes, investment and economicgrowth will continue to be distant dreams for Nicaragua and alasting peace will hang in the balance.   The issue of civilian rule is often oversimplified bythose who focus solely on President Violeta Chamorro'sdecision to retain former Sandinista Commander HumbertoOrtega as army chief. In fact, the entire army and policeremain Sandinista institutions through and through. Theyapply the law without consistency, routinely enforcing itonly when it coincides with FSLN policies and interests.</LP><TEXT>   The armed forces often use their power to persecute theirideological enemies and to serve their own interests andenrichment. Labor leaders and demobilized Contras reportcoldblooded murders of their members by identified Sandinistamilitants who act with impunity. As union leader JoseEspinoza told me, &quot;The army is still the army of a party. Itsleadership was formed in the Soviet Union and educated in aset ideology. This is not helping to guarantee law andorder.&quot;   The State Security -- the Sandinista intelligenceapparatus trained by East Germany's Stasi -- was ordereddisbanded by the Chamorro government. Nevertheless,Nicaragua's human-rights experts attest that these forcesremain intact and are now operating against their fellowcitizens from within the armed forces. In some regions, thepolice chief was replaced by the former State Security chief.According to human-rights lawyer Lino Hernandez, Capt. MarioNoguera, the former State Security chief of Jinotega, is nowthe police chief there. And former State Security chief andknown torturer Lenin Cerna is now director of militaryintelligence.   Sandinista confiscations of private lands are impossibleto reverse since the armed forces refuse to enforceevictions. And just last week, Mrs. Chamorro incrediblyvetoed a unanimous decision of her own UNO coalition thatwould have forced the Sandinista nomenklatura to give up orbuy at fair market prices the mansions, farms and factoriesthey stole for themselves between the February 1990 electionsand Mrs. Chamorro's inauguration that April.   The Supreme Court, the nation's highest tribunal, isfrequently paralyzed in an ideological deadlock betweenSandinista and non-Sandinista magistrates. At the appellatelevel, the Sandinista judges -- appointed by the formerregime for their party loyalties rather than juridicalexpertise -- still dominate. The immediate past president ofthe Nicaraguan Bar, Roger Guevara Mena, doubts his clientswill get a fair hearing because &quot;the Sandinista judges whosentenced me to six months' imprisonment in 1988 forparticipating in an UNO rally at Nandaime are the same judgeswho are there today.&quot;   Key state-owned industries -- which, according to formerCentral Bank President Francisco Mayorga, account for 40% ofgross national product -- continue to be run by Sandinistaloyalists. Sandinista-appointee Daniel Fajardo is stillmanager of the corporation of state industries. BernardoChamorro, another Sandinista holdover, remains generalmanager of the state foreign-trade corporation -- the bodythat handles the export of agricultural commodities. RicardoMelendez is still the head of the state oil importing anddistribution division. And the head of the state electricitycorporation, Emilio Rappaccioli, is a Sandinista militant whohas held this job for 10 years.   These strategic companies are able to paralyze thegovernment to force political demands. Last week, theSandinista-controlled Compania de Productos Atmosfericos (thestate monopoly supplying oxygen for medical use) went on awork slowdown for the declared purpose of protesting thelegislative effort to rescind laws sanctioning Sandinistaproperty confiscations. The slowdown was suspended on Fridayafter Mrs. Chamorro vetoed the legislation. And employees ofthe electric company last year cut the power lines to pro-UNORadio Corporacion -- a politically motivated abuse of powerthat was captured on videotape by human-rights activists.   Until now, the Sandinistas also have controlled thenational banking system. Jaime Bengoechea, the president ofNicaragua's private Chamber of Industry, said, &quot;A highpercentage of mid- and upper-level bank managers are stillholdovers from the previous system. We would not mind if theywere just functionaries without an ideology. But they do havean ideology, and they give preference in funding and creditto people {Sandinistas} who have not been paying back theirdebts.&quot; To its credit the Chamorro government has signed anew banking law, and several new private banks opened thismonth. These new-bank openings hold promise of providing somealternative to the government-controlled institutions.   The compounding failures of Nicaragua's governmentalinstitutions conspire to make property ownership the mostpolitically combustible issue in Nicaragua today. Nowhereelse is the interdependency of economic development, peaceand strong democratic institutions so graphically evident.Emilio Alvarez Montalvan, a director of the independentweekly, El Nicaraguense, said:   &quot;Sandinista militants continue to occupy other people'sproperty and go to the civil land registry and enterproperties as their own by backdating them before Feb. 25,1990 {the cutoff date under Nicaraguan law by which theSandinista property confiscations are allowed to stand}.Because the registry falls under the jurisdiction of theMinistry of Public Security, which is dominated by theSandinistas, the registrar accepts these falsely registeredproperties as legitimate and enters them into the books.Attempts to recover the property through the courts, alsodominated by the Sandinistas, would prove ineffective.Producers are reluctant to invest their money when there isno guarantee that they will reap the rewards of theirinvestment.&quot;   The Chamorro government says it is trying to avoid thewinner-take-all politics of Nicaragua's past. It argues thatconciliation with the Sandinistas is a short-term strategynecessary to ease the transition to a full democracy. Butthis argument loses force in the bitter struggle betweendemocracy and the political mafia that the Sandinistas --and, indeed, Marxist-Leninists world-wide -- have become.Repeatedly, the Sandinistas have employed the nondemocraticpressures of riots, coup threats and politically motivatedstrikes in order to force their programs on the government.   Dismantling communism is a new experiment. But fromNicaragua it is already clear that prerequisites forpolitical and economic development must include civilianrule, accountability within the economic ministries and thearmed forces, an independent and impartial judiciary, and dueprocess.   ---   Ms. Shea is president of the Puebla Institute, aWashington-based human-rights group.</TEXT></DOC>