<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900504-0037</DOCNO><DOCID>900504-0037.</DOCID><HL>   New NATO:   Europe Will Rely Less   On U.S. for Security,   More on Own Devices   ---   As Soviet Military Recedes,   Treaty Organization Seeks   Expanded Political Role   ---   Bush's Pullback on Missiles   ----   By Philip Revzin and Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST FORGN</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   BRUSSELS -- A new vision of European security is takingshape, one that promises an altered -- and diminished -- rolefor the U.S.   The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, for 41 years thespearhead of the West's fight against communism, will soonfind itself in victory smaller, weaker and battling forpolitical influence in the new Europe. Assuming currentpolitical trends hold, most of the 305,000 American troopsthat have stood guard here for decades will be going home.What's more, the armed forces of the European NATO memberswill shrink sharply as the Soviet Union pulls back its ownforces. As its military role recedes, NATO will scramble tobecome more of a political body, seeking to settle regionalconflicts far from Europe and verifying arms controltreaties.</LP><TEXT>   And what's expected to crowd into NATO's domain? Twoforces: the increasingly unified 12-member EuropeanCommunity, which wants to add security to its mandate, andthe separate Conference on Security and Cooperation inEurope, an existing 35-nation group that includes the U.S.and the Soviet Union. Indeed, some European politicians arecalling for NATO to give way entirely to a new securityalliance based on the CSCE.   Moves to pare NATO began in earnest on two continentsyesterday. In Washington, President Bush publicly concededthat, because of political opposition in Europe and adiminished threat from the East Bloc, the U.S. won't deploy anew generation of nuclear weapons in Germany. And inBrussels, Secretary of State James Baker, meeting with the 15other NATO foreign ministers, kicked off an unprecedentedseries of meetings which, over the next few months, will tryto salvage NATO's influence by cooking up new politicalmissions for the organization and deciding how to shrink itsmilitary component in an orderly fashion.   &quot;NATO will remain vital to America's place in Europe,&quot; Mr.Bush says. &quot;It is a proven structure upon which to base oursecurity, and from which to promote a stable, cooperativeEuropean order.&quot; But he called for a NATO summit meeting thissummer &quot;to launch a wide-ranging NATO strategy review for thetransformed Europe of the 1990s.&quot;   European officials reacted favorably to Mr. Bush'sannouncement, especially the part about no new nuclearweapons. Many European leaders, particularly those in WestGermany, would have faced serious political trouble trying tosell a new arsenal to their publics. NATO Secretary-GeneralManfred Woerner said the U.S. proposals received &quot;very strongand broad support.&quot;   Clearly, NATO is unlikely to disappear completely. ManyEuropeans want a continuing link to the U.S., and the U.S. iswarning privately it won't help defend Europe without NATO.Most important, NATO is widely seen as the only force able tocounter both resurgent German nationalism and a Soviet Unionthat will remain Europe's major military power -- an unstablegiant bristling with nuclear weapons and millions of troops atrain ride from Western Europe.   &quot;NATO will remain an essential element of security for theWest and possibly for a larger number of countries,&quot; saysItalian foreign minister Gianni De Michelis. But he adds,&quot;This must be seen as a transition period for the alliance,an evolution from the military to a political viewpoint.&quot;Says NATO's Mr. Woerner: &quot;The alliance must &quot;move beyondconfrontation to cooperation.&quot;   Europe is more ambivalent about the American presence herethan at any time since World War II. It is both more willingand more able to pay for and manage its own defense. With aunited Germany at its heart, Europe will naturally shift itspolitical attention to European-dominated institutions. TheEC recently took a significant step by endorsing a French andGerman initiative that could lead to joint decision-making onpolitical and defense matters within three years, and couldeven lead to a pan-European Army of sorts in the nextcentury. Both France and West Germany back a greater role forthe CSCE, as a way to include both the new democracies ofEastern Europe and the Soviet Union in European politicalmatters.   The U.S. strategy, by contrast, is to endorse the EuropeanCommunity and CSCE security roles generally, but work tolimit them in practice to relatively marginal matters -- suchas mediating disputes within Europe -- that will leave NATOwith the broader role.   &quot;It's our hope and belief that these institutions can actin a complementary but not a competitive way,&quot; says Mr.Baker.   But sorting all this out won't be easy. One thing that'scertain is that the new Europe will have far fewer soldiersand far fewer nuclear warheads on its soil. With Soviettroops gradually returning home from East Germany, Hungary,Poland and Czechoslovakia over the next five years, the U.S.military presence will drop to perhaps 50,000 troops. ThoseAmericans who remain will likely find themselves workingclosely with French, British and Italian soldiers, perhapseven in internationally mixed regiments, which don't exist inNATO today. NATO's supreme commander -- until now an American-- will probably be a European. East and West German armieswill be combined into a force that could be limited to as fewas 200,000 men in total, a cut of more than 50% from the500,000 soldiers in the current German armies.   Mr. Bush's decision yesterday not to replace the Lancemissile is part of a package that will eventually eliminatethe 88 launchers and 700 nuclear warheads already in Germany.Similarly, the decision not to deploy improved nuclearartillery shells is part of a broader plan to scrap those inEurope now. France will almost certainly abandon itsshort-range Hades missile, leaving only British and Frenchlong-range missiles in Western Europe -- buttressed by thethreat of American nuclear weapons fired from U.S. territoryor carried on airplanes and submarines. German officials ofall parties say privately that it will be much easier to gainpublic acceptance of airborne nuclear weapons based inGermany, rather than ground-based ones.   Any breakup of the Soviet Union or violent domestic unrestthere could, of course, give NATO a fresh lease on life.Neither the U.S. nor its European allies will make majorpolitical concessions or embark on a new security structureuntil the Soviet Union's future becomes clearer.   Assuming there is no cataclysmic event in the SovietUnion, the move to a new European security structure willhave to consider a dizzying array of national agendas on acontinent that, prior to NATO's reign, exploded into wartwice in this century. France, which withdrew its army fromNATO's control in 1966, will spend the 1990s trying tobolster the European Community as a sort of board ofdirectors for all European matters -- including security.That approach would maximize Paris's influence and confineboth the U.S. and the Soviet Union to ancillary institutions-- NATO or the CSCE.   &quot;We all have to get rid of our old ideas about NATO,&quot; saysformer French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing. &quot;In the newpolitical climate France and Germany must move ever closer.There will certainly be more cooperation on the productionand procurements of arms. Europe will be more European, butwe must keep a sort of U.S. presence that's less military andmore politically intense.&quot; That's a touchy issue: BothBritain and Germany have recently asked France to help cementa U.S. role by rejoining NATO's integrated military command;Paris politely declined.   Europe's growing political clout is already evident. Lastmonth, French President Francois Mitterrand and GermanChancellor Helmut Kohl issued a joint letter to LithuanianPresident Vytautas Landsbergis urging him to suspend therepublic's declaration of independence, and thereby avoiddestabilizing Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Mr.Landsbergis responded favorably.   For its part, Germany needs some kind of communal securitygrouping as a sort of parole organization to reassure thevictims of its earlier invasions. &quot;There's an important casefor Germany staying in an alliance so it's not perceived byits neighbors as being a rogue elephant,&quot; says John Roper,head of the new Institute for European Security Studies inParis. Many German politicians, including Foreign MinisterHans-Dietrich Genscher and Socialist Party leaders, are moreattracted to the idea of an all-European security system inthe CSCE that could eventually replace NATO. They like thethought of having Moscow inside the security system alongwith the U.S., something only the CSCE permits.   The emerging Warsaw Pact nations, led by Czechoslovakia'scharismatic President Vaclav Havel, also would like to dumpNATO in the long run. To them, it represents the bad old daysof the cold war and they believe Moscow would try hard tokeep them from joining the old alliance even if it invitedthem in. So the East Europeans will be pressing in a fewyears for a new CSCE structure with such features as apeacekeeping force.   Moscow, in turn, with only the dead Warsaw Pact to relyon, has latched onto the idea of a strong CSCE. Its goal isto replace NATO and the Warsaw Pact with a grouping in whichthe Soviet Union would be a player and Germany could beconstrained. Indeed, Soviet Foreign Minister EduardShevardnadze is likely to insist this weekend at Germanunification talks that steps toward German unity be&quot;synchronized&quot; with the development of such a structure. TheWest rejects that stand.   The U.S., having &quot;won&quot; the cold war, is determined toretain its influence in Europe even as its troops go home. Todo that, it must maintain the primacy of the only Europeanorganization which is both controlled by Washington andoff-limits to Moscow: NATO. But until this week'sinitiatives, Washington seemed slow to react to the quickpace of change in Europe. The White House and StateDepartment had brushed off the talk of competing securitysystems, and failed to make a persuasive case in Brussels forNATO's new role.   But yesterday, Mr. Baker formally endorsed the idea ofusing the CSCE to resolve intra-European disputes and said&quot;we don't see a major problem with the fact that the EC wouldbe talking about some sort of security discussion orcomponent.&quot; He will be using a series of future NATO meetingsto try to cut deals reserving the most important securitydecisions for NATO.   In the end, NATO will have to find a way to live with thecompeting groupings and coordinate its policies with them.Some suggest that NATO might become a subgroup of the largerCSCE. Others see the European Community as a bridge betweenthe two.   Mulling this over after yesterday's NATO meeting, Italy'sMr. Michelis suggested a smaller NATO might form the centerof a series of &quot;concentric circles&quot; of security encompassingselect countries. &quot;Everything must be connected,&quot; he said.</TEXT></DOC>