<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900703-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>900703-0095.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Suit in New York to Test Libel Protection   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Wayne E. Green   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   LABOR FREST MCD WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A libel suit involving a letter to the editor of ascientific journal has emerged as a test case of whether NewYork state, home to many of the nation's media companies,will make statements of opinion immune from defamation suits.   The state's highest court dismissed a libel suit filed byImmuno AG concerning the letter to the editor. But the U.S.Supreme Court threw out the decision last week and orderedthe state court to reconsider the case in light of its recentruling in Milkovich vs. Lorain Journal Co.</LP><TEXT>   In Milkovich, the Supreme Court ruled that under the FirstAmendment of the U.S. Constitution there is no specialimmunity from libel suits based on expressions of opinion.But that doesn't prevent individual states' courts fromdeciding that their own state constitutions implicitly offersuch immunity.   Courts in 36 states and the District of Columbia had ruledthat statements of opinion can't form the basis of libellawsuits, but in many instances it was unclear whether suchrulings were based on federal or state constitutional law.The U.S. Supreme Court ruling will now force many of thosecourts to explicitly determine whether or not stateconstitutions afford such protection.   The current case arose from a letter published in theDecember 1983 issue of the Journal of Medical Primatologythat criticized a plan by Immuno to set up a facility inSierra Leone to breed chimpanzees to use for the testing ofmedical products. The letter was written by Shirley McGreal,head of the International Primate Protection League, anorganization concerned with the welfare of primates. Immuno,a multinational concern based in Vienna that manufacturesproducts derived from blood plasma, alleged that the letterwas false and defamatory. The only remaining defendant in thecase is Jan Moor-Jankowski, co-founder and editor of thepublication.   The stakes in the Immuno case are particularly highbecause so many media companies are based in New York. Inaddition, media defense lawyers said the New York court isinfluential in libel law and its decision could affect howother states resolve the issue.   Robert G. Sugarman of Weil, Gotshal andamp; Manges, an attorneyfor Dr. Moor-Jankowski, said he believes the New YorkConstitution does provide protection from libel suits basedon opinions. He said he will ask the court to reaffirm itsearlier ruling as it previously determined that the factsthat formed the basis for the opinions in the letter weretrue.   But Raymond S. Fersko of Tanner Propp Fersko andamp; Sterner, anattorney for Immuno, disagreed. He said: &quot;I don't thinkthere's a basis for {stating} that what the framers of theNew York state Constitution had in mind was expanding FirstAmendment protections in libel cases in a situation likethis.&quot;   ---   TEENAGE MUTANT Ninja Turtles spawn court battle overlicensing.   A New York state court in Long Island will hear argumentsThursday on whether to dismiss a $281 million lawsuit againstthe licensing agent and creators of the Turtles, comic-bookcharacters who are the basis for an animated televisionseries and movie.   The characters have earned millions of dollars frommanufacturers that hold licensing agreements to put them oneverything from posters to frozen pizzas. They also appear asaction-figure toys and on T-shirts. The characters werecreated by Peter Laird and Kevin Eastman, partners in MirageStudios, of Northampton, Mass. The licensing agent is MarkFreedman, president of Surge Licensing Inc., Jericho, N.Y.   The suit was filed by Licensing Development Group Inc., aNew York company formed in 1987 to find products and licensethem for manufacturing. It contends that Mr. Freedmandeceived it by secretly acquiring and exploiting thelicensing rights to the Turtles while he was serving as thecompany's president and chief executive officer.   The suit alleges that Mr. Freedman should have beenseeking the licensing right on behalf of LicensingDevelopment Group, and that his actions breached hisfiduciary duty to the company. It also contends that Messrs.Laird and Eastman induced him to violate his fiduciaryresponsibilities. Playmate Toys Inc., a La Mirada, Calif.,company that makes Ninja Turtle toys, also is named as adefendant.   Jerome Halperin, a New York attorney for Mr. Freedman,said he has asked the court to dismiss the suit. &quot;It has nomerit either in law or fact,&quot; he said. &quot;It's a worthlesslawsuit.&quot;   Frederick U. Fierst, an attorney in Northampton forMessrs. Laird and Eastman, said the allegations are totallywithout foundation. Richard Sallis, a senior vice presidentof Playmate Toys, said he had never heard of LDG and didn'tknow anything about the lawsuit.   ---   SUIT AGAINST TRUMP over hiring of construction workersgoes to trial.   A class-action lawsuit on behalf of construction workerswent to trial in federal court in Manhattan. The suit allegesthat Donald Trump and others conspired to cheat the union'spension and welfare funds by hiring immigrants without workpapers off the books and under-reporting the number ofemployees on the job. The workers were hired for demolitionwork to make room for the construction of the Trump Tower in1980.   Milton S. Gould, of Shea andamp; Gould, an attorney for Mr.Trump and Equitable Life Assurance Society, which was apartner in the project, said Mr. Trump was sued only &quot;becausethey needed somebody with deep pockets.&quot;   &quot;There will be no proof that {Mr. Trump or Equitable}dictated, suggested, or even hinted at who should or shouldnot be listed on any reports&quot; of workers at the job site, Mr.Gould said in his opening statement. &quot;There is no proof that{they} committed any act which furthered a breach of trust&quot;involving the funds.   Mr. Gould said the labor agreement under which thedemolition work was being done was between a contractor andthe workers. He said Mr. Trump had nothing to do with thatagreement.   The lawsuit, filed in 1983, seeks damages of $1 million.The nonjury trial is being heard by federal Judge CharlesStewart.   ---   BANKRUPTCY JUDGE reluctant to approve contempt chargesagainst Kuhn.   U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Prudence B. Abram, in New York, saidshe was reluctant to hold Bowie Kuhn and his lawyers incontempt for proceeding with a suit against former partnersof Mr. Kuhn's now-defunct law firm, Myerson andamp; Kuhn. But thejudge said she was concerned that the firm's bankruptcyproceeding &quot;go forward with some degree of orderliness.&quot;   Myerson andamp; Kuhn's bankruptcy lawyers asked Judge Abram tohold Mr. Kuhn and his law firm in contempt for allegedlyviolating a restraining order that prohibited Mr. Kuhn andhis lawyers from &quot;commencing, continuing or prosecutinglitigation&quot; against former partners of the now-defunct firm.Mr. Kuhn's lawyers at Kelley Drye andamp; Warren say that neitherthey nor Mr. Kuhn have violated the order.   Marine Midland Bank had sued Mr. Kuhn, the former baseballcommissioner, seeking to recover about $3 million in debtthat he had personally guaranteed for the firm. Mr. Kuhn, inturn, sued his former partners for their share of the debt.   In a hearing about the contempt motion, Judge Abramappeared impatient with Mr. Kuhn's lawyers and said &quot;it ispossible for some people to turn anything into a three-ringcircus.&quot; But she said her main concern was to ensure that allthe parties understood what actions were barred by herrestraining order. The judge said she would take the contemptmotion &quot;under advisement.&quot;   Richard Cohen, who represents Myerson andamp; Kuhn in thebankruptcy proceeding, said in an affidavit filed last weekthat Mr. Kuhn's action against the partners had cost Myersonandamp; Kuhn more than $10,000 in legal fees that he should nowreimburse.   ---   HEAVYWEIGHT BOXING fight gets set for round one in court.   James &quot;Buster&quot; Douglas, the heavyweight boxing champ,claims promoter Don King sided with Mr. Douglas's opponent,Mike Tyson, in their title fight last February. Thus, Mr.Douglas says, he can drop out of his contract with Mr. Kingand claim at least $10 million in monetary damages to boot.   Mr. King, who has promotion contracts with both Mr.Douglas and Mr. Tyson, denies any unfair dealings and seeksat least $25 million in damages from Mr. Douglas for renegingon their deal. The bout is set to begin today in federalcourt in New York.   ---   COUDERT BROTHERS expands into Thailand.   The New York law firm has formed an affiliation withChandler andamp; Thong-Ek, an 18-lawyer firm in Bangkok. Chandlerlawyers will act as local counsel for Coudert clients onmatters requiring knowledge of Thai law, and Coudert lawyerswill assist the Thai law firm. With 370 lawyers, Coudert hasoffices in Tokyo, Beijing, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore andSidney.   James B. Sitrick, Coudert's chairman, says the law firmdecided to form the affiliation because the partners believeThailand is on the verge of a business boom.   He said the law firm represents American, Japanense,French and German companies who do business in Thailand.   ---   LEAVING MCDONALD'S: Donald P. Horwitz, executivevice-president for law and secretary of McDonald's Corp., isto leave the food-service giant to become a partner atSonnenschein Nath andamp; Rosenthal, Chicago. Mr. Horwitz willhandle corporate and franchise matters at the 270-lawyerfirm, which has been McDonald's principal outside counsel for20 years. Mr. Horwitz, who was the Oak Brook, Ill., concern'schief legal officer for 18 years, will remain as a directorof McDonald's.   ---   Wade Lambert and Arthur S. Hayes contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>