<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0119</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0119.</DOCID><HL>   International:   As Colombia's Drug Terror Intensifies,   Politicians Campaign Outside Country   ----   By Thomas Kamm   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><LP>   CARACAS, Venezuela -- Like presidential contendersanywhere, Cesar Gaviria is selling himself hard.   In one day of campaigning here, he has breakfasts withVenezuela's foreign minister, gives a few interviews, meets aleft-wing politician, lays a wreath on the tomb of freedomfighter Simon Bolivar, has lunch with his staff, holds talkswith voters, meets with President Carlos Andres Perez andheads home.</LP><TEXT>   And there's the hitch. Mr. Gaviria's home is neighboringColombia. But the political and drug-related violence thereis so bad that none of the candidates can do more than appearon television or hold small private meetings. So Mr. Gaviria,the candidate of the ruling Liberal Party and theoverwhelming favorite of the May 27 presidential vote, hascome to Venezuela on a three-day trip, hoping to generateheadlines and do some of the things he can't do at home.   &quot;It's easier to make a swing through Caracas than throughMedellin,&quot; home of one of Colombia's feared drug cartels,says Rodrigo Pardo, an aide to Mr. Gaviria.   Colombia is going through one of the strangest electioncampaigns ever, a clandestine, cloak-and-dagger affair whereissues have taken second place to making sure the candidatesstay alive. With Colombia's drug lords calling off aunilateral truce, violence is again sweeping the country,despite recent successes in the government's war on drugs.   That Mr. Gaviria is forced to campaign in the wrongcountry is just another sign of the surrealism and horror ofColombia. On Saturday, two powerful car bombs exploded incrowded shopping centers in Bogota as Colombians shopped forMother's Day gifts, killing at least 15 people, includingfour children, and wounding 144. A few hours later, anothercar bomb went off in Cali, the other drug-cartel capital,killing eight and wounding 37.   The bombs, believed to be the work of drug traffickers,marked the second-deadliest day of violence in Colombia's10-month-old war on the drug cartels -- a war decreed byPresident Virgilio Barco after presidential contender LuisCarlos Galan was murdered in August. Since his death, twoother candidates -- left-winger Bernardo Jaramillo and CarlosPizarro, the head of the M-19 terroristgroup-turned-political party -- have been killed. &quot;I don'tthink any other country has had a campaign where threecandidates have died,&quot; says Mr. Gaviria. Adds law studentLuis Gomez: &quot;If things continue this way, by the timeelections come around, we won't have any candidates left.&quot;   Colombia, home of Latin America's stablest democraticsystems, has also become one of the world's most violentcountries. In some ways, this isn't new: Two decades ofpolitical warfare pitting the Liberals against theConservatives, lasting into the 1960s, claimed an estimated250,000 lives. But today's violence is a bewildering maze ofdeclared and undeclared wars that have so weakened Colombia'sdemocracy that even candidates say the fact elections aretaking place is a triumph.   A particular breed of Colombian academics, known asviolentologists, is compiling grisly statistics and trying tomake sense of the bloodshed. Eduardo Pizarro, aviolentologist at Bogota's National University and thebrother of the slain M-19 candidate, counted 18,000assassinations in 1989, of which 3% were solved, in a countryof 32 million people. Rodrigo Losada, another violentologist,counted 23,312 homocides last year. &quot;I think only countriesin civil war have a higher rate,&quot; he says.   There are so many varieties of violence analysts havetrouble figuring out what it's all about. Mr. Pizarroidentifies seven violent &quot;actors&quot; in Colombia today: drugtraffickers, left-wing guerrillas, paramilitary squads,peasant self-defense groups, the extreme right, organizeddelinquents and urban criminals. &quot;It's not a nationalviolence, but a multiregional one,&quot; he says. &quot;In each regionthere's a different threat, and the alliances shift. In someplaces, it's the military and narcos against guerrillas. Inothers, the guerrillas side with the narcos against themilitary. The government has identified the narcos as thebiggest threat, and is promoting peace with guerrillas toneutralize a second threat, while the extreme right developsinto a new threat.&quot;   Not surprisingly, violence and security have dominated thecampaign, to the exclusion of all issues, including theeconomy, which despite the violence is one of the healthiestin South America. Fittingly, in a country where death isalways around the corner, it is a campaign dominated byghosts. Mr. Gaviria's posters show him waving in front of alarger picture of Mr. Galan, whose mantle he took up afterMr. Galan's assassination. And M-19's posters still showPizarro, who was killed on a plane on April 26, rather thanhis substitute, Antonio Navarro.   The central issue is how to deal with narco-terrorism, andMr. Gaviria talks tougher than the three other maincandidates, conservatives Alvaro Gomez and Rodrigo Lloreda,who want to balance justice with Colombians' peaceaspirations, and Mr. Navarro, who encourages some form ofnegotiation with drug lords.   On his trip to Venezuela, Mr. Gaviria is permanentlyfollowed by tens of machine-gun-toting security guards cladin bulletproof vests and by two ambulances, including amobile-operating unit. Taking time out for an interview, heoutlines a position very close to that of the currentgovernment: Keep fighting the war on drugs, and encourageconsumer countries -- principally the U.S. -- to wage warthere too and open their markets to Colombian products otherthan cocaine.   But in fighting the war on drugs, Mr. Gaviria, a43-year-old economist who has served as both finance ministerand interior minister, says Colombia must develop other toolsbesides extradition to the U.S., the main arm used by theBarco government. He proposes a far-reaching judicial reform,including the creation of a special court to judge drugtraffickers in Colombia, replacing judges who risk death ifthey don't bow to intimidation.   Colombians will also vote in a referendum on whether tostart the process of revising the constitution, presumably inways that could help the state fight the drug lords. Somepeople, however, have lost hope that any change will beenough. Mr. Pizarro, the violentologist, has attended 50funerals, including his brother's, in three years. He has hadenough. &quot;There are two options, he says -- &quot;Leave the countryor live without paranoia.&quot; Since death threats prevent himfrom following the second course, he has chosen the first.</TEXT></DOC>