<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911104-0018</DOCNO><DOCID>911104-0018.</DOCID><HL>   The Appalling Cost of the RTC's Haste   ----   By C. Daniel Clemente</HL><DATE>11/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><GV>FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORP. (FDC)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)VIRGINIA (VA)</RE><LP>   The Resolution Trust Corp.'s liquidation of the propertyof failed savings and loans is turning into the greatestpeaceful redistribution of wealth in modern times. But theredistribution is not going from the wealthy to the middleclass, or even from the middle class to the wealthy, butrather from the middle class and the wealthy to thesuper-rich and to big business.   The RTC understands its mandate to be rapid liquidation ofthe real estate that has come into the government's hands. Inorder to sell fast, it has taken to selling its commercialreal estate in bulk. But this decision has socialconsequences -- especially since there is no financingavailable today for those willing to speculate on thepurchase, development and improvement of real estate. Whenyou offer property for sale in packages of $300 million, cashonly, who do you suppose the buyers will be?</LP><TEXT>   Real estate values and the real estate industry have beenamong the prime victims of this unintended social revolution,for two reasons: First, the RTC's huge financial needs havemade credit unavailable to the industry as a whole. Second,it has taken control of the nation's largest group of realestate transactions out of the hands of the private sectorand turned it over to a bureaucracy.   From my personal experience, this bureaucracy has beenpredominantly staffed by individuals whose professionalbackground has either been in the Division of Liquidation ofthe Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. or in failed savings andloan associations. Individuals with those backgrounds may behave great experience in the mechanics of acquiring anddisposing of real estate. But the heart of the industry, theessence of the value of real estate, lies in theentrepreneurial developer's unique understanding of aparticular piece of property and, most important, hisunderstanding of the marketplace where the real estate islocated, together with the laws, ordinances and regulationspeculiar to its jurisdiction.   This crucial perspective is nowhere to be found at theRTC. The result is that the cost to the taxpayers of the Sandamp;Lliquidation far exceeds what it would have been if managementand control of the operation had been entrusted to peopletrained and motivated to realize the highest utility andvalue of property.   A developer wants to maximize the utility of a piece ofproperty in as short a period of time as possible. Aliquidator wants to dispose of the property as quickly aspossible. But disposing of property as quickly as possiblesimply is not compatible with maximizing value, or even withminimizing loss.   To see these these tendencies at work, look at the case ofone specific project, Potomac Crossing, a planned unitdevelopment in the town of Leesburg, Va.   The property was purchased in late 1986 by a Virginiadeveloper whose plan included design and construction of allnecessary streets, sewer lines, water service, curbs andgutters and electrical service. Work was begun in the fall of1987 and was to be accomplished in three phases. The originaldeveloper was able to complete phase one. Today,approximately 318 families live in Potomac Crossing. Thetotal value of the homes sold in phase one exceeded $45million.   In April 1990, United Savings Bank of Vienna, Va.,acquired the uncompleted portion of the project, and broughtin my firm as consultants to review the project and create abusiness plan. We determined that to maximize the return onthe sale of the land, it would be prudent to complete theengineering work. This would enable us to obtain final siteplan approval for the subdivision of all land in phases twoand three into building lots. Because the engineering designwork takes many months and because the approval process is solengthy, taking property through the process to finalapproval adds great value to the property. We also advisedUnited Savings Bank to commit the funds necessary to completeconstruction of the sewer line that would serve phases twoand three.   Then, in August 1990, United Savings Bank was placed inconservatorship. The RTC became the owner of the property. Itelected not to proceed with any further work on the land.Today, the RTC is holding 213 acres of ground that has noaccess to sewer lines and on which essentially no engineeringwork has been performed for more than a year. If we assumethat it would take 60 days to complete the engineeringdrawings for those 213 acres, it is my estimate that it wouldtake a total of at least 11 months to complete all theengineering work. In the year that has elapsed since it tookit over, the RTC could have completed all the engineeringwork on the property.   Instead, it appears that this property will be sold by theRTC without any further engineering work being done, andwithout the sewer being bonded because of the uncertaintycreated by the RTC. The town of Leesburg insists that noadditional lots can be recorded in Potomac Crossing untilbonds have been posted to guarantee sewer construction. Thatmeans the property will have to be sold as acreage ratherthan as lots, and as acreage with no present access to sewerservices.   In the meantime, the preliminary plan approval granted bythe town is about to expire. Since the original preliminaryplan was approved, the town has altered its design standardsfor public facilities. Engineering to meet the new designstandards will cost an extra $440,600 -- money that couldhave been saved had the RTC finished the job back in 1990.   Further, by interrupting construction of the sewer, theRTC has voided agreements with 11 neighboring property ownersand the town to contribute to the cost of the PotomacCrossing sewer system. Had the sewer been built promptly, itcould have cost as little as $768,998. To a new owner ofPotomac Crossing, the cost could be as high as $3.5 million.   The property is being offered for sale by the RTC at $8million. It will likely bring less than half that amount,between $3 million and $4 million -- on a property that wascarrying $16 million in debt when it was taken over.   If, on the other hand, it had been held and managed withan eye toward maximizing the value and utility of theproperty without taking any risk of development, and if about$1.5 million in engineering fees, review fees and sewerconstruction had been spent, today the property wouldreasonably be expected to yield in excess of $22 million.   In general, the RTC acts as best it can given itsunderstanding of its mandate. But Congress must recognizethat this mess cannot be brought to an even partiallysuccessful conclusion by mandating rapid liquidation. If wecontinue on the present course, the downward spiral in thevalue of real estate will accelerate, precipitating thecollapse of commercial banks by undermining the value ofproperty held as collateral, and eroding the principalelement of every American family's net worth: the equity intheir home.   The long-term economic value of real estate is asubstantial portion of the nation's net worth, and as long asthe RTC is poised to dump properties on the market, nobodyknows how much farther prices will fall. If the roughly $300billion in real estate loans due over the next two yearscannot be refinanced at present loan amounts because of adecline of as much as 40% in real estate values, then we areheaded for a new problem at least as big as the one we'vewatched grow for the past two years.   Here's what must be done:   -- The RTC should abandon the policy of liquidation assoon as possible.   -- Congress must recognize that as the owner of more than61,000 parcels of real estate, the government, like it ornot, is in the real estate business and must act prudently soas not to destroy the value of real property all across thecountry.   -- Private sector individuals and companies with realestate experience must be brought into the process early toaid in the management of real estate assets.   -- A tax incentive to make it possible for the little guyto participate in the purchase of real estate and otherassets from RTC must be enacted. For example, Congress couldallow a deduction of $2,500 for investment in a publicly heldentity that would buy assets from the RTC, the FDIC, FreddieMac, Fannie Mae and other federally insured financialinstitutions.   -- Bank regulators must be prevented from forcing banks towrite down assets that have real long-term value to theirartificially low present values.   -- The FDIC must stop closing banks and thriftinstitutions where there is no evidence of fraud orself-dealing.   If Congress will not take such steps, there is no doubt inmy mind that no one can estimate the ultimate cost facingthis nation. The only thing I can say with absolute certaintyis that it will far exceed anyone's worst fears.   ---   Mr. Clemente is a real estate consultant in Vienna, Va.</TEXT></DOC>