<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900703-0043</DOCNO><DOCID>900703-0043.</DOCID><HL>   A New Nippon?   MITI `Vision' for 1990s   Seeks a Mellow Japan   Others Shouldn't Fear   ---   But Some Doubt the Agency   Has Changed or Is Able   To Open Up the Country   ---   A Report That's Partly PR   ----   By Jacob M. Schlesinger   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   JAPAN</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   TOKYO -- Every decade, the powerful Ministry ofInternational Trade and Industry gazes into its crystal balland publishes what it calls a vision of the future. &quot;Warning&quot;might be a better word.   Had foreign steel, semiconductor and other industriesviewed the visions of the 1960s, '70s and '80s as economicwar plans, they might have been better prepared for thestruggles they later faced.</LP><TEXT>   But in its vision for the 1990s, slated for publicationThursday, MITI calls for nothing less than the dawning of anindustrial Age of Aquarius. New national goals, according toearly drafts, include creation of a &quot;mellow society&quot; forJapan's elderly and &quot;promoting eating space&quot; in Japanesehomes and restaurants, so that &quot;the dining table will be aplace where you can express yourself.&quot;   The main industries targeted for improvement by the visionare domestic. They include such unstrategic sectors asresorts, interior decorating, traditional handicrafts andfashion (through fashion museums, fashion towns and designdays). The vision also calls for &quot;technoglobalism&quot; --world-wide sharing of research -- and &quot;harmonizing&quot; Japan'strade ties.   &quot;If you look at our report,&quot; says one official working onit, &quot;you might wonder where MITI's industrial policy is.&quot;   Indeed, MITI's professed transformation from driver ofthis nation's economic steamroller to dispenser of mellownessdoes stir wonder. Amid growing international suspicion ofJapan, &quot;you have to take it {the new vision} as apublic-relations document,&quot; says Ezra Vogel, a Harvardprofessor and Japanologist, on hearing a summary of thereport. Even one of the authors admits, &quot;We have drafted thisdocument based on the fact that foreigners will read it.&quot;   Yet for those wondering what Japan will look like in theyear 2000, the real question is not whether MITI is sincerebut whether it -- or anyone else -- can loosen up Japan. Forthe 1990s prognostications to turn out as accurately asMITI's previous forecasts, Japan will have to make changesfar deeper than ever before.   &quot;I'm skeptical about how strongly MITI will be able toinfluence industry,&quot; says Naohiro Amaya, a retired MITI aideand main author of the 1970s vision. &quot;It's simple to saydevelopment of steel is important. But when MITI says qualityof life is very important, it's not so simple.&quot;   Even doubters will pay attention to MITI's new vision,though, because few bureaucracies anywhere can rival MITI'strack record over the past few decades. MITI emerged afterWorld War II with a vast arsenal of formal and informaleconomic powers, ranging from controlling access to foreignexchange to proffering &quot;administrative guidance&quot; toexecutives. In the early 1960s, for example, MITI forcedInternational Business Machines Corp. and Texas InstrumentsInc. to license potential Japanese competitors as the priceof setting up shop in Japan.   Chalmers Johnson, a Japan expert at the University ofCalifornia at San Diego, argues in his 1982 book &quot;MITI andthe Japanese Miracle&quot; that the ministry charted Japan'seconomic rise and still wields great influence. Othersdisagree. They cite such famous MITI flubs as its failedattempts to block Sony Corp. from acquiring Americantransistor technology in 1953 and Honda Motor Co. fromentering the auto business in 1963. They say MITI's main rolewas to ratify existing trends.   But even when MITI followed rather than led, it played animportant bureaucratic role. Its tracts, though far fromCommunist-style five-year plans, are much more important thanhands-off macroeconomic forecasts. Work on the 1990s visionbegan in the fall of 1988, with help from more than 300Japanese leaders, including MITI officials and such outsidersas the chairmen of Sony and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd.,professors of economics, law, and literature from TokyoUniversity and an editorial writer from Japan's leadingeconomic newspaper.   MITI isn't just an intellectual middleman. The ministryhelps define a consensus and, by lending its seal ofapproval, gives that consensus great weight. Executivesinvoke MITI statements to defend investment decisions. Bankloans often flow into MITI-targeted areas. College studentsflock to technologies highlighted by MITI as growthindustries. Specific MITI policies and projects often followthe general visions.   The visions give &quot;an orderly frame of reference withinwhich corporate actors can make a series of their owndecisions,&quot; Daniel I. Okimoto, a Stanford politicalscientist, wrote last year in &quot;Between MITI and the Market,&quot;a book largely skeptical about the ministry's current power.&quot;When economic plans are concrete, industry-specific andbased on a consensus between MITI and industry, they can getactors in the private and public sectors moving in the samedirection.&quot;   When the vision of the 1960s was published in 1963, Japanhad already bounced back from the war's devastation but stillworried about surviving international competition. MITIcalled for concentration on high-growth heavy industries andchemicals and subsequently fostered those sectors. In steel,for example, MITI helped coordinate production, investmentand pricing to prevent &quot;excessive competition,&quot; eventuallyengineering the merger of two large manufacturers into NipponSteel. By the end of the decade, Japan had tripled its steeloutput and become the world's most efficient producer.   The next vision, published in 1971, called for a&quot;knowledge-intensive&quot; economy. Japan was worried aboutcompetition from low-wage developing countries and industrialpollution. MITI steered its financial machinery-tax breaksand loans away from heavy industries and toward cleantechnologies, while maintaining trade curbs in thosestrategic sectors.   It launched research projects with Japanese electronicscompanies in areas such as mainframe computers andsemiconductors. It guaranteed a market for these nascentindustries by buying only domestic products, even thoughforeign technology was superior. By the end of 1970s, Japanhad largely pushed America out of consumer electronics, mademajor gains in computers and become the technological leaderin basic chips.   The 1980s vision was more diffuse. It dwelled on whatseemed at the time like a long-term energy crisis. But itsgoals included becoming &quot;technology-intensive,&quot; on the groundthat Japan must &quot;develop its own technology to serve as abargaining power.&quot; The report listed many crucial fields,such as artificial intelligence and new materials, and MITIsubsequently underwrote related research projects. Americantrade negotiators also allege that MITI encouraged, or atleast shielded, measures that protected Japan's domestictechnology while wiping out foreign competitors.   It is too early to judge the success of many of theadvanced research ventures. But as the 1980s ended, Japan hadvirtually chased Americans out of the dynamic random accessmemory semiconductor business and seemed poised to take alarge chunk of the supercomputer market.   But something else happened in the 1980s that MITI hadn'tenvisioned: The world got angry at Japan. Americans andEuropeans termed its policies unfair, blamed MITI andthreatened to close their markets unless Japan changed. Soone of the ministry's new missions has been to shine upJapan's image -- and its own.   MITI officials talk these days like graduates ofre-education camps. They diligently refer to declines inJapan's trade surplus as &quot;improvement&quot; in the trade picture.Many Americans fear that Japan is targeting aircraft as itsnext great industrial leap, but Shinichiro Ohta, the head ofMITI's aircraft and ordnance division, insists that &quot;we don'thave national goals.&quot;   MITI's face lift has included everything from negotiatinglimits on Japanese exports and sharing research money withforeign companies, down to plastering &quot;Import Now&quot; postersall over Tokyo's Narita Airport. And now comes the vision ofthe 1990s, which essentially declares that the mission ofbuilding up Japan Inc. has been accomplished. Like the KGB,which is suffering an identity crisis in the Soviet Union,MITI needs a new task.   The 1990s report still talks about the health of theJapanese economy, but focuses on such domestic issues asdealing with the labor shortage. The vision calls for morebasic, as opposed to commercial, scientific research. Theindustrial-policy section calls for consumerism and moreattention to &quot;human values.&quot;   &quot;MITI had great success in making Japan an economicgiant,&quot; says Hiroshi Tsukamoto, a 22-year veteran of theministry who helped draft a section on &quot;yutori and yutakasa,&quot;which roughly translates into &quot;comfort and affluence.&quot; &quot;Butnow the surroundings of Japan are changing, and we have tohave a more balanced relationship between the economy andindividual people's lives.&quot;   Yet MITI hasn't abandoned its traditional role. It stilltargets commercial technologies in which Japan lags behindother countries, such as jet engines, forgovernment-sponsored research and tax breaks. And itstrenuously resisted U.S. pressure to open up markets rangingfrom supercomputers to the retail system.   &quot;The only thing that is changing is what is needed topromote Japanese business in the 1990s,&quot; says John P. Stern,who heads the American Electronics Association's Tokyooffice. &quot;Japanese companies are overflowing with capital.They don't need the West anymore to develop technology. Theyneed to maintain foreign markets' openness. I see absolutelyno change in MITI's fundamental vision.&quot;   The innocent-sounding vision of the 1990s might appear tobe aimed at doing just that. For the first time, the ministryplans to release an English-language summary simultaneouswith the Japanese report. The release comes just a week afterthe first full report of the Structural ImpedimentsInitiative, a forum in which the U.S. is urging Japan toadopt a more mellow economy. In fact, the Japanesegovernment, in an interim agreement in the SII talks signedin April, specifically agreed that its &quot;vision&quot; statements&quot;shall not be used to enhance the competitive position ofparticular companies in the Japanese market&quot; and that intrade-related visions, &quot;the significance of imports shall beemphasized.&quot;   Yet more and more Americans are convinced that MITI reallyis evolving. Some visiting U.S Commerce Department officialslast September praised MITI's helpful role in tradediscussions and criticized the more intransigent Ministry ofPosts and Telecommunications. &quot;Some people are going to bevery reluctant to change, but there is a recognition {withinMITI} they've got to open up,&quot; a Commerce Department officialsaid here recently.   MITI, in fact, has plenty of reasons other than pleasingAmericans for adopting a new look. In Japan's fiercelycompetitive bureaucratic wars, MITI's new vision can be readas a gambit for expanding its turf. Most of the issuesaddressed have little to do with MITI's directresponsibilities. The push for greater public spending, forexample, is a shot across the bow of the tightfisted Ministryof Finance. The drive to cut labor hours -- reinforced withyet-another report issued in early June -- nudges into theLabor Ministry's domain.   In fact, while MITI and the Americans talk about the samegoals, the proposed means often differ sharply. U.S.negotiators argue that the source of most economic conflictis the heavy hand of the Japanese government and that thesolution is deregulation. But MITI's response to mostcomplaints is a new MITI program.   Besides, MITI isn't alone in calling for reorientation ofJapan's economy. The 1990s vision will be only the mostprominent in a stream of reports issued since then-PrimeMinister Yasuhiro Nakasone commissioned a 1986 report callingfor a laundry list of market-opening and lifestyle-enhancingmeasures.   And just yesterday, Japan's largest trade-union federationand the federation of employers' associations, in theirfirst-ever joint report to the government, urged areorientation in Japan's industrial structure away fromproducers and more toward consumers, according to the Kyodonews agency.   But even if MITI, as well as other pockets of Japan'sleadership, really have the will, it isn't clear that theyhave the way, or even know the way, to craft such atransformation. After all, the 1970s vision included a callfor a five-day workweek, and the 1980s vision advocated&quot;relaxed ease&quot; -- though stressing balance with economic&quot;vitality.&quot; Over that time, Japan's economy has certainlygained in vitality, but working hours have stayed stuck atmore than 2,100 a year, 10% more than those in any otherindustrialized nation.   One problem, analysts say, is that MITI is advocatingvalues alien to long-held Japanese practices. &quot;I think thereis a desire on the part of Japanese leaders to avoidconfrontation and friction with the U.S. and othercountries,&quot; says Clyde Prestowitz, a former U.S. tradenegotiator who often jousted with MITI. But, &quot;the moreimportant question is `Do they know how?' . . . If you don'treally have a concept of openness, then how do you getthere?&quot;   Another potential stumbling block is that MITI, bychampioning foreign companies as well as Japanese workers andconsumers, would rile its traditional constituency: Japaneseindustry. Is it really able to rein in the giant it helpedcreate? Some say it is -- but just feigns impotence toconvince Americans further market-changing measures areimpossible.   Others aren't so sure. &quot;Whenever companies consider {MITIpolicies} good for them, they follow,&quot; says Makoto Kuroda,the ministry's recently retired vice minister ofinternational affairs. &quot;But when MITI says something stupid,or believed to be contrary to the interests of business,there is no way to force them.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>