<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900413-0048</DOCNO><DOCID>900413-0048.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Marcus Schloss Fined for Insider Trading   ----   By Wade Lambert and Paul M. Barrett   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   LATAM TAXES MDEST</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   A federal judge fined Marcus Schloss andamp; Co. $480,350 fortwo counts of conspiring to trade on inside information andsecurities fraud.   The securities firm could have been fined $500,000 on eachcount, but Judge Charles Haight Jr. said that imposing alarge fine on both counts would have been unfair because thetwo convictions stem from one incident. In an unusual ruling,the judge fined the firm $480,350 on each count, but said itonly has to pay the fine once. As a result, the fine willstand even if one of the two convictions is overturned onappeal.</LP><TEXT>   Federal prosecutors had urged the judge to order a&quot;substantial fine&quot; but had not been more specific. AssistantU.S. Attorney Howard Heiss, one of the prosecutors on thecase, declined to comment on the size of the fine.   Marcus Schloss, a trading firm on the New York StockExchange, was convicted of the two counts in July inconnection with its purchases of stock in American BrandsInc. in March 1986. The firm made illegal profits of $9,825.Marcus Schloss has said it is appealing the conviction. Thefirm was acquitted on securities fraud charges involving itstrading in three other stocks.   That case marked the first time that a Big Board memberfirm had ever been convicted of insider trading. A specialisttrading firm, such as Marcus Schloss, acts as a market makerin certain stocks.   In determining the sentence, Judge Haight said he tookinto consideration a settlement Marcus Schloss reached withthe Securities and Exchange Commission in February 1988. Inthat settlement, which involved trading in American Brandsand other stocks, the firm turned over alleged illegalprofits of $136,900 and paid civil penalties of $273,800.   Of those SEC penalties, however, only $19,650 was directlyrelated to the American Brands trading. Judge Haight, infederal court in Manhattan, said he deducted that amount fromthe fine he considered appropriate for the criminalconviction. At the sentencing, Marvin Schwartz, an attorneyfor Marcus Schloss, said it would be &quot;double hitting&quot; for thecriminal fine not to take into account some of the civilpenalties paid to the SEC.   Judge Haight said he believed the reduced fine would stillsend a message to the securities industry. &quot;Trading while inpossession of material, confidential, nonpublic informationis a crime. . . . It constitutes an affront to the fairoperation of the marketplace,&quot; the judge said.   ---   NEW JUDICIAL PROCEDURES may be needed in cases involvingsecret documents, says the independent counsel in theIran-Contra investigations.   Congress may have to set special procedures, withcurtailed individual rights, to avoid problems withdisclosing classified documents in cases such as theIran-Contra prosecutions, Independent Counsel Lawrence Walshsaid.   Mr. Walsh suggested in an interview that Congress may wantto restrict certain defendants' rights to a public trial or ajury of ordinary citizens because of the reluctance ofintelligence agencies to surrender classified material. Theattorney general, acting on behalf of the intelligenceagencies, can unilaterally bar the disclosure of classifieddocuments.   &quot;The picture is not happy,&quot; said Mr. Walsh, whose officerecently won the conviction of former National SecurityAdviser John Poindexter for coordinating the cover-up ofcovert U.S. arms sales to Iran and secret White House supportfor the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. &quot;The question you comedown to,&quot; Mr. Walsh said, is: &quot;Do you have to go to somespecial system of justice like the military has?&quot; Militarycourts have restrictions on defendants' rights not found inthe civilian judicial system.   Mr. Walsh's suggestion isn't new. Jack Friedenthal, deanof George Washington University's law school and an expert onlegal evidence, said that &quot;restrictions (on rights at trial)perhaps should be the cost of holding sensitive governmentpositions.&quot;   Another alternative, Mr. Walsh said, is &quot;forcing greaterflexibility on the (intelligence) agencies in dealing withdocuments.&quot; Mr. Walsh has criticized the Bush administrationfor being overly zealous in protecting documents deemedsecret by the Central Intelligence Agency. He was forced todrop conspiracy and fraud charges against Mr. Poindexter andother defendants because of the government's concern aboutdisclosing secret documents.   The independent counsel said he will submit a report toCongress on this and other matters at the conclusion of theIran-Contra investigation. Meanwhile, Mr. Walsh reiteratedthat he may bring additional indictments later this year.   He is expected to recommend that Mr. Poindexter besentenced to prison for coordinating the cover-up of theIran-Contra affair. The other convicted defendants have notreceived prison terms.   Mr. Poindexter was convicted on five felony counts,including making false statements and obstructingcongressional inquiries.   ---   AIDS TEST MANUFACTURER drops lawsuit against government.   University Hospital Laboratories Corp., manufacturer of acontroversial home kit that tests for infection of the AIDSvirus, settled its suit in federal court against the Healthand Human Services Department and the Food and DrugAdministration.   Under the terms of the settlement, the FDA must decidewithin 120 days whether to approve the company's kit. Thecompany's chairman, Elliot Millenson, a vocal critic of theFDA approval process, said the settlement was tantamount toapproval. &quot;The public health benefits are so compelling thatthere's little doubt that the product would be rejected,&quot; hesaid. The product would allow consumers to perform bloodtests on themselves and mail them anonymously to the company.Results would be retrieved by calling a toll-free phonenumber and giving an identification number.   But FDA spokesman Brad Stone described the outcome as moreuncertain. &quot;It's not a guarantee that we're going to approvethe product,&quot; he said. &quot;What it does say is that we willreview it.&quot;   Mr. Millenson first sought FDA approval in 1987 afterclinical trials. But the FDA withheld the application on theground that tests for acquired immune deficiency syndromeshould be marketed only for use in a hospital or clinic.   Under the terms of the settlement, FDA will reconsiderthat decision.   ---   CO-OP AND CONDO DIRECTORS have broad authority to makebuilding policy, New York's highest court rules.   The state's Court of Appeals ruled that cooperative andcondominium boards are shielded from judicial scrutiny by astandard similar to the business judgment rule. The ruleprohibits judges from second-guessing actions taken bycorporate directors no matter what the result, as long astheir decisions were reasonable, legal and made in goodfaith.   &quot;Application of a similar doctrine is appropriate becausea cooperative corporation is -- in fact and function -- acorporation, acting through the management of its board ofdirectors, and subject to the Business Corporation Law,&quot; thecourt wrote in a unanimous opinion. The court noted that NewJersey, Washington and Colorado have adopted the samestandard.   The case involved an action brought by tenant-shareholderRonald Levandusky challenging the board of One Fifth AvenueApartment Corp. in New York. At the board's request, a courtordered Mr. Levandusky not to relocate a steam pipe in hisapartment. His attorney, Irwin Brownstein, said he had notread the opinion and had no comment.   One Fifth Avenue's attorney, Arthur Abelman, predicts thatthe decision should diminish the amount of litigation broughtby tenant-shareholders challenging board decisions.   ---   COMPROMISE IS REACHED on SEC's efforts to join Drexelcreditors' committee.   Attorneys for the Securities and Exchange Commission andthe Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. creditors' committeetold U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Howard Buschman that they haveagreed to resolve the matter on an interim basis. The interimagreement will at least postpone a court fight over the SEC'sefforts to join the committee.   Drexel filed under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Codein February, and the SEC maintains it is the firm's largestcreditor because Drexel owes it $150 million as part of asettlement last year of civil charges. The creditors'committee and the U.S. Trustee's Office, a Justice Departmentbranch that administers bankruptcy proceedings, have opposedthe SEC's unprecedented request to be made a member of thecommittee.   Under the interim agreement, the SEC will be able toconsult with the committee's attorneys and with thecommittee's chairman &quot;to share information and ideasregarding the conduct of the Chapter 11 case.&quot; The SEC willalso be notified of matters on which the committee plans tomake a formal decision -- except for issues involving theinternal functioning of the committee and anything relatingto actions that the committee may take against the SEC.   In the event the agreement doesn't work out, a hearing onthe SEC's original motion is set for June 12.   ---   TWO BUSINESSMEN and their Connecticut companies pleadguilty to federal tax charges.   Peter M. Brant, 43, of Greenwich, Conn. and Joseph Allen,48, of Manhattan, and their companies, the Bato Co. andRiviere Du Loup Newsprint Ltd., entered the pleas in federalcourt in Bridgeport, Conn., and agreed to pay $2.4 million infines.   U.S. Attorney Stanley A. Twardy Jr. said Messrs. Brant andAllen pleaded guilty to willful failure to maintain recordsfrom which their taxable income and tax could be determined.Bato and Riviere Du Loup pleaded guilty to two counts each ofmaking and subscribing false tax returns for two years. Thetwo men were accused of charging substantial personalexpenses to their companies, which then reported the expensesas business deductions.   Bato and Riviere agreed to pay maximum fines of $1 millioneach and Messrs. Brant and Allen agreed to pay maximum finesof $200,000 each. Mr. Brant will also pay $250,000 in taxesdue and a civil fraud penalty of $125,000.   Neither Mr. Brant nor his attorney were available forcomment. Mr. Allen's attorney did not return phone calls.</TEXT></DOC>