<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920108-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>920108-0122.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Cambodia, Hit by Poverty and Violence,   Is a Nation Almost Literally Up for Sale   ----   By Nayan Chanda   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/08/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><RE>KAMPUCHEA (CB)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   President Bush's announcement last week that the U.S.would lift its trade embargo on Cambodia comes at a time whenPhnom Penh is short of good news.   Growing unemployment, rising inflation and thegovernment's inability to pay its employees have triggeredconcern about the durability of the Cambodian peace accord.Against that backdrop, the nation's bankrupt regime isholding a fire sale of nearly everything it owns, includinggovernment ministerial buildings.</LP><TEXT>   Anger at Phnom Penh officials recently prompted the firstanti-government demonstrations in Cambodia in more than 15years, and caused several deaths and injuries. In addition toviolent demonstrations in the capital against politicalcorruption, protests have erupted in the provinces. Civilservants and policemen in several provincial towns, whohaven't been paid for months, have taken to the streets.Demobilized or unpaid soldiers have started to collecthighway &quot;tolls&quot; at gunpoint.   Diplomats and analysts say the demonstrations andlawlessness may be warning signs of a severe economic andgovernmental crisis facing Cambodia. Not only is the UnitedNations-brokered peace plan in jeopardy, the country could beplunged back into chaos and anarchy that would open the doorto a new era of control by the Khmer Rouge, who are accusedof genocide against their own people during their brief rule.The Khmer Rouge were ousted by Vietnamese forces in late1978, setting off the civil war that the current peace accordis attempting to settle.   A senior U.N. official says a &quot;collapse of the civiladministration in Cambodia would make the task ofimplementing the peace plan impossible.&quot; This prospect hascreated an uncomfortable situation for the Westerngovernments that have long sought to remove a Phnom Penhregime they condemn as illegitimate, because it was installedby the invading Vietnamese, and that they pressured to accepta deal with the resistance factions, including the KhmerRouge. These governments now face the prospect of eitherhelping the regime stay in place until elections are held, orseeing the Khmer Rouge benefit from Cambodia's collapse.   Cambodia's economic woes, rooted in the disappearance ofaid from the Soviet bloc, have been compounded by politicaluncertainty spawned by the drawn-out peace process, and bythe chaotic emergence of a free-market economy.   The peace process ran into trouble early. Hardly had thecelebration for Prince Norodom Sihanouk's homecoming dieddown when a mob tried to lynch a Khmer Rouge leader. Afterthat first display of anger, the demonstrators have turnedagainst the Phnom Penh regime.   A crowd of people who have been directly affected by salesof state property, along with students and demobilizedsoldiers protesting corruption, recently attacked anofficial's house in Phnom Penh and burned his furniture.Several days of violence and demonstrations left half a dozenkilled and scores wounded.   The demonstrations were prompted by a surge of open graftand the reported sale of land, buildings and enterprisesbelonging to the state. According to Cambodian sources andforeign residents and diplomats, everything in Cambodia isfor sale, from a government hospital to the DefenseMinistry's printing press.   But the country's economic ills really stem from theunique problems associated with reviving private property anda market economy after the Khmer Rouge leveled the country.When the Vietnamese-installed Hung Sen government tookcontrol in 1979, there was no private property. Everythingbelonged to the state, and government ministers effectivelywere the landlords. Poor government salaries were oftenaugmented by title to a house. The rest of the population,living in once-abandoned buildings, were squatters.   Private property was reintroduced in 1989, when thegovernment granted squatters and farmers ownership rights.Shortly before last October's signing of the Paris Accord onCambodia, which opened the door for the country's politicalexiles to return, the government reaffirmed that currentoccupants' rights couldn't be challenged by former owners.   While that move was popular, the prospect of politicalchallengers arriving in the capital made officials eager toearn a fast buck while they still had authority. Suchofficials feared that once the Supreme National Council,headed by Prince Sihanouk, and U.N. supervisors startedmonitoring the administration, milking the state would bemore difficult. In addition, a sharp rise in demand forhousing in Phnom Penh from hundreds of foreign-aid workers,diplomats and businessmen helped double real-estate prices.   Besides outright greed, the selling frenzy has been fueledby the government's fiscal woes. The government's need forfunds grew substantially in 1991 as the principal financialbacker of the regime, the Soviet Union, crumbled. Even withSoviet-bloc assistance, the government in 1989 ran a severebudget deficit; the shortfall was met by printing money.   By the end of 1991, with all foreign aid gone, Cambodiawas reduced almost to bankruptcy. Officials in the provincesand many of the army units haven't been paid for three orfour months.   In a speech delivered after the demonstrations in PhnomPenh, Prime Minister Hun Sen defended the selling of stateproperty. Money received by selling or leasing buildings andfactories has enabled the government to meet its urgentneeds, he said, adding that more than $100 million of annualfunding previously received from the Soviet Union and EasternEurope had &quot;completely dried up.&quot;   And he said the sale or leasing of factories was the onlyway to get foreign investors to take over Cambodia's oldindustrial enterprises, produce goods, provide employment andgenerate tax revenue. But while Mr. Sen's explanation forprivatization of state-owned enterprises is rational, thelack of public bidding and announcements of sales has led towild rumors and created the impression of massive theft ofpublic property for private gain.</TEXT></DOC>