<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920129-0191</DOCNO><DOCID>920129-0191.</DOCID><HL>   The Pioneers:   A Small Joint Venture   Is Leading the Way   In Getting Russian Oil   ---   Texans and Siberians Battle   Cold, Inflation and Politics   While Bigger Firms Wait   ---   Sharing CIA, KGB Secrets   ----   By Robert Johnson and Allanna Sullivan   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/29/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CHV MDR MITSY MOB MRO SB TX XON</CO><MS>ENERGY (ENE)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>OIL-DRILLING AND EXPLORATION (DRL)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)OIL-EQUIPMENT, SERVICES, PLATFORM SUPPLIERS (EQS)OIL-EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES (OIE)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)OIL-SECONDARY (OIS)PETROLEUM (PET)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>JOINT VENTURES (JVN)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)LOUISIANA (LA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)RUSSIA (RS)TEXAS (TX)COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (UR)UNITED STATES (US)VIRGINIA (VA)</RE><LP>   HOUSTON -- Gil Labbe, a florid oil man toting a scotch andwater, herds three pale Russian engineers into his restored1962 Chevrolet Impala muscle car. &quot;This has the big enginethe Beach Boys sang about, remember? `She's real fine, myfour-oh-nine,'&quot; he sings hoarsely.   The Russians stare blankly at Mr. Labbe -- but he'sclearly singing their song. &quot;Big engine, good. Varooom --uses much gas,&quot; says Michael Tajrinsk, a drilling specialist.He hadn't seen the good life that oil affords capitalistsuntil visiting Mr. Labbe's sprawling home and pool on threeacres with an air-conditioned garage pampering 15 speedstersfrom Detroit's heyday.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Labbe's garage is fancier than most of the homes inthe Siberian town of Raduzhny, where Mr. Tajrinsk and 1,000countrymen are on the payroll of a new Russian-American jointventure to find and export oil. Mr. Labbe's little company,Anglo-Suisse L.P., and Salomon Inc.'s Phibro Energy unit aregambling $100 million on a partnership with the Russians.   While oil giants from Amoco Corp. to Societe Elf Aquitaineof France cautiously wait to see who's really in charge ofthe former Soviet Union, the upstarts at Anglo-Suisse andPhibro are charging ahead: getting the permit signatures of52 officials from Siberia to Moscow, erecting $45 millionworth of new rigs amid rusting Soviet equipment and importing60 &quot;roughneck&quot; oil workers from Texas. They began drillingand exporting oil on Aug. 19-one day before the doomed coupattempt by Communist hard-liners.   Although many larger oil companies are busily chasingagreements in the new commonwealth, the Anglo-Suisse ventureis six months ahead of them and its experience is a test casethat seems to be on track so far. Among the oil companiesplanning eventual production out of Siberia are U.S. industryheavyweights Chevron Corp., Texaco Inc. and Exxon Corp.   &quot;The big oil companies are looking at this as a bellwetherfor the potential of Russian oil,&quot; says Daniel Yergin, an oilindustry consultant and author of &quot;The Prize,&quot; a history ofglobal petroleum development. Russia's proven reserves areestimated at 60 billion barrels, though some Western analystssay there could be closer to 250 billion barrels, approachingSaudi Arabia's total. The lack of money and modern equipmenthas limited both exploration and production. &quot;It may be thelast great oil frontier,&quot; says Mr. Yergin.   Just yesterday, a Japanese-U.S. consortium consisting ofMitsui andamp; Co., McDermott International Inc. and Marathon OilCo. won a contract to study the feasibility of developinghuge oil reserves located off Sakhalin Island, near the eastcoast of Siberia. The consortium beat out six other groups ofbidders, which included such big-name oil companies as Exxonand Mobil Corp. At best, the first oil will flow in three orfour years -- and even then, there's no guarantee that thecompanies doing the feasibility study will get the contractsto develop the fields.   There is at least one other upstart pumping oil inSiberia, a joint venture put together by Canadian FracmasterLtd. of Calgary. It has been operating for about two yearsand is exporting about 20,000 barrels a day.   Small independent operators have trailblazed for the last100 years in the oil patch from Beaumont, Texas, to thebottom of the Gulf of Mexico. Traditionally, they open newfields with a few wells, poorly capitalized, and watch BigOil surround them. Yet more than 5,000 independents stillexist in the U.S., and Anglo-Suisse says there's plenty ofroom for the Amocos and Chevrons to co-exist with them inRussia. &quot;Let them come in with the big money that will buildthe roads, more pipelines and stores out here,&quot; says Mr.Labbe.   White Nights, as his Russian-American venture is known,had flown its own flag: a white chess knight and a redhammer-and-sickle on a blue background. Now that Russia is anindependent republic in a new commonwealth, the Communistemblem is gone and the flag is being redesigned with Russia'shistoric red and white stripes.   &quot;We need a symbol, you say -- a logo -- we can put somedayon our service stations in America. Why not a White Nights onthe corner across from Texaco?&quot; dreams Alexander Ignatiev, avice president in the joint venture. He's the former deputychief engineer of the former Soviet Union's VaryeganProduction Association, one of 22 regional productionconcerns that operated with varying degrees of autonomy underthe Kremlin. Now, each is largely on its own unless officialsof the newly emerging republics say otherwise.   &quot;The new governments will leave us alone as long as we paytaxes in U.S. dollars. They can't afford to meddle with anyeconomic venture that's going well,&quot; says Mr. Ignatiev,tapping a Marlboro on his gold cigarette lighter.   His confidence is enhanced by White Nights seismic studiesprojecting production by the company of more than 200,000barrels a day by 1995, equaling the entire output of Ecuador,a member of the Organization of Petroleum ExportingCountries. Further, Anglo-Suisse and Phibro say they'renearing agreement with the Russians on an even larger jointSiberian venture in a separate oil field.   Such cooperation blazes a new trail in Russian-Americanrelations. The Anglo-Suisse engineers share declassifiedreports on Siberian resources by the Central IntelligenceAgency, and the Russians reveal the locations of pipelines tothe Black Sea that were KGB secrets until recently.   Mr. Labbe is a 45-year-old former Texaco Inc. engineerturned promoter. He has hammered out contracts to squeeze oilfrom worked-over fields in Morocco, Pakistan and Indonesiasince 1984. The privately held company had about $10 millionin revenue last year and has operated in the black for all ofits seven years, Mr. Labbe says.   He created the name Anglo-Suisse to disguise the company'sAmerican origin when operating in potentially unfriendlyforeign locations. &quot;It sounds Swiss. Almost nobody hates theSwiss,&quot; reasons Charles Brunet, a vice president.   Mr. Labbe hit on the Siberian idea at 6 a.m. one Februaryday in 1990 when he met some Russian Embassy officialslooking for a tennis game on a court in Rangoon, Burma. Theyinvited him to Moscow and later to Siberia, where he flew inby helicopter. &quot;Coming in low, you can see oil rig after rigfor hundreds of miles. There's nothing like it anywhere inthe world,&quot; he says. But much of the drilling equipment is inneed of repair or replacement, and Mr. Labbe saw opportunityin that.   By June 1990, Anglo-Suisse had its joint-venture agreementsigned with the Siberians. Obtaining the 52 required permitstook another six months. By the spring of 1991, the companybrought in the first of its current five new oil rigs byfreighters leaving the Houston docks. A half-dozen more arescheduled for delivery this year. Anglo-Suisse says itsSiberian capital-spending budget, thanks largely to itsSalomon backing, is $70 million this year.   Mr. Ignatiev's profit guess for White Nights: nearly $1.9billion over the next 25 years, divided evenly by theRussians and the Americans.   But their plans face plenty of potential pitfalls. Forexample, inflation in the new Russian republic has alreadymore than tripled prices on everything from fuel for thecompany's chartered supply planes from Moscow to thedomestically made, Jeep-style Vaz vehicles needed to crossSiberia's tundra. Local vendors routinely urge White Nightsofficials to trade in black-market products to get betterdeals. &quot;They want dollars, but it isn't legal to pay that way-- yet,&quot; says Jerry Walston, the joint venture's director inRaduzhny.   Then there's the political uncertainty. White Nightsofficials worry they haven't even met the new Russianpresident, Boris Yeltsin. And the Americans can't helprecalling that British oil engineers in Russian fields werejailed and roughly deported by Bolsheviks who nationalizedoil fields in 1920.   Siberia's weather obviously doesn't help. Located just 250miles south of the Arctic Circle, the White Nights operationhas a policy that workers can stay home when the temperaturefalls to 36 degrees below zero; it has happened five timesthis winter. (Why 36 below? No specific reason. &quot;You have toset the number at something. You can't just say go home whenit gets real cold -- not in Siberia,&quot; says one Anglo-Suisseofficial.)   Actually, the temperature has hit 60 below once alreadythis winter. That's one reason other companies are skepticalabout the risks and rewards of getting oil from Siberia. &quot;Iknow for a fact it's too cold out there to even do seismicsurveys right now,&quot; says a skeptical Elf Aquitaine spokesman,Tom Saunders, adding that he doubts drilling can continueunabated in the cold.   Mr. Ignatiev, a beefy 36-year-old, scoffs at suchcriticism. &quot;The French are accustomed to warm climates, likethe Riviera. Let them work in the Sahara. After the Americanstake a chance on us and it pays off, we'll need new roadsinto Siberia for all the Westerners who'll want to follow,&quot;he says.   Maybe, but so far there isn't any payoff, White Nightsofficials concede. The Russian-American agreement calls for a50-50 split of profits, when there are some. And the first20,000 barrels a day must be for internal Russian use, forwhich Anglo-Suisse gets nothing. So far, production hasreached only a modest 25,000 barrels a day, too little to payfor operating costs.   &quot;Look, there are billions of barrels out here and theRussian partners know where it is. They just need ourtechnology and our money to get it out,&quot; says White Nights'Mr. Walston. &quot;The risks are mainly political,&quot; he says. ButMr. Ignatiev thinks the worst of those are over. &quot;Look, theAmericans here already survived the coup. We saw only onetank out here and it just passed by. Now they're survivingthe commonwealth,&quot; he says.   Indeed, in Raduzhny, a town of 50,000, so primitive thatmany residents live in abandoned oil tanks and much of thetown is without hot water, the Americans are popular. WhiteNights has spent more than $2 million to fly in aprefabricated recreation center as a gift to the town, and tobuy clothes and snowmobiles for some residents. Some of theWestern meat, bread and butter flown in on White Nightscharters is distributed to the company's Russian workers.Anatoly Loshakov, mayor of nearby Sorgut, welcomes the sharedlargess. &quot;We need food,&quot; he says simply.   Mr. Loshakov says White Nights generosity is building astrong base of political support that will help ward offpolitical interference from Moscow. Russian engineersreturning from consulting trips to Anglo-Suisse headquartersin Houston spread stories of the relative wealth of consumersin that energy center. One Russian says he wept after touringthe pet aisle of a Fiesta supermarket and counting 20 brandsof dog food. &quot;So much, so much,&quot; he exclaims.   The Americans offer their Siberian counterparts a glimpseof how oil exports can improve the quality of life. Until thejoint venture -- and the loosening of bureaucraticrestrictions from Moscow -- Soviet oil was just anothersagging socialist bureaucracy. Workers were being laid offand wells were often closed after being emptied of only 30%of their contents because of aging equipment. Overallproduction has slipped to 10 million barrels a day from 12million in 1989. Exports have plunged by about a third.   Thus, enthusiasm for Western expertise is building.Western wages are welcome, too. White Nights' Russian rigworkers are paid the rubles equivalent of $120 a year, littleby American standards but twice the typical per capita incomein Siberia.   All of which keeps morale high both in Siberia and here atAnglo-Suisse's Houston offices, where Russian and Americanengineers wear golf shirts adorned with White Nights chesspawns while planning future wells. Humor abounds. Mr. Labbepoints to Mr. Ignatiev and says dryly, &quot;He was nothing&quot;before teaming with the Americans.   Retorts Mr. Ignatiev playfully: &quot;Without our oil, you'renothing.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>