<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911115-0196</DOCNO><DOCID>911115-0196.</DOCID><HL>   Battle Without End:   Jack Kent Frustrates   Environmentalists,   And Loves Doing It   ---   He Turn Hazardous Waste   Into Money, VIP Contacts   And a Debate Over Safety   ---   Kissing a Mule at High Noon   ----   By Robert Tomsho   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LDM.B LDWA LDWB</CO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)INDUSTRIAL andamp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CANADA (CN)LOUISIANA (LA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MORGAN CITY, La. -- Down here on the bayou, few people aretougher to deal with than Jack Kent.   Consider, for example, recent negotiations between Mr.Kent's Marine Shale Processors Inc. and a unit of LaidlawInc., the big Canadian waste-disposal company. Mr. Kentagreed to sell Marine Shale's patented technology fortreating hazardous waste, along with an option on its planthere, for up to $320 million over the next decade. How muchof that potential jackpot he gets, however, depends on theplant's annual revenue.</LP><TEXT>   So Mr. Kent demanded, and got, an unusual clause in thesales contract. In any year that the plant generates lessthan $80 million in revenue, William E. Stilwell Jr.,president of Laidlaw Environmental Services Inc., will berequired, on two weeks' notice, to &quot;kiss the {rear end} of aMissouri mule at high noon on the steps of the LouisianaState Capitol.&quot;   &quot;He already gave me a picture of the mule,&quot; says Mr.Stilwell.   That's vintage Jack Kent, as environmental regulators knowonly too well. For six years, the Louisiana Department ofEnvironmental Quality, the federal Environmental ProtectionAgency and the Justice Department have all butted heads withMr. Kent, whose company collects hazardous waste from anelite client roster and converts it into an aggregate thathas been spread as fill beneath Louisiana roads, homes andbusinesses. They contend he is using a legal loophole toproduce a potentially hazardous product.   But despite two congressional subcommittee hearings, acontinuing federal investigation and $6.5 million in federaland state fines, the feisty 51-year-old entrepreneur hasfended off regulators' heaviest broadsides. &quot;It's kind oflike Mike Tyson fighting Gerry Cooney,&quot; Mr. Kent toldreporters outside a federal courthouse in Lafayette, La., inAugust, after staving off a Justice Department effort to haltall shipments of his aggregate. &quot;They fighting the champ whenthey come up against us.&quot;   In the war over the environment, Jack Kent's rollickingsaga demonstrates how difficult it is to enforceenvironmental laws amid political pressure, bureaucraticbumbling, regulators' budgetary woes, uncertain science andloose legal interpretations. &quot;We've done a tremendous amountof work on getting decent environmental laws passed,&quot; saysErik Olson, senior attorney for the Natural Resources DefenseCouncil, &quot;but there hasn't been a whole lot of work done onhow they are enforced.&quot;   Mr. Kent, who estimates he has spent more than $20 millionin legal fees, blames his problems on inept bureaucrats. &quot;Infive years, if they haven't been able to determine whetherthat material is hurting you or not, they ought to throw themall out and get another batch of people,&quot; he says. &quot;Thereain't but one reason that we ain't shut down and that'sbecause we right.&quot;   A high-school dropout and the son of a restaurateur, thewiry, ruddy-faced Mr. Kent built a small Louisiana businessempire in the 1970s out of holdings in farming, constructionsupplies and oil-field services. Among his holdings then wasa sand-and-gravel business, which led him to purchase anabandoned lime kiln beside the Bayou Boeuf in late 1984. Heexpected the Louisiana Legislature to pass a law requiringthe incineration of nonhazardous oil-drilling wastes, and heplanned to use the kiln to process the wastes into aggregate.But after the Legislature rejected the law, his attorneysspotted a loophole already being used by some othercompanies.   Because of costly regulatory requirements, commercialincinerators were then charging up to $800 a barrel to burnhazardous wastes. But, as interpreted by the EPA, theResource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), the nation'sprimary law regulating hazardous waste, exempted &quot;recyclers&quot;of hazardous waste from many of those stiff reporting,discharge and disposal rules. In other words, someone whoincinerated and disposed of the waste was subject to therules; but anyone who used the waste as a fuel or to make aproduct was not subject to them.   The exemption was designed to encourage manufacturers toreuse landfill-bound hazardous wastes. In 1985, Mr. Kent saidhe had invented a revolutionary process for recyclinghazardous waste into harmless black gravel. Although manycompanies extract usable chemicals from hazardous waste, Mr.Kent remains one of the few entrepreneurs to claim that hecan totally transform such dangerous substances into a safeproduct.   Mr. Kent says he &quot;didn't know anything&quot; about hazardousheavy metals when he launched Marine Shale. Moreover, insteadof hiring scientists and engineers to tinker with his275-foot kiln, he personally chalked out modifications on thehood of a truck. &quot;We'd just commence to changing it,&quot; recallsMr. Kent, who says it was &quot;absolutely a trial-and-errorsituation.&quot;   That became clear to Sally Herman when acrid smoke fromMarine Shale began billowing into her family's diving-supplyshop across the street, forcing them to send nauseousemployees home and eventually move the business. &quot;It happenedquite regularly, because they didn't know what they weredoing,&quot; says Bob McHugh, a parish councilman.   By late 1985, complaints about Marine Shale were floodinginto the beleaguered state Department of EnvironmentalQuality (DEQ), whose budget was then so paltry that, in astate teeming with chemical plants and refineries, itcouldn't afford to collect air pollution data on weekends.   After discovering uncovered mounds of contaminated soiland half-sunken storage barges in the bayou, one DEQinspector wrote that he found a &quot;remarkable degree ofcarelessness&quot; at Marine Shale. Still, top DEQ people modifiedthe company's permits to allow the storage and burning ofhazardous waste. Patricia Norton, then the DEQ secretary,later told reporters that she felt pressured by then-Gov.Edwin Edwards to modify the permits for Mr. Kent, who gave$75,000 to the 1983 Edwards campaign. Mr. Edwards, now tryingto regain the governorship, declined to be interviewed, buthas previously denied doing anything to favor the company.   DEQ administrators later told Congress that at a 1986meeting attended by Marine Shale executives, the governortold Ms. Norton to settle the DEQ's disputes with thecompany. Instead, Ms. Norton, who couldn't be reached forcomment, asked the EPA's regional office in Dallas toregulate Marine Shale.   In November 1986, FBI and EPA investigators confiscatedMarine Shale business records and collected aggregate samplesfor a federal grand jury probe of possible violations of theResource Conservation and Recovery Act. Five months later,the EPA ordered the company to halt unpermitted dischargesinto the Bayou Boeuf. But the EPA -- following a policy thatcivil actions should defer to criminal actions -- neverfollowed up to see whether Marine Shale had complied.   Meanwhile, Mr. Kent marshaled a powerful counterattack,hiring a crack legal team that included George Eldredge, theDEQ's former general counsel; Fred Thompson, House minoritycounsel during the Watergate investigation; and Robert C.Odle Jr., administrative director of Richard Nixon's 1972re-election campaign. He also recruited former EPA executivesto refine the plant's procedures and retainedpublic-relations experts to spruce up the company's image.   The latter wasn't an easy task, especially with MarineShale workers armed with ax handles confronting environmentalprotesters, as they did in November 1988. Last December, aGreenpeace activist trying to plug one of the plant's bayoudischarge pipes was hospitalized after allegedly being beatenby Marine Shale employees wielding steel rods. A plant workerwas subsequently charged with aggravated assault. Trial ispending; the worker hasn't yet entered a plea. &quot;If they comeback, the same thing is going to happen to them, but I hopeit's worse,&quot; Mr. Kent says.   Mr. Kent also hired respected outside engineers to monitorplant operations and test the aggregate for safety. Theirsampling indicated that the amount of dangerous chemicals andheavy metals that could leach from the aggregate was wellbelow federal limits, although the EPA argued that the testsweren't stringent enough.   Although Marine Shale said it wasn't subject toregulations because it was recycling hazardous waste into ausable material, company executives acknowledge that theaggregate was actually being sold for as little as $1 a tonand sometimes given away. &quot;People are scared to buy it, it'sbeen so tainted by the government,&quot; says Mr. Eldredge, MarineShale's general counsel. Federal investigators contend that,because the bulk of Marine Shale's revenues come fromwaste-handling fees, the company should be considered anincinerator and not a recycler. But Mr. Eldredge says, &quot;We'vetaken something with a negative value and turned it intosomething with a positive value.&quot;   Indeed, business boomed at Marine Shale. Mr. Kent'sexemption from landfill and permitting costs enabled him toundercut regulated incinerators' fees by as much as 75%. By1988, Marine Shale was handling hazardous waste shipped infrom 48 states and Puerto Rico. Its 2,000-customer rosterincluded several Fortune 500 companies, the EnergyDepartment, the State Department, the Central IntelligenceAgency and even some of the EPA's own private contractors.   The privately held company processed 130,000 tons of wasteand generated revenue of $46 million in 1990, up from $1.7million in 1985. Stung by Marine Shale's growth, theHazardous Waste Treatment Council, the lobbying arm of theregulated incinerators, has issued reams of critical pressreleases, funded Morgan City opposition groups and lobbiedmembers of Congress intensely. Once, the council warned U.S.senators to dispose of a Marine Shale gift-letter-openerscontaining nuggets of its aggregate-because they mightcontain hazardous material.   Complaining that he was the victim of a conspiracy by hiscompetitors, Mr. Kent used political and business contacts toobtain the help of influential Mississippi politician TrentLott, then U.S. House minority whip and now a U.S. senator.According to records from two internal EPA investigationsinto the agency's handling of the case, in 1986 Mr. Lott'sstaff helped the company obtain legal help from a Washingtonattorney who was a close friend of the EPA's enforcementchief.   In 1987, according to the records, Mr. Lott's staffcomplained to EPA officials that the agency was &quot;out to get&quot;Marine Shale and asked White House officials to investigate aregional EPA administrator married to an executive for acompany that Marine Shale claimed was a direct competitor. Aspokesman for Mr. Lott says the senator looked into the caseat the request of a Mississippi constituent who did businesswith Marine Shale but hasn't had any involvement in thematter since 1988. The spokesman didn't return subsequentcalls requesting further comment.   Marine Shale employees told the FBI, meantime, that thecompany often hired a tugboat to run up and down the bayou todisperse spills and bottom deposits and, at night, frequentlyincreased its burning and bypassed its primary air emissionfilters. The investigation culminated in a 1989 settlement inwhich Marine Shale agreed to pay a $1 million fine and pleadguilty to one felony violation of the RCRA statute and twomisdemeanor violations of federal waterways and refusedisposal laws.   Mr. Kent then turned his guns on the state DEQ, which hadbegun hitting Marine Shale with new fines following theinauguration of reformist Gov. Buddy Roemer in March 1988. Asfast as the DEQ took action, Marine Shale lawyers appealed,in some instances to the state supreme court. Such appealshave kept the DEQ from collecting any of the $5.5 million inpenalties it has tried to impose.   Mr. Kent kept the pressure on in other ways. To supportits conspiracy charge, Marine Shale sought to depose rivalexecutives and members of Louisiana's congressionaldelegation in appealing some DEQ enforcement actions.Meanwhile, Mr. Kent backed a successful effort to lobby theLegislature to cut the DEQ's budget. Mr. Kent also bought$508,000 of advertising to oppose Gov. Roemer's re-electionbid, which failed Oct. 19.   In 1989, the DEQ began trying to negotiate a settlementwith the company, which agreed not to transport its aggregateoff the plant site during the discussions. But amid thosetalks, the EPA issued stricter guidelines for hazardous wasterecyclers and, in June 1990, the Justice Department filed acivil suit in federal court in Lafayette, seeking up to $50million in fines from Marine Shale for allegedly pollutingthe Bayou Boeuf and illegally storing, treating and disposingof hazardous waste.   Despite Marine Shale's agreement with the DEQ, trucksloaded with aggregate began rumbling through the Morgan Cityplant's gates last March and dumping their loads on a plot ofland across a nearby highway. &quot;I am going to sell it,&quot; Mr.Kent said then. &quot;And if a little boy comes by here and wantsa pail of it, I'm going to sell it to him.&quot;   The Justice Department sought a court order barringshipments of the aggregate. But during hearings before U.S.Judge Richard Haik in Lafayette in August, governmentwitnesses weren't very convincing. One EPA scientistacknowledged that, while past tests on the aggregate detectedpotentially dangerous lead levels, the material moved acrossthe Morgan City highway didn't exceed federal limits.   Judge Haik barred the company from shipping or selling itsaggregate, pending resolution of the civil case, butpermitted the company to continue moving it to the siteacross the highway, where it plans to build an industrialpark.   The decision kept Marine Shale's kiln burning, ended itsmounting storage problems and sent sales executives scurryingto courthouse pay phones to call customers in need of itsservices. These days, Mr. Kent says business has never beenbetter. Profits could soar even further if Laidlaw carriesout its plans to market Marine Shale's technologyinternationally.   After extensive testing, says Laidlaw Environmental's Mr.Stilwell, his company is satisfied that Marine Shale'saggregate is a viable, non-hazardous product. And Laidlawisn't put off by Marine Shale's long-running regulatorybattles. &quot;This is a business of litigation,&quot; he says. &quot;If youlook at us or any of our competitors, we all have hassles.&quot;   Laidlaw would like to help negotiate a settlement betweenthe government and Mr. Kent. &quot;Maybe now his tenacity isworking against him a little bit,&quot; Mr. Stilwell says. &quot;Youdon't get anywhere by beating up the government.&quot;   But Mr. Kent isn't letting up. Marine Shale hascountersued the federal government in the civil case, whichis scheduled for trial before Judge Haik next March. Thecompany argues that if it has operated outside the law, theEPA is to blame because it didn't quickly contest thegranting of the company's state permits nor stop federalagencies from doing business with the company. And becausethe plant has processed hazardous waste for so many federalagencies, Marine Shale argues, federal taxpayers should pay aportion of any penalties.   &quot;I have never let nobody run over me and I don't neverintend to,&quot; Mr. Kent declares. &quot;It wouldn't make me nodifference if it was the National Guard. I'm going to battletheir {expletive}, and they can count on that.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>