<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900626-0048</DOCNO><DOCID>900626-0048.</DOCID><HL>   High Court Says Minors Can Be Required   To Tell a Parent Before Getting Abortion   ----   By David Shribman and Stephen Wermiel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court ruled that states canrequire most minors to notify at least one parent beforeobtaining an abortion.   Two court decisions, hailed by abortion opponents, willstoke abortion controversies in this fall's elections andcould prompt state legislative actions next year to restrictthe right to abortion for minors. The decisions also permit ahalf-dozen states to begin enforcing abortion restrictions onminors that have been blocked by court orders.</LP><TEXT>   By a 5-4 margin, the high court ruled it isunconstitutional for a state to require that a minor notifyboth her parents without exceptions. By a different 5-4margin, the justices said Minnesota had corrected thisconstitutional flaw in its state law by allowing minors toobtain a judge's permission to have an abortion withoutnotifying her parents.   In a separate 6-3 decision, the court upheld an Ohio lawthat requires notification of one parent or a courtprocedure. The court procedure requires a minor to specifywhether she is seeking a judge's approval because shebelieves she is mature enough to make her own decisions orbecause notifying a parent wouldn't be in her best interest.The court stopped short of deciding whether such a bypass isnecessary when states impose a one-parent notificationrequirement.   Abortion-rights activists say such parental-involvementlaws are an artifice for curbing abortions rather than a toolfor promoting family discussions. They argue, moreover, thatforcing some young people to consult with their parents onsuch a highly emotional subject can cause irreparablepsychological damage in a family or even prompt physicalharm. They also say provisions forcing teens to discuss theissue with a judge are intimidating and discomfitting.   &quot;Minors were today's victims,&quot; says Roger Evans of PlannedParenthood Federation of America.   Abortion opponents said the court ruling would spurlegislative action to curb teen abortions. &quot;Given the greatpublic popularity of laws that give parents some say whentheir young daughters are facing the trauma of a difficultpregnancy, these decisions will encourage state legislatorsto pass additional laws,&quot; said Burke Balch, state legislativedirector of the National Right to Life Committee.   Lawmakers and activists in Idaho and Montana already weremoving to place their state laws in line with the guidelinesestablished by the high court. &quot;We're going to go ahead andmake some adjustments,&quot; said GOP state Sen. Mark Ricks, aleading abortion opponent in Idaho, where a strictanti-abortion law was vetoed last spring by Democratic Gov.Cecil Andrus.   Public support for abortion rights lessens substantiallyin cases involving minors, where voters tend to see the issueas more of a family problem than a question of personalrights and reproductive freedom. Abortion-rights activistshave avoided making minors' rights the centerpiece of theirmovement. Nevertheless, Kate Michelman, executive director ofthe National Abortion Rights Action League, called the twodecisions &quot;alarming.&quot;   Many abortion-rights activists have avoided a hard line onthe question of abortion for minors; NARAL assisted DemocratDouglas Wilder in his successful Virginia gubernatorial racelast year despite his support for parental-involvementprovisions.   &quot;The court is going through the exact same balancing actthat every candidate is going through: They want to be alittle pro-choice and a little pro-life,&quot; said DouglasBailey, a Republican political consultant. &quot;If you're acandidate, the safest position to be in is to be pro-choiceoverall but in favor of some parental notification.&quot;   The court's action permits laws to go into effect in atleast six states where they had been blocked: Georgia,Illinois, Minnesota, Nevada, Nebraska and Ohio. Variations ofsuch laws are already in effect in Arkansas, Utah and WestVirginia.   Parental-involvement provisions are an issue in the Texasgubernatorial race, and controversies are certain to flare inother fall elections, particularly in gubernatorial andsenate races in Iowa. The issue probably will be tested in apublic vote in Oregon.   The Alan Guttmacher Institute, which formerly wasaffiliated with Planned Parenthood, estimates that about183,000 abortions are performed annually on minors under 18years of age, roughly 11% of the total performed in the U.S.Studies show that about half of the minors who get abortionsconsult with at least one parent, with three out of four ofthose under the age of 15 discussing the issue with a parent.   &quot;The young women who feel they can talk to their parentsabout this situation will do it, and the young women who feelthey can't often have good reasons not to,&quot; said Ellen Story,associate executive director of the Family Planning Councilof Western Massachusetts. &quot;There are abusive familysituations; there are cases when the pregnancy is caused by afamily member; there are instances when this informationcould lead to serious health and psychological crises in afamily.&quot;   The rulings marked the first time that Justice SandraO'Connor voted to find a state abortion regulationunconstitutional. She joined the 5-4 Minnesota ruling,written by Justice John Stevens, that a requirement fornotifying two parents, without an alternative for a courthearing, is unconstitutional. She also was the deciding voteto uphold the two-parent Minnesota law once the courtprocedure is activated.   In the past, she has acted to stop the court'sconservatives from overruling the right to abortion, whilejoining them to uphold most state restrictions on abortion.But yesterday &quot;was the first time that she has said theconstitutional liberty of a woman includes the right toterminate a pregnancy,&quot; said Harvard Law School Prof.Laurence Tribe. That may limit how far Justice O'Connor iswilling to cut back on the right to abortion.   The decisions showed how divided the court remains overthe issue, taking months to try to reach consensus, yetproducing nine separate opinions in the two cases.   While the justices said a two-parent-notice law must allowfor a court procedure to bypass the parents, they didn'tdecide whether a one-parent-notice law also must allow acourt bypass: They simply upheld Ohio's law, which doesprovide for a court procedure. That open question, in JusticeAnthony Kennedy's majority opinion in the Ohio case, islikely to encourage states to pass one-parent-notice lawswithout provisions for court hearings, according to bothProf. Tribe and James Bopp of the National Right To LifeCommittee.   In the Minnesota case, the justices also voted, 6-3, touphold a requirement that minors wait 48 hours for anabortion after notifying their parents.   In the Minnesota case, Justice Stevens's decision blockingthe absolute two-parent requirement was joined by JusticesO'Connor, William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall and HarryBlackmun. Justice Kennedy, joined by Chief Justice WilliamRehnquist and Justices Byron White and Antonin Scaliadissented, voting to uphold the requirement. Separately,Justice O'Connor joined Justice Kennedy's bloc to uphold thetwo-parent requirement once a court hearing provision isadded. The 48-hour wait was agreed to by six members of thecourt, with Justices Marshall, Brennan and Blackmundissenting.   In the Ohio case, Justices Blackmun, Brennan and Marshalldissented from Justice Kennedy's decision. (Hodgson vs.Minnesota; Ohio vs. Akron Center for Reproductive Health.)</TEXT></DOC>