<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900829-0058</DOCNO><DOCID>900829-0058.</DOCID><HL>   Desert Roughnecks:   In Yemen's Oil Patch,   Hunt Firm Finds It Is   Best to Ignore Politics   ---   The Texas Drillers Overcome   Nation's Support of Iraq   By Sticking to Business   ---   Check All Daggers at the Door   ----   By Geraldine Brooks   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/29/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)OIL, SECONDARY (OIS)</IN><LP>   MARIB, Yemen -- In what the Texans here call the chowhall, workers tuck into barbecued chicken under the broodinggaze of a portrait of Saddam Hussein hung on the wall.   Yemeni employees taped up the huge, tinsel-edged portraitmore than a week ago, causing consternation among theirAmerican colleagues. &quot;A couple of the guys took exception toit,&quot; says Ray Cooke, assistant manager of Hunt ConsolidatedInc.'s oil refinery here. &quot;They wanted to tear it down. Isaid `Nope. You leave it right where it is.'&quot;</LP><TEXT>   The reason: Dallas-based Hunt wants to stay right where itis -- profitably pumping out the oil it discovered in Yemenin 1984. Iraq's invasion of Kuwait has put the Americancompany's oil fields smack in the middle of a political minefield. Yemen's government backs Iraq and decries the presenceof U.S. forces in the region. As American troops beganarriving in neighboring Saudi Arabia, Yemenis begandemonstrating: Hundreds of dagger-wielding protesters hurledstones at the U.S. Embassy in the capital, Sanaa.   Out in remote Marib, at the edge of the vast desert aptlynamed the Empty Quarter, the silvery loops of Hunt's refinerypoke from the sand like half-buried paper clips. The nearestYemeni buildings, almost 22 miles distant, are a cluster ofancient mud-brick towers. Much of the local traffic stilltravels by camelback. At the refinery, Americans in baseballcaps work alongside turbaned Yemenis, some of whom are localtribesmen who check their &quot;jambias&quot; -- nine-inch daggers --and AK-47 assault rifles at the gatehouse on their way towork. It isn't the kind of place where anyone wants to startan argument over politics.   &quot;We all are with Saddam Hussein,&quot; says Mohammed Zain, astorekeeper at the refinery. &quot;We support him against allforeign troops. But the Americans here are our brothers,&quot; headds, and &quot;we don't talk about it with them.&quot;   Richard Davis, general manager of Hunt's Yemen operations,hopes it stays that way. &quot;We are trying to keep a low profileand get on with the job,&quot; he says. That's easier said thandone. Oil accounts for about half of Yemen's revenue, andHunt controls the oil business.   With scores of U.S. and European Hunt employees basedhere, the company is a conspicuous presence in this small,isolated country. Hunt's four-wheel-drive vehicles crisscrossthe desert, its microwave dishes dot the mountain crags, itshelicopters clatter through the skies, and its tall Texas oilmen tower over Yemenis in the towns. Besides running therefinery, Hunt, with Exxon Corp. as a minority partner, isdrilling new wells and pumping crude through a mountainpipeline for export. It is also conducting seismic surveys ina consortium that includes Kuwait's oil company, nowoperating in exile. &quot;They are, in every sense, a cowboyoutfit,&quot; says a British diplomat in Sanaa. &quot;If they pulledout, I don't think any other company would come in.&quot;   Closely held Hunt, whose U.S. interests includewell-servicing, real estate and agribusiness, has a corporatestyle that certainly is idiosyncratic. The boardroompolitesse of its executives often belies a barroom toughnessuseful in Yemen, where even in normal times the businessclimate presents unusual challenges. Parts of Yemen still areunder control of armed tribes whose relationship with thecentral government can be tenuous. Hunt has had vehicles&quot;borrowed&quot; by tribesmen, with the government generally havingto ransom them back by building a schoolhouse or healthclinic.   Tom Meurer, who handles political liaison for the company,remembers the day a Hunt engineer drove past a wavingtribesman. &quot;When the vehicle didn't stop, he laid a roundfrom his Kalashnikov around it,&quot; he says. &quot;All he wanted wasa liter of gas. It was one way to get attention.&quot;   Hunt's origins, in the oil fields of West Texas, help itfit the Yemen milieu. At one point, the company decided topresent a gift to Yemen's president. Recalls Mr. Meurer: &quot;Wewanted to give him something that expressed what Texas wasall about.&quot; They decided on a pistol, holster and 50 roundsof ammunition.   In the nine years since its first explorers went out tofind oil in Yemen, the company has built a network ofrelationships reaching from the humblest Bedouin camel herderright up to the presidential palace. When a tribe near Hunt'srigs needed a water well, Hunt employees found time to sinkit. And when the president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, recently madehis first visit to the White House, Hunt invited him toDallas for some Texas-style hospitality that included a rodeoin Fort Worth.   The company doesn't disclose figures relating to itsoperations, but its venture in Yemen is one of its largestand most profitable, with total investment estimated ataround $1 billion. Robert Weiss, an analyst with Standard andamp;Poor's, says in a report that while the company's domesticoperations are satisfactory, it is the 200,000-barrel-a-dayproduction in Yemen that &quot;raises considerably Hunt's overallbusiness profile&quot; and earns it an A+ credit rating.   News of the Kuwait invasion sent tremors through thecompany. Ray Hunt, its chairman and chief executive officer,was home in Dallas watching TV when the story broke late atnight. &quot;I went, `Oh, nuts,' or probably put it a littlestronger than that,'&quot; says the 47-year-old Mr. Hunt, who ownsthe company along with his mother and three sisters. He is ason of the late Texas wildcatter H.L. Hunt, but his businessinterests are separate from those of his better-knownhalf-brothers, Bunker, Herbert and Lamar. H.L. Huntconcentrated his oil operations in the U.S., but when RayHunt took over the company he took the oil search overseas.   And not just anywhere. A list of countries in which Hunthas interests reads like a State Department travel warning.It just signed an exploration agreement in war-torn Ethiopia.It is searching for oil in Laos, with an explorationconcession that includes part of the Ho Chi Minh trail. Andit is trying to strike up a deal with strife-ridden Burma.   &quot;What we try to do is lean against the wind,&quot; Mr. Huntsays. &quot;If all you do is what everybody else does, then if yousurvive, your success will only be modest.&quot; He likens Hunt'scompetition with the Mobils and Texacos of the world to &quot;aguerrilla force going up against a conventional army.&quot; Huntcan move quickly into areas unappetizing to largebureaucracies -- or skittish shareholders.   But looking for big rewards means managing big risks. Thenight Iraq invaded Kuwait, executives from Dallas to Sanaascrambled to assess the likely impact on the company. Mr.Meurer, the political troubleshooter, got a late-night callfrom the chief financial officer asking for an evaluation tobe presented the next day at a meeting of management.   &quot;I started turning over the `what ifs' and didn't go backto sleep,&quot; Mr. Meurer says. On an early-morning jog, heroughed out scenarios based on Yemen's regional alliances,the impact on Hunt's Kuwaiti exploration partner and thelikely consequences of U.S. intervention.   It was when the Yemen representative on the United NationsSecurity Council declined to vote on a resolution condemningthe invasion that &quot;the scorecards started being kept,&quot; saysMr. Davis in Sanaa. Yemen's delegate said he didn't haveinstructions on how to vote, reflecting the dilemma posed bythe country's alliance with Iraq, but receipt of aid fromKuwait. For Hunt, that stand created confusion. &quot;We didn'thave enough information to know why the vote was cast as itwas,&quot; says Mr. Davis.   When the U.S. military intervened, the mood in Yemenbecame clear. Most of the population swung behind Iraq, andanger at America expressed itself in the streets. Hunt'sprimary concern was the safety of its employees in Yemen, thenumber of which it won't disclose. Good communication helped.Overseas radio bulletins were reporting 10,000 demonstratorstrying to storm the U.S. Embassy. &quot;Fortunately, I was on thephone to corporate headquarters in the States when thatreport came over,&quot; says Mr. Davis, and was able to explainthat the bulletin apparently had been based on exaggeratedaccounts by Iraq's news service. In fact, no more than 500Yemenis were outside the embassy, and Yemen's police werecontaining the protest.   Communication with the government also proved reassuring.A few days into the crisis, the foreign minister called Mr.Davis with a message from the president, saying the eventswouldn't affect Yemen's relationship with Hunt, and anysupport the drillers needed would be forthcoming.   The government also ordered a stop to stone-throwingduring demonstrations. Protestors now are limited to shoutingand waving placards. The president also stressed in atelevision interview that foreigners in Yemen were workingfor the good of the country and didn't have anything to dowith the Western forces massing in Saudi Arabia.   &quot;We want the Americans to get out of there, not out ofhere,&quot; says Abdul Hakim Mohammed, a Yemeni driver for Hunt.   Protecting foreigners who provide useful skills is deeplyembedded in Yemeni custom. For hundreds of years, Jewishsilversmiths in Yemen were considered neutrals in tribalwars. &quot;Protected people providing useful services aren'tsupposed to be cut up into small and bloody pieces,&quot; explainsa Western diplomat.   Nevertheless, the company decided to pull out the familiesof workers. A few days later, the U.S. Embassy made the samedecision for dependents of its staff, sending them home alongwith all Peace Corps volunteers. Then, Hunt sent in Mr.Meurer and two of its top security men to assess thesituation and send a message of reassurance to the staff.   &quot;Everybody isn't staying behind a desk in Dallas,&quot; Mr.Hunt says. &quot;I don't think we could have asked for more interms of a response from the government,&quot; but even so, itpays to be prudent. &quot;Even the U.S. can't guarantee thesecurity of its president 100%.&quot;   Hunt's two security directors, Walt Coughlin and WilberRainey, know a thing or two about that. Both are formerSecret Service agents assigned to the White House during theturbulent Vietnam War era. Arriving in Yemen, they went firstto the Marib refinery that sits atop the vast oil field thecompany struck with its first wildcat well.   The field isn't far from Yemen's ill-defined border withSaudi Arabia, and relations between the two countries areprecarious. If Yemen were to allow Iraqi forces to cross itsborder with Saudi Arabia, State Department analysts speculatethat the Saudis could retaliate by financing a terrorist hiton Yemen's oil infrastructure.   Don McNelis, vice president of operations in Yemen, doubtsthat would happen. &quot;For one thing, you've got armed tribesmenfor about 30 miles all around here who are pretty picky aboutwho moves on their land,&quot; he says. And at the refineryitself, Yemen's army is guarding the perimeter and manningcheckpoints on the road. &quot;When you've got the army helpingyou it makes your job a lot easier,&quot; says Mr. Coughlin. &quot;Solong as their guns are pointing the right way, you're okay.&quot;   To some extent, Mr. Coughlin says, the refinery and thedrilling sites are protected by their isolation. It is in thecity that the risk of an attack is higher. Hunt has advisedits staff to stay out of town as much as possible, but so faradditional security hasn't been considered necessary.   Most Yemenis see the company as a promise of increasedprosperity, says Abdel Malik Assindi, an official with theministry of information. &quot;People here believe that the bigoil companies knew there was oil here but were pressured bythe Saudis against exploring for it. They see Ray Hunt as aman who plays his own hand of cards, and they admire that,&quot;he says.   Indeed, as many Westerners scramble to find flights out ofthe region, Hunt employees are among the few still flying in.Most employees are on a 28-day rotation, working consecutive12-hour days in the desert and then flying home for a month'sbreak. So far, Mr. McNelis says, everyone due back in Yemenhas turned up on schedule.   Hunt employees don't talk about worst-case scenarios. Mostbelieve there won't be one, because the interests of thecountry and the company are identical. Oil companies in muchmore hostile situations have kept right on with theiroperations. Occidental Petroleum stayed in Libya during thenadir of U.S. relations with Col. Moammar Gadhafi. In Angola,Cuban troops protected Gulf Oil operations during the war.Hunt believes the key is staying out of politics -- andputting up with Saddam portraits in the chow hall. &quot;We arejust oil finders from Texas,&quot; Mr. Meurer says. &quot;Politicsisn't our business.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>