<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910118-0161</DOCNO><DOCID>910118-0161.</DOCID><HL>   Iraqi Missiles Hit Israel   As U.S. Presses Air Attacks   ---   Victory Over Iraq Won't Be   As Easy as First Day's Strike   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- &quot;There will be some downs,&quot; President Bushcautioned yesterday morning. A few hours later, SaddamHussein's missile strike against Israel proved him right.   The attack on Israel makes it less likely that the U.S.will achieve a simple and easy victory in the Gulf war. U.S.officials already were acknowledging that, despite theoverwhelming initial success of American warplanes, theyfaced the difficult prospect of fighting on the groundagainst Iraq. Now, they must contemplate conducting thatground war while trying to hold together a strainedcoalition.</LP><TEXT>   The U.S.'s central goal -- evicting hundreds of thousandsof Iraqi troops from Kuwait -- hasn't been accomplished.Events in the next few days will determine whether that jobis swift and clean or slow and bloody. Despite the sweepingdamage done to Iraq by nonstop waves of aerial attacks, U.S.officials say they don't expect an internal Iraqi collapsethat would prompt heavily dug-in Iraqi soldiers to simplyflee Kuwait. U.S. planners anticipate that liberating Kuwaitwill require an intense military campaign designed to inflictwhat one official calls &quot;a world of hurt&quot; on Iraqi troops inKuwait.   The key question for the American military is whether thatpain can be inflicted mostly by waves of heavy bombardment byB-52s and other powerful planes or whether it will requireextensive ground maneuvers to dig out the Iraqis. Groundfighting would be far more costly in American lives than anaerial campaign. Iraqi troops are believed to have turnedoccupied Kuwait into a ghastly no man's land fortified withthousands of mines, long ditches and miles of barbed wire. Inaddition to the usual anti-tank and anti-personnel devices,the Iraqis may also have planted biological and chemicalmines, according to the January issue of Marine Corps Gazettemagazine.   The casualty rates incurred in breaching such tangledbarriers could be high. &quot;Few things in combat cause as muchanxiety, chaos and panic as mines,&quot; the Gazette noted. &quot;Whenyou add ditches, wire and other nonexplosive obstacles . . .you have a tough nut to crack.&quot;   Despite the aerial display by the U.S. and its allies sofar, many analysts inside and outside the government sayground action over this terrain will be needed. &quot;I think theystill would be wise to assume that there's no way, in apurely military sense, that you can occupy Kuwait with justaircraft,&quot; said former Defense Secretary Harold Brown.   Such concerns are fueled by suspicions about the strategySaddam Hussein is pursuing. In addition to striking outagainst Israel, some U.S. analysts say, the Iraqi leader maymaneuver toward a war of attrition more suited to hisstrengths. Such a strategy would require his troops to simplystay hunkered down in Kuwait.   Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staffand the guiding spirit of Operation Desert Storm, hasrepeatedly indicated that when the U.S. and its allies moveon the ground, they don't plan a frontal assault that couldprove especially costly in lives -- and politicallyunpalatable back home. Instead, they have hinted thatflanking maneuvers are far more likely, either to cut offIraqi troops or to draw them into the kind of high-speedbattle better suited to Western forces. Also, U.S. officialshinted yesterday that American troops have some surprisesplanned for the time they move.   Iraq is giving no indication that it will yield easily.Saddam Hussein began yesterday by bluntly warning that thewar has only just begun. He openly threatened to overthrowSaudi Arabia's King Fahd for cooperating with the U.S. &quot;Thecriminals will be defeated, and Fahd, the traitor of the twoholy places, will be defeated,&quot; he declared, in a referenceto the Islamic holy cities of Mecca and Medina in SaudiArabia. He finished the day by launching his attack onIsrael.   All yesterday, administration officials from the presidenton down cautioned against excessive optimism.   Congressional leaders who met with the president saw noevidence that the Iraqi ground forces in Kuwait are severelyshaken or that the need for the American-led coalition toeventually use its ground forces had been reduced.   &quot;It is a comprehensive campaign with, as I've said manytimes, air, land and sea components,&quot; Gen. Powell said. &quot;Itwill unfold over a period of time.&quot;   The most perplexing problem for the Bush administration asthe campaign unfolds may be deciding on a precise strategyfor bringing it to a clean conclusion. &quot;The problem of wartermination is one of the most serious issues war strategistshere have to calculate,&quot; one official says.   The easiest solution, of course, would be for someoneinside Iraq to rise up and shove out Saddam Hussein. &quot;Isuppose one can envisage a breakdown of the Iraqi governmentand its replacement by some new authority which negotiates aceasefire and undertakes the withdrawal&quot; from Kuwait, saysZbigniew Brzezinski, a former national security adviser.&quot;That is probably the best outcome. Short of that, it couldbe very messy.&quot;   But U.S. analysts still don't think a coup or insurrectionagainst Saddam Hussein very likely. He has spent yearsentrenching himself in power and sifting through his militaryofficers to ensure that those with the most power are loyalto him.   The next-best hope may be that the intensive campaign byAmerican, British, Saudi, Kuwaiti and French pilotsthoroughly cuts off Iraqi troops in Kuwait from theircommanders and supplies back in Iraq. That might compel theoccupiers to defect or flee homeward.   In an attempt to encourage Iraqi soldiers to abandon theirpositions, U.S. officials said, the coalition forces havebegun dropping thousands of leaflets on Iraqi troops urgingdefections. American forces even have interceptedconversations among Iraqi soldiers wondering about how planescarrying the leaflets managed to penetrate areas supposedlyprotected by Iraqi anti-aircraft missiles, officials said.   Yet there aren't any signs of massive defections so far.Egypt's state-owned news service reported that about 50 Iraqitanks crossed from Kuwait into Saudi Arabia and surrenderedto Egyptian troops serving in the anti-Iraq coalition. ButU.S. officials said they hadn't any information about such adefection, and the Egyptian news agency itself eventuallyseeemed to retract its story.   It's also conceivable that a massive bombing campaign,accompanied by only minimal ground probes into Iraqi lines,could force Iraqi soldiers to abandon Kuwait. But, aftertheir eight-year ground war with Iran, Iraq's combatengineers are masters at the art of digging troops intoheavily fortified trenches and bunkers, and it remainsuncertain that even a cascade of big bombs could force themout.   Even if it succeeded, such a massive bombing campaignwould have a political cost of its own. To succeed, it mighthave to kill thousands of Iraqi soldiers. This might beportrayed by some in the Arab world as a massacre, whichcould exacerbate anti-American sentiment there.   So it is most likely that American commanders eventuallywill launch a combined air and ground campaign usingbombardments of Iraqi troops in Kuwait, flanking maneuvers onthe ground and amphibious landings on beaches to squeezeIraqi troops.   U.S. commanders aren't in a big hurry to start even apartial ground campaign. Pentagon officials suggest it willbe several days, at least, before they move beyond thecurrent aerial efforts.   In the meantime, some military analysts suggest, theremight be limited ground activity as forces of the U.S., andperhaps its Egyptian and British allies, probe the Kuwaitifront for weak spots. Such forays also would have thepsychological advantage of stirring uncertainty among Iraqiforces and perhaps straining their lines of defense. But theresulting skirmishing wouldn't necessarily indicate the onsetof a new phase in the war.   And some signs emerged yesterday that the U.S. and the 27nations that have joined it in the anti-Iraq coalition mightfind it easier to stick with an air campaign for now. Turkey,reversing its earlier position, authorized the coalition tolaunch air attacks on Iraqi targets from Turkish bases.Turkey borders on Iraq, and the move could make it easier forthe U.S. and its allies to hit targets in some parts of Iraq.   In addition, French warplanes, which didn't participate inthe initial wave of attacks on Iraq, joined in yesterday.U.S. officials said France's sophisticated warplanes launchedan attack on an air base in Kuwait being used by Iraqiforces.   But those hopeful signs for the coalition wereovershadowed by the Thursday night strike against Israel.Over the next several days, the task for the U.S. won't bewringing more cooperation from its allies in the coalition,but ensuring its Arab members remain in the group at all.</TEXT></DOC>