<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911112-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>911112-0070.</DOCID><HL>   Gammon's Law Points to Health-Care Solution   ----   By Milton Friedman</HL><DATE>11/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><NS>LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)</NS><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Some years ago, I came across a study by Max Gammon, aBritish physician who also researches medical care, comparinginput and output in the British socialized hospital system.He took the number of employees as his measure of input andthe number of hospital beds as his measure of output. Hefound that input had increased sharply, while output hadactually fallen.   He was led to enunciate what he called &quot;the theory ofbureaucratic displacement.&quot; In his words, in &quot;a bureaucraticsystem . . . increase in expenditure will be matched by fallin production. . . . Such systems will act rather like `blackholes,' in the economic universe, simultaneously sucking inresources, and shrinking in terms of `emitted production.'&quot;</LP><TEXT>   I have long been impressed by the operation of Gammon'slaw in the U.S. schooling system: Input, however measured,has been going up for decades, and output, whether measuredby number of students, number of schools, or even moreclearly, quality, has been going down.   The recent surge of concern about the rising cost ofmedical care, and of proposals to do something about it --most involving a further move toward the completesocialization of medicine -- reminded me of the Gammon studyand led me to investigate whether his law applied to U.S.health care. There clearly have been major advances inmedical care in the past half century. Indeed, I would notmyself be alive today if it were not for some of them. Yetthe question remains whether these gains were promoted orretarded by the extraordinary rise in the fraction ofnational income spent on medical care. How does outputcompare with input?   Even a casual glance at figures on input and output inU.S. hospitals indicates that Gammon's law has been in fulloperation for U.S. hospitals since the end of World War II,and especially since the enactment of Medicare and Medicaidin 1965.   Before 1940, input and output both rose, input somewhatmore than output, presumably because of the introduction ofmore sophisticated and expensive treatment. The cost ofhospital care per resident of the U.S., adjusted forinflation, rose from 1929 to 1940 at the rate of 5% per year;the number of occupied beds, at 2.4% a year. Cost per patientday, adjusted for inflation, rose only modestly.   The situation was very different after the war. From 1946to 1989, the number of beds per 1,000 population fell by morethan one-half; the occupancy rate, by one-eighth. In sharpcontrast, input skyrocketed. Hospital personnel per occupiedbed multiplied nearly seven-fold and cost per patient day,adjusted for inflation, an astounding 26-fold. One majorengine of these changes was the enactment of Medicare andMedicaid in 1965. A mild rise in input was turned into ameteoric rise; a mild fall in output, into a rapid decline.   Taken by itself, the decline in the number of occupiedbeds could be interpreted as evidence of the progress ofmedical science: The population is healthier, needinghospitalization less, and advances in science and medicaltechnology have reduced the length of hospital stays andenabled more procedures to be performed outside the hospital.   But that does not explain much, if any, of the rise ininput. True, care has become more sophisticated andexpensive, and medical machines more complex. Yetimprovements in health and hospital care quality do notappear to have proceeded more rapidly after 1965 than before-- there is some evidence that the reverse was true. Reportedexpenditures on research (per capita and in constant dollars)rose at the rate of 15% a year from 1948 to 1964, at lessthan 2% a year from 1965 to 1989. Yet the number of occupiedbeds per 1,000 population fell 1% a year from 1946 to 1964,and 2.5% a year from 1965 to 1989. Cost per patient day roseby 6% a year in the first period, 9% in the second.   Gammon's law, not medical miracles, was clearly at work.The federal government's assumption of responsibility forhospital and medical care for the elderly and the poorprovided a fresh pool of money, and there was no shortage oftakers. Personnel per occupied bed, which had already doubledfrom 1946 to 1965, more than tripled from that level after1965. Cost per patient day, which had already more thantripled from 1946 to 1965, multiplied a further eight-foldafter 1965.   Growing costs, in turn, led to more regulation ofhospitals, further increasing administrative expense.Unfortunately, I have been unable to uncover comprehensiveand readily available data for a sufficiently long period tojudge how large a role was played by increasingadministrative costs. Anecdotal evidence suggests thatincreased administrative complexity played a major role inthe explosion of total cost per patient day, and led to ashift from hospital to outpatient care, accelerating thedecline in occupied beds.   Experts in medical care and in hospital administration candoubtless put flesh on the stark evidence from the limitedstatistical data. But a fuller description is hardly likelyto alter the bottom line: In Gammon's words, &quot;a bureaucraticsystem . . . will act rather like `black holes,' in theeconomic universe.&quot;   Though hospital cost has risen as a percentage of totalmedical cost from 24% in 1946 to 36% in 1989, it is still aminor part of total medical cost. It is tempting to applyGammon's analysis to total medical cost rather than simply tohospital care.   There is no problem about input. Estimates of expenditureson medical care are readily available for the postwar period,can be estimated back to 1919, and can be corrected readilyfor the rise in population and in the price level.   Except for the Great Depression, when the collapse ofincomes raised the percentage sharply, health spending from1919 on rose gradually but stayed between about 3% and 4% oftotal national income. Government spending was only a modestpart of that total and was primarily state and local. Afterthe war, total spending on health care tripled as a fractionof national income; government spending, particularlyfederal, became an increasing fraction of the total.   Private spending rose at a steady arithmetic rate up tothe end of World War II, increasing by $3.30 per capita ayear in 1982 dollars, with only minor deviations as a resultof cyclical forces. As a percentage of national income,private spending stayed between 3.5% and 5% from 1922 to 1958except for some of the Depression years. From 1958 on,private spending began to rise as a percentage of nationalincome -- at first slowly, then more rapidly -- reaching morethan 8% by 1989.   Government spending behaved somewhat differently. It roseat a rather constant percentage rate from 1919 all the way to1965, except for a short postwar bulge. The enactment ofMedicare and Medicaid produced an explosion in governmentspending. In the process, government's share of totalspending went from 15% during the 1920s to 25% in 1965,before surging to 42% in the next two decades, or from lessthan 1% of national income to nearly 6%. If the prior trendshad continued, total spending in 1989 would have been abouthalf as much as it actually was.   One major physical input is the number of physicians.Physicians numbered 157 per 100,000 population at the turn ofthe century, gradually declined in number to 125 by 1929, andthen rose slowly to 133 by 1940 before beginning anexponential climb to 252 by 1987, the latest year for which Ihave data. The rapid increase in the number of physicians waspreceded by a sharp rise in their median income from a levelless than seven times per-capita income to a peak of 11.6 to1 in 1962. As cost containment became more and more pressing,the rise in the number of physicians was accompanied by adecline in their relative income, even though their incomecontinued to rise in absolute terms. By 1987, the ratio haddeclined from 11.6 to 9.1, and no doubt the decline iscontinuing.   Despite the sharp rise in the number and income ofphysicians, it is worth noting, first, that the cost ofphysicians' services accounts for only about one-fifth oftotal health-care costs, and, second, that the share is lessthan it has historically been. In 1929, the cost ofphysicians' services was about 27% of total health costs;after World War II, about 25%. The explanation is presumablya combination of more expensive equipment and greateradministrative expenses.   So much for input. What about output? That is the realproblem. The output of the medical-care industry that we areinterested in is its contribution to better health. How canwe measure &quot;better health&quot; in a reasonably objective way notgreatly influenced by other factors?   The least bad measure that I have been able to come upwith is length of life. That too is seriously contaminated byother factors. Improvements in diet, housing, clothing and soon made possible by increasing affluence as well as suchgovernment measures as the provision of purer water andbetter garbage collection and disposal have doubtlesscontributed to lengthening the average life span. Wars,epidemics, and natural and man-made disasters have played apart. Even more important, the quality of life is asimportant as its length. Perhaps someone more knowledgeablein this field can find a better measure of the relevantoutput of the medical-care industry. I have not been able to.   Data on life expectancy at birth are readily available bysex and race, and I have concentrated on the length of lifeof females, and of whites and blacks separately, in order tokeep the populations as homogeneous as possible over a longperiod. Life expectancy at birth of white females rosesteadily from 48.7 years in 1900 to 74.2 years in 1959, andof black females from 33.5 years to 65.2 years. The rise thenslowed drastically. Life expectancy went from 74.2 in 1959 to79.0 in 1989 for white females and from 65.2 years to 75.6years for black females. The rate of rise was more thanhalved for whites, cut by more than a third for blacks.   As the length of life increases, further increases arepresumably more and more difficult to achieve -- early gainswould seem to be the easiest. Yet there was no sign of anyslowdown for the first 59 years of the 20th century. Theshift to a lower rate of improvement comes suddenly, not longbefore the rapid expansion in the federal government's rolein medical care and the sharp slowdown in the rate ofincrease in the funds going to research.   Life expectancy at age 65, in sharp contrast, shows veryslow though steady progress to about 1939, and then decidedlymore rapid progress, especially for females. Does thespeeding up around 1939 reflect the discovery about that timeand subsequent wider use of a widespread range ofantibiotics? I leave that as a puzzle for others.   In terms of my own concern, the effect of greatergovernment involvement, the data are of little help. Forfemales, Medicare is followed by an initial speeding up, thentapering off; for males, the pattern is almost the reverse:little or no change from 1950 to 1970, then a speeding up. Inshort, it will take a far more detailed and informed analysisto reach any clear conclusions about what has been happeningto the output of the medical-care industry, whether in termsof the length of life, and even more, the quality of life.   Nonetheless, for total medical care, as for hospitals, itis hard to avoid the conclusion that Gammon's law is at work.No question that medicine in all its aspects has becomesubject to an ever more complex bureaucratic structure. Noquestion that input has exploded. No evidence that output hascome anywhere close to keeping pace, though we lack a firmbasis for going beyond this very general statement. &quot;Blackholes&quot; indeed.   Why should we be surprised? Evidence covering a muchbroader range of activities documents that bureaucraticstructures produce high cost, low quality, and inequitabledistribution of output. The U.S. medical system has become inlarge part a socialist enterprise. Why should we be anybetter at socialism than the Soviets? Medicine is not unique.Our socialized postal system, our socialized schoolingsystem, our socialized system of trying to control drugs, andindeed our socialized defense industry provide clear evidencethat we are no better at socialism than countries that havegone all the way.   Yet not only do we keep on being surprised, but wecontinue in each of these areas to increase the scope ofsocialism. Nearly all the suggestions for improving ourmedical system involve expanding the role of government, atthe extreme moving from a partly socialist system to acompletely socialist system]   The inefficiency, high cost and inequitable character ofour medical system can be fundamentally remedied in only oneway: by moving in the other direction, toward re-privatizingmedical care. I conjecture that almost all consumers ofmedical services, and many producers, would favor a simplereform that would privatize most medical care. Yet thatreform is politically infeasible because it would beviolently opposed by the bureaucracy that plans, controls andadministers today's structure of medical care.   The reform has two major steps: (1) End both Medicare andMedicaid and replace them with a requirement that every U.S.family unit have a major medical insurance policy with a highdeductible, say $20,000 a year or 30% of the unit's incomeduring the prior two years, whichever is lower. (2) End thetax exemption of employer-provided medical care; it should beregarded as a fully taxable fringe benefit to theemployee-deductible for the employer but taxable to theemployee. Each of these reforms needs further discussion.   Preferably, the major medical insurance policy should bepaid for by the individual family unit, which should receivea reduction in taxes reflecting the reduction in cost to thegovernment. There would be an exception for lower-incomefamilies and for families who were unable to qualify forcoverage at an affordable fee. The government would help themfinance the policy though not administer it. That would bedone by private competitive insurers, chosen by eachindividual or family separately. Each individual or familywould, of course, be free to buy supplementary insurance ifit so desired.   However, even if the government were to pay directly formajor medical insurance for everyone -- rather than byreducing taxes -- there is little doubt that both thegovernment's and the total health cost would declinedrastically because of the elimination of the tremendousgovernmental bureaucratic structure that has been built up tosupervise a large fraction of all health activities.   The tax exemption of employer-provided medical care hastwo different effects, both of which contribute to raisinghealth costs. First, it leads the employee to rely on theemployer rather than himself to finance and provide medicalcare. Yet the employee is likely to do a far better job ofmonitoring health-care providers in his own interest than isthe employer. Second, it leads him to take a larger fractionof his total remuneration in the form of health care than hewould if it had the same tax status as other expenditures. Ifthe tax exemption were removed, employees could bargain withtheir employers for higher take-home pay in lieu of healthcare, and provide for their own health care, either bydealing directly with health-care providers or throughpurchasing health insurance.   These two reforms would completely solve the problem ofthe currently medically uninsured, eliminate most of thebureaucratic structure, free medical practitioners from anincredible burden of paper work and regulation, and lead manyemployers and employees to convert employer-provided medicalcare into a higher cash wage. The taxpayer would save money,since total governmental costs would plummet.   The family unit would be relieved of one of its majorconcerns -- the possibility of being impoverished by a majormedical catastrophe -- and most could readily finance theremaining medical costs, which I conjecture would return tosomething like the 5% of total consumer spending that it wasbefore the federal government got into the act. Familieswould once again have an incentive to monitor the providersof medical care and to establish the kind of personalrelations with them that once were customary. Thedemonstrated efficiency of private enterprise would have achance to operate to improve the quality and lower the costof medical care.   There is only one thing wrong with this dream. It woulddisplace and displease the large number of people who are nowengaged in administering, studying and daily revising thepresent socialized system, including a large private-sectorcomponent that has adjusted to the system. They aresufficiently potent politically to kill any such reformbefore it could ever get a real following, just as theeducational bureaucracy has repeatedly killed even modestprograms for privatizing the educational system, even thoughpoll after poll shows that the public supports privatizationthrough parental choice.   Medical care provides a clear example of the basicdifference between private and governmental enterprise. Thedifference is not in the quality of people who initiate oroperate new ventures, or in the promise of the ventures. Thedifference is in the bottom line. If a private venture isunsuccessful, its backers must either shut it down or financeits losses out of their own pockets, so it will generally beterminated promptly. If a governmental venture isunsuccessful, its backers have a very different bottom line.   Shutting it down is an admission of failure, somethingnone of us is prepared to face if we can help it. And theyneed not shut it down. Instead, in entire good faith, thebackers can contend that the apparent lack of success issimply a result of not carrying the venture far enough. Ifthey are persuasive enough, they can draw on the deep pocketsof the tax-paying public, while replenishing their own, tofinance a continuation and expansion of the venture. Littlewonder that unsuccessful government ventures are generallyexpanded rather than terminated.   In my opinion, that is what is responsible for Gammon's&quot;black holes,&quot; whether in medicine, schooling, the &quot;war ondrugs,&quot; agricultural subsidies, protectionism, and so on andon. That is the way high-minded motives and self-interestcombine to produce what Rep. Dick Armey once labeled &quot;theinvisible foot of government.&quot; I challenge you to find morethan a very exceptional counter-example.   ---   Mr. Friedman, the Nobel laureate in economics, is a fellowat the Hoover Institution.   ---   Gary S. Becker, Robert J. Cihak, James F. Fries, ThomasMoore and Gloria Valentine helped this article through theirwork and comments.</TEXT></DOC>