<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910516-0174</DOCNO><DOCID>910516-0174.</DOCID><HL>   Counterpoint:   Quota Scare Must Not Destroy Civil Rights Bill   ----   By Eleanor Holmes Norton</HL><DATE>05/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A17</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   The Civil Rights and Women's Equity Act of 1991, scheduledfor a vote next week in the House of Representatives, seeksto overturn five Supreme Court decisions that make it moredifficult to prove job discrimination. Similar legislationwas passed last year, but the Senate failed by one vote tooverride the president's veto. With this bill, the countryrepeats a chapter in our history that I thought was closed.   In the early 1960s I was a law student and a civil rightsactivist who thought she had a pretty good idea of where thestruggle for civil rights was headed. Sit-ins anddemonstrations had finally exposed racism in a uniquelycompelling way. Civil rights legislation, on the other hand,seemed off on a distant horizon.</LP><TEXT>   Nor did passage of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Actfollowing President Kennedy's assassination convince me thatstatutory law would do what demonstrations were beginning toaccomplish. The act seemed pitifully watered down andunworthy of the great cause that had called it forth. Allthat seemed predictable were more demonstrations,increasingly violent retaliation, like that in Birmingham,Ala., and the instability that had finally shaken cast-ironSouthern traditions. What was most unpredictable was the rolethat courts, the most conservative of American institutions,would play using statutory law to disassemble patterns of jobdiscrimination for the first time in our history.   Although increasingly conservative, the Supreme Court andthe lower federal courts read the new job-discriminationstatute broadly, in keeping with the usual rules forconstruction of remedial statutes. When legislatures seek toroot out an entrenched problem, the rule goes, courtscountermand that intent if they interpret the statute sonarrowly as to leave the problem intact. This routine rule onconstruction had not been applied to state civil-rights lawsor to such federal attempts as there had been. As a result,patterns of discrimination remained unmoved, the willingnessof Congress and the president to do something about it wascynically regarded, and the credibility of courts was on theline.   Title VII introduced modern anti-discrimination law andbroke with this discredited past. The courts responded,applied traditional remedial rules of statutory construction,and broke up centuries-old discriminatory practices andpatterns. The fight for the 1991 Civil Rights bill inCongress today is over whether to reintroduce the onlyconcepts that have proven effective and to correct foranomalies in existing law, an effort made necessary byseveral Supreme Court decisions that effectively rewroteexisting job-discrimination law.   The largely technical battle about burden of proof andsimilar concepts has not excited much interest from thepublic. After all, the country has not only lived with thisstatute for a quarter of a century, Congress several timeshas blessed the interpretations now at issue, and Americanshave seemed proud of the progress now visible in the workplace, where people of color and women are no longerinvariably at the bottom. All sides concede, however, thatrace and sex discrimination are still abundant and that TitleVII must be repaired.   With the statute open for amendment for the first time inyears, two important actors have seized the opportunity torewrite it their way for reasons special to them. Some (butby no means all) businesses would like to avoid the expenseassociated with making job qualifications relate to the joband to avoid monetary damages to sex- andreligious-discrimination victims, as the law already requiresin cases of racial and ethnic discrimination. The Bushadministration has raised and shamelessly exploited theracially polarizing issue of quotas. Notwithstanding explicitlanguage barring quotas and 25 years of experience showingdamage awards to be rare and small, these have become the tworesonating issues in the fight for the Civil Rights bill.   Quotas is a dangerously false issue. It is false becauseit has been used to imply that numerical remedies benefitblacks and Hispanics when the major beneficiaries of goals(quotas are barred under existing statutory interpretation)have been white women. Their superior life advantages makethem the most readily available pool of workers to fillpreviously exclusionary jobs. Yet quotas will not be possiblefor women any more than for blacks. If used, claimants willhave an explicit cause of action, just as other victims ofdiscrimination do.   Sixteen major Jewish organizations, experts on quotas andthe primary victims, recently held a press conference toexpress strong support for the Civil Rights bill and to saythat the bill will not lead to quotas. The Anti-DefamationLeague, the American Jewish Committee, the American JewishCongress, the Rabbinical Assembly of Conservatism and othershave put this issue to rest for all except those who do notwant to hear it.   But the quota issue is also dangerous. In the hands of thepresident, who has marketed the quota scare, it poisons theracial atmosphere already polluted by racial incidents andself-segregation on campuses and by the mutual suspicionbetween blacks and whites that is the legacy of retrenchment,resistance and resentment on racial issues that began in the1980s.   The largest irony about the Civil Rights bill is that themajor issue that divides the Congress is not race but sex:whether there should be a limit on damages to victims of sexdiscrimination (religion, too). This issue, which has gottenlittle public exposure or concern, is driven by a flood ofletters and calls from small and medium-sized businesses.They are not reacting to any pattern or even instances oflarge awards in discrimination cases, where back pay is therule and damages are rare, but to an atmosphere in whichbusiness is trying to cap medical malpractice and similardamage awards. Proponents of the Civil Rights bill, however,find it difficult to sanction invidious discrimination withinthe text of an anti-discrimination statute, especially whenthe data show damages very difficult to prove or win.   Thus, a bill that is controversial in the public becauseof race is hung up in the Congress largely because of sex.The president has brought confusion rather thanclarification, and House leaders are trying to translate avexing set of technical issues for that bulky body. Surely itis too late in the century for the issues that moved peoplelike me from civil-rights activism to civil-rights law to bemisunderstood, miscast, or simply missed. As I join thedebate on the House floor 26 years after our activismstimulated the passage of Title VII, I hope it is not toolate for the bill to be rescued from racial demagoguery.   ---   Rep. Norton, who represents the District of Columbia,headed the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission underPresident Carter.</TEXT></DOC>