<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910129-0157</DOCNO><DOCID>910129-0157.</DOCID><HL>   Iraqi Warplanes Seeking Shelter in Iran;   Oil Spill May Complicate U.S. Operations   ---   Officials Citing Signs That   The Baghdad Strategem   Was a Surprise to Tehran   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Iraqi warplanes are conducting a mass flightto safety in Iran, and U.S. officials say there are signs thesize of the movement has been a surprise to Iran.   More than 80 Iraqi aircraft have fled to Iranianterritory, most of them in the last few days, U.S. officialssaid yesterday. Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operationsfor the Pentagon's joint staff, said more than 60 of thefleeing planes are fighter-bombers. The remainder appear tobe transport planes, including some civilian aircraft.</LP><TEXT>   There are at least three possible explanations for theIraqi flight. The most likely, American officials say, isthat Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein has begun a systematicevacuation of the cream of his air force to ensure that itremains intact after the current war ends.   If true, that could be a sign Iraq has become convincedthat its fortified bunkers won't protect its warplanes fromattack. The U.S. and its allies have said that many Iraqiwarplanes are hidden in such bunkers, and it isn't clearprecisely how effective allied bombing has been in puncturingthem.   Still, the flight wouldn't necessarily be a sign thatSaddam Hussein intends to seek peace any time soon, U.S.analysts say. Instead, it could indicate that the Iraqileader is focusing all his efforts on trying to pull the U.S.into a long and costly ground war more suited to his militarystrengths.   It's also possible that the flights represent a massdefection from the ranks of the Iraqi air force. Thatpossibility is bolstered by unconfirmed reports that SaddamHussein has been so at odds with his air force that he hasordered some commanders executed since the war began.   Most ominously, the movement could be a sign that Iran isallowing Iraqi fighters to regroup on its territory and tolaunch attacks from there on the U.S. and its allies.   But U.S. officials say that the reaction of Iran'sair-defense system suggests the exodus isn't part of anIranian scheme to aid in Iraqi combat operations. Iranian airdefenses let Iraqi civilian transport planes pass intoIranian territory unimpeded in the first days after the warbegan, officials said, but went on alert when war planesbegan arriving in the last few days.   That suggests, the officials said, that Iran had agreed togive haven to some aircraft, especially civilian airlinersand transport planes, but was surprised when fighters beganarriving in large numbers.   Still, there is continuing concern in the U.S. governmentthat, in addition to accepting Iraqi planes for safekeeping,Iran could complicate allied war plans by covertly providingmilitary supplies and other equipment to Iraq.   Meanwhile, Saddam Hussein sounded a defiant tone in hisfirst interview with a Western journalist since the warbegan, the Cable News Network reported. The Iraqi leader saidthat the Scud missiles he has been firing at Saudi Arabia andIsrael are capable of firing chemical, biological or nuclearwarheads, CNN correspondent Peter Arnett reported fromBaghdad. The U.S. and its allies have said they are unsurewhether Iraq has the ability to fit such mass-destructionwarheads on its long-range missiles.   Saddam Hussein didn't say clearly whether he would usesuch warheads, commenting simply that &quot;Iraq will use weaponsthat equate the weapons used against us,&quot; Mr. Arnettreported. The Iraqi president also expressed high confidenceIraq would prevail in its war with the U.S.-led coalition,and he reiterated that Kuwait will remain a part of Iraq.   Intelligence officials indicated that there were somesigns Iraq may have sent a few transport planes forsafekeeping in the few days before the war even started. Inany case, soon after shooting erupted Jan. 16, officialssaid, a small number of Iraqi transport planes began flyingto Iran, apparently to avoid being bombed by the U.S. and itsallies. They were accompanied on their journey to safety byIraqi fighter escorts, which then returned to Iraq.   In those early days of fighting, other Iraqi commercialplanes flew to safety in the small nation of Mauritania,administration officials said.   But at least once since Iraqi fighter jets themselvesbegan fleeing to Iran, Iranian air-defense planes rose tochallenge them, compelling the Iraqi planes to return home,Gen. Kelly said. The Iraqi jets are taking off from air basesin central and northern Iraq, apparently so they can avoidcontact with U.S. planes on the short trip to Iran, Gen.Kelly said.   Whatever the cause of the movement, U.S. officials saythey are receiving firm, private assurances from Iran that itwill force the Iraqi planes to remain on the ground for theduration of the war. &quot;The best thing we can do right now istake them at their word,&quot; said Pentagon spokesman PeteWilliams.   If Iran's assurances are true, the departures have left abig hole in the Iraqi air force, which already wasovermatched against the big and technologically superior airforces of the U.S. and its allies.   Iraq was believed to have begun the war with about 700military aircraft. Of those, some analysts considered only 75to 125 to be top-of-the-line fighter planes. The U.S. and itsallies say they have shot down 26 of those Iraqi warplanesand destroyed at least another 24 on the ground. The flightof more than 60 additional planes, which U.S. analysts sayappear to be from the ranks of Iraq's top-flight aircraft,means that well over 100 Iraqi warplanes are out of action.   Bush administration aides are curious about the movementof Iraqi aircraft because it may give an indication of SaddamHussein's war strategy and provide a clue about the Iraqileader's plans.   If Saddam Hussein really has ordered the evacuation of histop-line fighter aircraft, it may indicate that he is layingplans to assure that he retains military muscle in thepostwar period. That, in turn, would suggest that he mayintend to fight for a time to bloody the U.S. and prove hisvalor in the Arab world, and then attempt to negotiate a dealallowing him to stay in power. At that point, he couldretrieve his warplanes from Iran.   Under such a scheme, Saddam Hussein might have to withdrawfrom Kuwait to satisfy the U.S. But there still could besignificant complications in such an outcome for PresidentBush, who hopes the war won't only force an Iraqi withdrawalbut also wipe out Iraq's military threat for years to come.   Though it isn't clear whether Iran is involved in such aplan, Iran might see some virtue in cooperating in such aneffort despite its own feud with Saddam Hussein. Iranianofficials have signaled that while they don't want Iraq tosucceed in occupying Kuwait, they also don't want Iraqdecimated or dismembered in a war. Iran apparently fears thatwould leave the U.S. as too powerful a force in the region.It also could tempt Syria or Turkey to move in and gobble uppieces of Iraqi territory, increasing their own clout in thearea.   There also have been some reports in recent days that Iranmight be preparing to send food and medical aid to Iraq, asit has declared in the past that it is willing to do. TheIranians have said they don't consider such shipmentsprohibited under the economic embargo the United Nationsimposed on Iraq after Saddam Hussein's forces invaded Kuwaitlast August.   The U.N. resolution provided a mechanism under whichcountries sending food and humanitarian aid to Iraq areexpected first to notify a U.N. committee. State Departmentspokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said that &quot;no such request hascome forward to the U.N. on an Iranian plan or any otherplan.&quot;   Meanwhile, U.S. ground units are carrying out maneuvers toconfuse Iraq about allied troop whereabouts and intentions.Officials indicated that such maneuvers may have been underway when one Marine was killed recently in what militaryauthorities described as an accident. Officials who have beentold of the incident said there is evidence it occurred whileU.S. forces were maneuvering at night as part of a probingeffort.   ---   David Rogers contributed to this article.   (See related story: &quot;Jet Fuel, Diesel Refineries Could BeShut; Water Supply Also Threatened&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 29, 1991)</TEXT></DOC>