<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900828-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>900828-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Don't Throw Good Money Out With Bad</HL><DATE>08/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><IN>SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   Reid Nagle's recommendation to seize and sell healthymutual savings institutions to raise funds for thesavings-and-loan bailout is outrageous, irresponsible,inaccurate, unconstitutional, unjust and un-American(editorial page, July 30).   The depositors of mutual institutions are by definition&quot;members&quot; of the institution. They have voting rights basedon the value of their accounts (much as stockholders havevoting rights based on the value of their shares) and aportion of the institution's assets, proportional to thevalue of their accounts, belongs to each account holder.Federal law and regulations provide that all holders ofaccounts of a mutual association are entitled to equaldistribution of assets in the event of voluntary orinvoluntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of theassociation. Provisions of state laws provide similarprotection for members of state-chartered associations.Mutual thrifts, technically and in fact, belong to theirdepositors. Mr. Nagle's view that the managers are the onlypeople who would lose in a government takeover of healthymutual thrifts is inaccurate.</LP><TEXT>   He is advocating the seizure of healthy institutions thatserve their communities well. From 1985 through 1989 thehealthy portion of the thrift industry paid more than $5billion in increased insurance premiums through a &quot;specialassessment&quot; to support the government's resolution of thetroubled thrifts. Since 1989, they have been paying insurancerates set by the law that are significantly higher than thosepaid by commercial banks. All of this money is being used tofund the costs associated with resolving the problems oftroubled thrifts.   Disregarding due process and other constitutionalprotections, Mr. Nagle proposes that the government seizeprivate property. Since when has this country advocated theseizure of private business to finance a government debt?   Edmond V. Lawlor Jr.   President   New Jersey Savings League   Cranford, N.J.   ---   Mr. Nagle's article bears a strong resemblance to theWillie Sutton aphorism that he robbed banks because that'swhere the money was. Mr. Nagle proposes the theft of propertysimply because it is mutually rather than individually held.He ignores economic realities in suggesting that there issome gain to the American taxpayer from the confiscation ofmutual savings institutions. And he disregards the needs ofcommunities that have been well served by mutual savingsinstitutions.   Next, Mr. Nagle hits us with the fiction of a $10 billion&quot;windfall&quot; to be realized through the seizure. He ignores theproblem of what exactly is being sold. When a mutual is&quot;sold&quot; through its conversion to stock, the &quot;buyers&quot; areactually investors; every dollar of the amount they pay forthe stock stays in the institutions and becomes new capital.In fact, the conversions of some institutions that took placein the 1980s were a way of expanding by raising this capital.But he suggests that there will be buyers for institutionsunder a plan in which every dollar paid goes into governmentcoffers.   State-chartered mutual savings banks, far from being a&quot;relic of the past,&quot; continue to serve local communitiestoday as they have for more than 175 years. The overwhelmingmajority are solvent, successful and crucial to the economicneeds of individuals and businesses in cities and townsacross the country. Rather than destroy these soundinstitutions, the industry should learn from them.   Janet M. Pavliska   Chairman   National Council of Savings Institutions   Washington   ---   Mr. Nagle's illogical scheme to confiscate the reserves ofmutual savings institutions is flawed. No justificationexists for requiring mutual associations to pay for theproblems created by others simply because they operate undera different corporate structure than stock corporations.Simply because the U.S. Supreme Court said the depositors inmutuals were not &quot;technically owners&quot; of the institutions,for purposes of conversion to stock organizations, doesn'tpermit the quantum leap in logic that these companies aretherefore in some sort of ownership limbo. Technicalownership of a mutual is not the issue.   It is interesting to note that Mr. Nagle's businesshappens to be converting mutuals to stock organizations. Whowould profit if the government proposed escheatment onconversion? Oddly enough, Mr. Nagle.   W. Dean Cannon Jr.   President   California League of Savings Institutions   Los Angeles   ---   Mr. Nagle suggests that by auctioning off healthy mutualsand &quot;eliminating&quot; 2,000 savings institutions, $10 billioncould be raised. If 2,000 institutions with an average sizeof $225 million are eliminated, his economics break downrapidly.   With a commensurate average payroll of approximately $2million per institution, the federal government would lose(at the 15% tax bracket) $600 million in income-tax revenueannually. State government would see an approximate $100million annual shortage. Furthermore, the institutions forauction, by his own admission, are healthy and thereforepaying corporate income taxes. Based upon industry averages,we are probably talking at least an additional $200 millionannually. Add to this the lost local real-estate tax revenuesand additional state unemployment-insurance expenses.   More important, the healthy savings institutions pose theleast risk and pay the highest insurance premiums to thereconstituted FDIC. Mr. Nagle's proposal kills the cash cowsthat are paying the most to defray obligations incurred bythe Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp./Federal DepositInsurance Corp.   The abolition of the local-oriented mutual thriftinstitution would be a sad day for communities throughoutthis nation, but his disregard for neighborhoods andcommunities is evident.   Steven F. Rosenbaum   Executive Vice President   Prospect Federal Savings Bank   Lombard, Ill.   ---   Mr. Nagle's conclusions are based on a number of premisesthat just ain't so. He believes that depositor members offederally chartered savings-and-loan associations don't haveproperty rights in the institution under the Home Owners'Loan Act. But they do. The case law never has held thatdepositors have no property rights.   He further believes that the tangible book value ofsolvent mutuals can be obtained for the U.S. governmentthrough some form of &quot;sale,&quot; although the potentialpurchasers are not described, nor is there a description ofwhat they would purchase and what, if anything, would remainbehind. This structure ignores the tax consequences of eitherthe liquidation or the transfer of assets and liabilities ofthe Sandamp;L. Such a transaction could result in generatingfederal tax liabilities at the association level, as well asto holders of any remaining, distributed net worth of theinstitution. Such a transaction generally would prevent orinhibit the use by the acquirer of any net operating losscarry forwards, even assuming they otherwise could be used.The windfall billions wouldn't be billions at all because thetransactions couldn't work the way Mr. Nagle describes them.   He also assumes that 2,000 savings-and-loan institutionswould disappear and there would be fewer federally insureddeposits. How? Does this mean that commercial banks wouldpick up all the deposits? That's what's currently occurringwith Resolution Trust Corp. transactions, but would theacquirers also pick up the mortgages and other assets? Ifthey didn't, where does this instant money come from? Ifcommercial banks acquired the deposits, they remain federallyinsured, but by a different FDIC fund. The total federalexposure does not decrease by any relevant amount. If thearticle contemplated acquirers purchasing the entireinstitutions and operating them as Sandamp;Ls, then there aren't2,000 fewer institutions to be supervised.   At first glance, Mr. Nagle's scheme may appear ingenious,but the premises used in it don't permit the conclusions hereaches. Unless quite substantial changes were made inapplicable charter, escheat and tax laws, as well as amendingsome relevant provisions of the U.S. Constitution, it can'twork.   Arthur W. Leibold Jr.   Partner   Dechert Price andamp; Rhoads   Washington   (Mr. Liebold is former general counsel of the Federal HomeLoan Bank Board, Federal Savings andamp; Loan Insurance Corp. andFederal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.)   ---   Mr. Nagle wants those institutions that did almosteverything right to pay for those that did everything wrongand then to be handed off to &quot;acquirers&quot; in exchange for afew golden parachutes. He refers to the mutual as a &quot;relic ofthe past.&quot; If his opportunistic &quot;acquirers&quot; are the symbolsof our industry's future, then I see little hope for theAmerican consumer in the financial marketplace. I find itvery difficult to consider seriously his solution evenforgetting for the moment that his proposal would pay only 2%toward the resolutions of the problem while causing a majordisruption of our industry.   I have to believe his outrageous proposal was a bid forattention and notoriety. Unfortunately, it succeeded.   Joseph S. Yewaisis   Chairman and President   First Savings Bank   Perth Amboy, N.J.   ---   Mr. Nagle's proposal is something that could happen in acommunist country, but it certainly does not make sense inAmerica. His concept to just go in and take over 2,000mutuals with assets of about $450 billion is like robbing abank without a gun.   Speaking for one profitable mutual, I had nothing to dowith the Sandamp;L bailout. In fact it is not an Sandamp;L bailout but abailout of the government-sponsored deposit insurance. Wehaven't gotten bailed out; we are doing the bailing.   Carl A. Zulke   President   Union Loan andamp; Savings Association   Freeport, Ill.</TEXT></DOC>