<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900926-0061</DOCNO><DOCID>900926-0061.</DOCID><HL>   Milken Lawyers   Ask Sentence   Of Urban Work   ---   U.S. to Release Allegations   That Paint Defendant   As a Major Wrongdoer   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><IN>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   NEW YORK -- Michael Milken's lawyers urged a federal judgeto view Mr. Milken's crimes as aberrations in an otherwiseexemplary life and to sentence him to perform full-timecommunity service with inner city youths in Los Angeles.   Meanwhile, prosecutors prepared to release a barrage ofnew allegations painting Mr. Milken as a white-collarcriminal of major proportions, in its effort to get a stiffprison sentence for the former king of junk bonds.</LP><TEXT>   The conflicting views about the former Drexel BurnhamLambert Inc. official appear in sentencing memoranda preparedby the two sides. Mr. Milken's memorandum was made publicyesterday. The government's memorandum is expected to bereleased today.   Mr. Milken is scheduled to be sentenced next Monday byU.S. District Judge Kimba Wood for six trading-related crimesto which he pleaded guilty last April. Mr. Milken admitted toone count each of conspiracy, filing a false statement withthe Securities and Exchange Commission, securities fraud,aiding and abetting net-capital violations, mail fraud andassisting the filing of a false tax return. He faces amaximum of 28 years in prison.   The pre-sentencing memos have taken on great importance,because the government is alleging that Mr. Milken committednumerous securities-related crimes -- including insidertrading -- beyond those included in his plea bargain. Andprosecutors are urging Judge Wood to consider these furtherallegations against Mr. Milken as reasons to dole out whatthey have called a &quot;substantial&quot; prison sentence.   People named in the government's memo had sought to keepthe additional unproved allegations sealed, but, at therequest of news organizations, Judge Wood ordered them to bemade public, with the names of people who had not beencharged with crimes blacked out.   Judging from Mr. Milken's reply memoranda, theprosecutors' memo accuses Mr. Milken of systematicallyengaging in criminal behavior throughout much of the 1980s,working in concert with convicted former stock speculatorIvan F. Boesky and a host of other clients. The governmentalso accused Mr. Milken of being a &quot;greedy&quot; individual whodepended on corrupt dealings to enhance Drexel's market shareand his own compensation, which reached $550 million in 1987.   Lawyers for Mr. Milken took issue with the government'sentire memorandum, saying that it was &quot;written without regardto legal or factual constraint, seemingly to appeal to thepublic and to pressure the Court&quot; to issue a stringentsentence. Mr. Milken's attorneys contested each allegationthat went beyond the six charges to which he pleaded guilty.And they accused the government of &quot;sneaking in through theback door&quot; evidence of offenses that Mr. Milken has &quot;neveracknowledged and has never committed.&quot;   Although many details in the government's sentencing memohave already come to light in the SEC complaint filed againstMr. Milken and others in 1988 and in the 90-count indictmentof Mr. Milken filed in March 1989, the government presentedsome new allegations in its sentencing memo, according to Mr.Milken's reply.   Among other charges, the government said in its memo thatMr. Milken built Drexel's business and achieved personalfinancial rewards through insider trading.   Mr. Milken didn't plead guilty to any insidertrading-related charge. But in its memo, the governmentpresents four instances of alleged insider trading from whichit said Drexel benefited, involving securities of CaesarsWorld Inc., Viacom Inc., Republic Airlines and Lorimar Inc.In each of these transactions, the government alleges thatMr. Milken directed Drexel traders to trade on the basis ofmaterial nonpublic information that Mr. Milken possessed as aresult of his role as a financial adviser to companiespondering mergers.   The government also claimed that Mr. Milken provided&quot;tips&quot; and &quot;advice,&quot; as well as illegal payoffs, to certainmoney managers and others who were among Drexel's bestclients.   Names of these individuals were blacked out in Mr.Milken's memo. But according to people with knowledge of thegovernment's investigation, those who received allegedlyillegal payoffs include former money manager David Solomon;former First Investors Management Co. junk-bond portfoliomanager Ben Bayse; and Thomas Spiegel, former chief ofColumbia Savings andamp; Loan Association.   Mr. Solomon, who has received immunity from prosecution,is cooperating with the government. Mr. Bayse left FirstInvestors last year, and the firm's lawyer has said FirstInvestors funds weren't in any way &quot;harmed&quot; by Mr. Bayse'sactivities; the lawyer has declined to elaborate. Attorneysfor Columbia and Mr. Spiegel have acknowledged that the firmis under investigation and have denied wrongdoing.   According to the government, Mr. Milken offered personalinvestment opportunities to favored customers in exchange fortheir promises to purchase securities from Drexel. In one ofthese transactions, the government alleges that Mr. Milkenimproperly gave certain money managers and corporateexecutives an opportunity to invest in Kohlberg KravisRoberts andamp; Co.'s 1985 acquisition of Storer CommunicationsInc.   In a previously reported allegation, Mr. Milken encouragedthese money managers to buy risky securities by allowing themto buy equity warrants at relatively cheap prices. Thewarrants were held in a Drexel-organized partnership known as&quot;MacPherson.&quot;   According to the Milken reply memo, the government alsodetails a number of crimes that it said Mr. Milken committedwith Mr. Boesky, beyond the three Boesky-related offenses towhich Mr. Milken pleaded. And the government providesadditional evidence about Mr. Milken's dealings with ColumbiaSavings andamp; Loan, without referring to the thrift by its name.The government alleges that Mr. Milken helped the BeverlyHills, Calif., Sandamp;L obtain tax benefits by purchasingsecurities from Columbia, with the understanding that thosesecurities would later be sold back at a pre-arranged timeand price.   Finally, according to Mr. Milken's memo, the governmentsays that Mr. Milken had obstructed justice by ordering thedestruction of documents after Mr. Boesky agreed to pleadguilty to securities fraud in November 1986.   Regarding the specific allegations, Mr. Milken's attorneyssay the insider-trading allegations are refuted by documentsand testimony that the government has in its possession. Inthree of the cases, the attorneys say, &quot;Mr. Milken did notdiscuss the trades&quot; with his traders.   Mr. Milken never tipped favored customers about dealseither, his attorneys contend. Instead, they say, he merelyprovided investment advice to money managers who requestedit. Mr. Milken's lawyers also disagree with the government'sposition on MacPherson.   They say that Mr. Milken didn't have to bribe moneymanagers to purchase the risky securities; these securities,they say, were valuable and highly profitable. Mr. Milken'slawyers say the warrants sold to money managers were&quot;speculative&quot; investments and had nothing to do with thesemanagers' agreement to buy risky securities.   Moreover, Mr. Milken's attorneys say their client had beengiven approval by Drexel to establish MacPherson and to ownStorer warrants. In a series of interviews, however, seniorDrexel executives have denied that any such approval was evergranted and have indicated that they had no knowledge of thefund managers and other executives' participation inMacPherson.   Mr. Milken's lawyers also take issue with the governmentconcerning the payment of $5.3 million to Drexel by Mr.Boesky. Both the government and other Drexel officials havealleged that the payment was made to turn over to Drexel itsgains in a series of illegal trades, in which Mr. Boesky heldstock for Drexel with the understanding that it would be soldback at a later date.   In their sentencing memo, Mr. Milken's lawyers argue thatthe $5.3 million was a payment for &quot;services rendered,&quot; atheory that Drexel rejected after its own guilty plea in1988. They also deny that Mr. Milken directed anyone todestroy documents.   The second prong of Mr. Milken's argument seeking alenient sentence focuses on his character and good works. Hislawyers' memo relies heavily on more than 170 letters thathave been sent to Judge Wood by Mr. Milken's friends, familyand associates. Quoted extensively are letters by New Yorktakeover attorney Joseph Flom; Steven Ross, chairman of TimeWarner Inc.; and Daryl Gates, the Los Angeles chief ofpolice, among others.   According to the memo, the letters &quot;paint a portrait of .. . a person of great conscience, compassion and charity whohas always been generous with his time, money and spirit.&quot;   Mr. Milken, his lawyers say, possessed &quot;unusual talentsand compassion&quot; at an early age. By the first grade, he couldperform complicated multiplications in his head. Afterschool, he tutored fellow students in math. And &quot;as aschoolboy, Michael organized numerous school charity drivesand volunteered his time, services and modest allowance moneyto an array of local charities.&quot;   This work and charity ethic has continued throughout hislater life, his lawyers say.</TEXT></DOC>