<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920117-0180</DOCNO><DOCID>920117-0180.</DOCID><HL>   Inquiring Eyes:   An Israeli Contract   With a U.S. Company   Leads to Espionage   ---   Arbiters Say Israel Stole Data,   And It Wasn't First Time   The Ally Spied in America   ---   Just Intrigue Among Friends?   ----   By Edward T. Pound and David Rogers   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/17/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIAL (IDD)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)ILLINOIS (IL)ISRAEL (ISR)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PAKISTAN (PK)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOUTH KOREA (SK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The leafy Chicago suburb of Barrington, Ill., seems anunlikely place for an international espionage drama. Yet on aspring day in 1986, the offices of Recon/Optical Inc. becamethe site of just that.   For more than a year, three Air Force officers from Israelhad been working in the plant, monitoring Recon's contract tobuild a top-secret airborne spy-camera system for Israel. Adispute between Recon and Israel over the cost of the projecthad been simmering for months and finally in May it boiledover: Recon halted its work and ordered the Israelis out ofthe building. But as they left, carting off 14 cardboardboxes of documents, they were stopped by a Recon securityofficial, who grew suspicious and confiscated most of thematerial.</LP><TEXT>   Among the contents: documents written in Hebrew allegedlydescribing plans to steal Recon's secret and commerciallyvaluable spy-camera technology.   The case created a momentary stir in the courts, withIsrael denouncing the company's ensuing charges of spying as&quot;irresponsible.&quot; But like so much involving the U.S. andIsrael, the legal case -- after an initial hearing in federalcourt in New York -- quickly went behind closed doors, whereit was bitterly debated before a panel of New York arbitersand ultimately buried in sealed files.   The contents of the arbiters' February 1991 sealeddecision recently became known to The Wall Street Journal.The panel ruled that the Israeli agents had indeed used&quot;elaborate subterfuges&quot; to steal some of the company's plansfor the spy camera, which, the arbiters said, was consideredby the Israeli government to be &quot;very important to itsnational security interests.&quot; Denouncing the &quot;sordidness&quot; ofthe affair, the arbiters ordered Israel to pay $3 million indamages to Recon.   The case establishes for apparently the first time in aU.S. legal proceeding that Israel stole high-tech secretsfrom an American company. The arbiters expressed incredulitythat the agents who stole the plans were never reprimanded bytheir government for the theft.   Though it's impossible to know whether such incidents arewidespread, the Recon case isn't the only example of Israeliespionage in the U.S. For decades, the U.S.-Israelrelationship has been marked both by cooperation and mutualdistrust and deception. Irn the most celebrated case, a Navyintelligence analyst named Jonathan Jay Pollard wasdiscovered in 1985 selling U.S. military secrets to Israel.But an inquiry by this newspaper found additional evidence ofintelligence activities and intrigues involving the twoallies:   -- Israel appears to have gained access to confidentialU.S. procurement documents in an effort to glean designinformation on a Pentagon electronic intelligence project,according to testimony and evidence submitted in the Reconcase. The alleged security breach gave Israel insight intoU.S. research and development of the highly classifiedproject, which remains under development by the Air Force.   -- Rafael (Rafi) Eitan, a former Israeli spymaster whodirected the Pollard spy operation, also cultivated seniorAmerican officials and unsuccessfully tried to recruit a highPentagon official, Noel Koch, for possibly improperout-of-channel activities, according to former U.S.officials.   -- The U.S., for its part, used electronic surveillanceand wiretaps to monitor the Israeli Embassy during the 1970s.Former law-enforcement and military intelligence officialstell of keeping tabs on U.S. citizens as part of a heretoforesecret counterespionage project -- dubbed Scope -- to assessIsraeli intelligence efforts in this country.   Israeli officials in the U.S. and Tel Aviv repeatedlydeclined to be quoted by name, but they deny any allegationsof espionage. &quot;We aren't spying in the United States,&quot; says aDefense Ministry official in Tel Aviv.   Nonetheless, Israel's passion for military security, inconjunction with its arms-based economy, has made it willingto adopt unusual means to obtain defense technology,law-enforcement officials say -- and Americans are among itsmost frequent targets. The officials describe Israel as amonga handful of friendly countries -- including Pakistan, SouthKorea and France -- that have appeared intent on gainingaccess to American technology.   Opportunities are abundant. As a favored ally and customerof American defense contractors, Israel has easy access toweapons plants. Israeli scientists and military officers workside-by-side with American defense contractors engaged inclassified U.S. projects.   The matter has become even more urgent because ofarms-proliferation concerns in the wake of the Cold War.Although driven first by its own security concerns, Israelalso relies on weapons sales to sustain its industry andmilitary research. It maintains world-wide standing as anarms merchant, and has supplied weapons to China, forinstance, and to South Africa, even as Pretoria was helpingarm Iraq.   Yet while the U.S. has guarded against intelligencepenetration and technology theft by Israel, on another levelit has seemed willing to look the other way. In 1986, theU.S. investigated alleged efforts by Israel's militarymission in New York to illegally obtain U.S. technology formaking cluster bombs, but law-enforcement officials said theyhad to scrap the potential prosecution because of diplomaticconcerns. The State Department, says former U.S. CustomsChief William von Raab, &quot;guillotined&quot; the case. AbrahamSofaer, the legal counsel to the State Department at thetime, says that there may have been legitimate questions ofdiplomatic immunity involved, but that no one in thedepartment undermined the inquiry.   Israeli officials point out that their defense industryhas shown itself skilled at adapting technology as well asmaking breakthroughs on its own. They say the U.S. hasbenefited from Israeli advances, most recently in the GulfWar. Israel's defenders also say that some U.S. officials maybe suspicious of the country in part because it enjoysconsiderable support in Congress. This political clout canbreed resentment in Executive Branch agencies that controlmilitary technology. &quot;There is sort of a whiplash effect,&quot;says Mr. Sofaer. &quot;Israel is treated preferentially inCongress and the bureaucracy reacts&quot; unfavorably.   The friction over espionage and technology contrasts witha history of cooperation between U.S. and Israeli spyservices. Soviet weapons captured by Israel in Lebanon laterserved to arm U.S.-backed anti-Sandinista forces inNicaragua. In a 1983 memo, Robert McFarlane, then nationalsecurity adviser, mused that whenever Congress increased aidto Israel, Israel perhaps should divert the added funds toU.S. operations in Central America.   But at the same time, U.S. officials say Israel typicallymaintains two sets of intelligence stations -- one recognizedand one secret -- even in friendly nations. Over the years ithas been apparent to old counterespionage hands just howactive Israel has been even in the U.S. As head of theJustice Department's internal security section, John Davitthad a front-row seat. Though the Soviet Union was &quot;lightyears ahead of Israel,&quot; says Mr. Davitt, who retired in 1980,&quot;those of us who worked in the espionage area regarded Israelas being the second most active foreign intelligence servicein the United States.&quot;   Today, former intelligence officials say they aren't awareof any active programs to combat alleged Israeli spying. Aformer FBI official says Israel isn't considered a &quot;hostile&quot;country, and isn't on the Justice Department list ofcountries to be watched.   Yet during the late 1960s and early 1970s, according toseveral former senior U.S. officials, the FBI and militaryintelligence worked in a secretive counter-espionage programknown as Scope. U.S. agents kept periodic tabs on theactivities of some Americans whom they say Israel wasattempting to recruit, especially military and corporatepersonnel. Officials say Israel in part was motivated by adesire to obtain sensitive military technology through theback doors of corporations.   According to one retired high-level military intelligenceofficial, Israel was attempting to recruit young Americans incolleges and military academies &quot;for long-term use. . .downthe road.&quot; In some cases, he says, &quot;we approached theindividual {target} and neutralized the situation. We wouldtell them, `You are under possible assessment by a foreignintelligence operation. If you are approached, let us know.'&quot;He says many targets were unaware they were being recruited.   A former Air Force counter-intelligence official adds thatScope &quot;was primarily the collection of information,indicating what they were doing and where they were doingit.&quot; He adds, &quot;Of course, it was terribly politicallysensitive because we were great friends with the Israelis.&quot;Some former intelligence officials say investigative leadscame from electronic surveillance that the FBI placed on theIsraeli Embassy and other facilities.   Scope was closed down in the early 1970s because ofconcerns that investigators might be violating Americans'constitutional rights, according to a former U.S. official.The &quot;net was too broadly cast,&quot; he says. &quot;They were pickingup people they did not intend to pick up.&quot; Asked about this,current FBI officials say they don't comment on &quot;pastoperational matters.&quot;   Former intelligence officials say the later Pollard spycase was a classic example of what Scope had been designed todetect and prevent. Israel maintains that Mr. Pollard waspart of a rogue intelligence operation within its Ministry ofDefense -- an explanation that most U.S. officials dismissout of hand.   The man who knows most of the answers about the Pollardcase, Rafi Eitan, a former spy and counter-terrorism adviserto Israeli prime ministers, isn't saying much -- even today,years after the operation he masterminded was exposed, toIsrael's great embarrassment. &quot;I covered for others, but Idon't want to elaborate,&quot; he says during a two-hour interviewin his home in a Tel Aviv suburb. &quot;I wouldn't help myself andwould harm others&quot; by discussing the Pollard case.   Mr. Eitan, a short, balding man of 65, spent years workingin Israeli intelligence, including the elite Mossad, gaininga wide array of contacts in high levels of the U.S.intelligence community. He won everlasting fame in Israelafter he helped capture the Nazi war criminal Adolph Eichmannin 1960.   &quot;Rafi Eitan is one of the best people in the{intelligence} business,&quot; says a former senior U.S. officialwho knows him well. Indeed, while Mr. Eitan in the mid-1980swas directing the Pollard operation as the head of Lakam, asince-disbanded intelligence unit in the Defense Ministry, hewas cultivating important friends in the Reaganadministration and the intelligence community.   A former senior Pentagon official felt a chill from one ofMr. Eitan's approaches. After the Pollard case broke, NoelKoch, a former Pentagon official involved incounter-terrorism policy, reported to superiors that hebelieved Mr. Eitan had tried some months earlier to recruithim for activities that Mr. Koch feared were improper. Aformer Pentagon official says Mr. Eitan's lure included whatMr. Koch saw as an improbable scheme to use money to obtainfreedom for U.S. hostages in the Middle East. In a memo tohis superiors, Mr. Koch described the overture, which, hesaid, occurred in a Tel Aviv lounge.   Another former Pentagon official, Richard Armitage, now asenior State Department official, who was Mr. Koch's boss atthe Defense Department, confirms that Mr. Koch was &quot;afraid&quot;that Mr. Eitan had tried to lead him astray. Mr. Eitandeclines to comment on the Koch matter.   It is against this backdrop of years of spy-vs.-spyintrigue that the Recon/Optical industrial-espionage casecame to light. The case involved an aerial reconnaissancesystem that the American company was building for Israelunder the U.S. military-aid program. The project includedproviding Israel with two cameras, a ground station and acommunications system.   Recon later alleged that when it caught Israeli Air Forceofficers removing confidential technical drawings from itsplant in Barrington, it also determined that restrictedinformation had already been shipped to Israel. Recon claimedthat Israeli Air Force officers passed along propriety datato a competing Israeli company so the competitor could makethe system on its own. Recon alleged that the company, El OpElectro-Optics Industries Ltd., an Israeli defense contractorthat also does work for the U.S., participated in the scheme.   El Op's former managing director, Nathan Sharoni, says inan interview, &quot;There was no conspiracy between the Air Forceand El Op, to my best understanding. Nobody wanted to stealthe technology of Recon/Optical.&quot;   After reviewing evidence, the three-man panel from theAmerican Arbitration Association found that Israeli Air Forceofficers had, in fact, worked hand-in-hand with El Op tosteal Recon's secret plans. At one point during theclandestine operation of more than one year, Israeli militaryofficers stationed in Recon's facility were asked by El Op toplant an &quot;undercover&quot; El Op representative on the project,according to Israeli documents that Recon filed in the case.Questions from El Op officials were transferred to themilitary officers by Israeli Air Force intelligenceoperatives. El Op and military officers also discussed&quot;cover&quot; stories to mask their stealing, the documents show.   After presiding over four years of secret litigation, thearbitrators ordered Israel to pay Recon $3 million, plusinterest dating to June 1986, for what it described as thecovert &quot;misappropriation&quot; of the company's proprietary data.At the heart of the theft, they said, was data onsophisticated semiconductor chips critical to electronicallyrecording and transmitting the camera images.   The arbitrators had few kind words for Israel, bluntlyadmonishing it for &quot;perfidious,&quot; &quot;unlawful&quot; and&quot;surreptitious&quot; behavior in filching Recon's data. Notably,in a portion of its decision handed down in November 1988,the panel also criticized Recon for unilaterally breaking its$44.8 million contract with Israel during the initialcommercial dispute over the cost of the project -- theconflict that led to discovery of Israel's espionage. Itlater also chastised the company for &quot;casual&quot; and &quot;slipshod&quot;protection of its data.   The arbitrators held that the operation hadn't beensanctioned by senior Israeli officials. But they pointedlysuggested that Israeli government officials sought to coverup the mess and withhold information that might have shedlight on the theft. This conduct, the panel said, was&quot;extremely unfortunate.&quot; In perhaps their most damningcomment, the arbitrators said that Israeli Air Force officersassigned to monitor the project with Recon were laterdisciplined not for the theft, but for letting the theft cometo light.   In this regard, the arbitrators observed that MottiHarkabi, described as an Air Force officer and one of the&quot;direct perpetrators&quot; of the theft, was soon employed onIsrael's new contract to re-procure the camera system fromanother company, Loral Fairchild Systems in New York. &quot;I wasan engineer,&quot; Mr. Harkabi said in a brief telephoneinterview, &quot;not a spy.&quot;   The Customs Service briefly investigated the Recon affairin 1986. A senior Customs official says the case would havebeen difficult to prosecute but suggests that the inquirydied from &quot;a lack of interest&quot; by U.S. officials to pursuesuch cases. Customs, he says, requested a ruling from theadministration on whether the Recon manufacturing datarequired a U.S. export license, but never got an answer.   The covert efforts to steal Recon's data coincided withIsrael's interest in a larger and much more sensitivetactical intelligence program being developed by the U.S. inthe same period. Known today as the Joint Services ImageProcessor, or JSIP, the classified system is intended tospeed the transmission of data from reconnaissance flights toa sophisticated ground station, weighing the data with otheravailable intelligence.   For example, optical, radar, and infrared sightings couldbe made of SCUD missile launchers. Then, by melding thethree, the ground station could determine which sites weredecoys and advise a field commander where to most effectivelytarget forces. The technology is advanced and the design ofthe program is carefully guarded; access would give anyforeign power an understanding of the secret formats used bythe U.S. to transmit data and the capabilities it hasachieved in reconnaissance and sensors.   Despite this sensitivity, written testimony and evidencesubmitted in the Recon case indicate that Israeli militaryofficials obtained access to secret documents related to JSIPat a critical juncture in the design process. The issuewasn't resolved by the arbitration panel, but a Reconexecutive, John Whyte, said in written testimony submitted tothe arbitrators that Israel appeared to have copied in 1985the U.S. design in shaping its own program, dubbed RemoteImaging System, or RIS.   According to that testimony, Israel purportedly told Reconthat RIS was the product of intense work by one of its owndefense officers, assisted by a subsidiary of Israel MilitaryIndustries, then a part of the Defense Ministry. But Mr.Whyte testified that he was told later by an American firm inthe JSIP program that the Israeli proposal was in fact a&quot;close copy&quot; of a JSIP proposal circulated by the U.S. AirForce in the same period.   Mr. Whyte testified that he subsequently received adeclassified briefing on JSIP and concluded that the U.S. andIsraeli designs were so similar that it was &quot;extremelyunlikely&quot; the similarities were &quot;mere happenstance.&quot; The RISproposal was sent to many of the same companies involved inJSIP, and his affidavit said there were &quot;multipleindications&quot; that Israel's purpose was really to ferret outmore information on the secret U.S. program.   The U.S. Air Force confirms that a secret design proposalrelated to the JSIP program was sent to American companies inOctober 1985, or shortly before Mr. Whyte's testimony saysthe first drafts of the Israeli RIS proposal began to appearin November to December 1985. The U.S. package was classifiedsecret and had attachments of more sensitive material aswell. A specific &quot;No Foreign&quot; prohibition was included, theAir Force said.   Air Force officials say Israel has begun in the past yearto explore acquiring the technology from the JSIP programthrough official channels. Gen. Kenneth Israel, who oversawthe project from May 1985 to May 1989, says he doesn't&quot;recall ever giving the country of Israel any information&quot; toassist it with its RIS design proposal.   The case takes on significance, in part, because it mayillustrate how Israel carefully tracks some U.S. defenseprojects. And while it is unclear how Israel allegedlyobtained the information it used for its RIS proposal, U.S.officials say that in some cases American defense contractorsare careless and improperly share confidential data withforeign countries to generate business.   Recon's Mr. Whyte declined to comment for this article.Israeli officials refuse to comment, except to defend theintegrity of their RIS program and to insist that theft isn'tthe Israeli way.   &quot;You don't take any shortcuts,&quot; insists a senior Israelidefense official, speaking broadly of dealings with the U.S.&quot;You have to risk suicide, to be a gambler, to takeshortcuts.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>