<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910114-0028</DOCNO><DOCID>910114-0028.</DOCID><HL>   Make Your Environment Dirtier -- Recycle   ----   By Lynn Scarlett</HL><DATE>01/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)CONTAINERS andamp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)</IN><LP>   Some 40 states now have recycling laws. A handful havebanned specific products, with certain plastics anddisposable diapers targeted most often. Others haveimplemented deposit-refund systems. California is evenconsidering a special &quot;disposal fee&quot; on virtually allproducts, to be paid at the point of purchase.   The federal government is likely soon to begin draftingnew solid-waste regulations. High on the list will beproposals for all states to reach specified recycling levels.At the same time, policies to facilitate disposal will beignored, or even undermined with regulations restricting theinterstate transfer of solid waste.</LP><TEXT>   Yet this regulatory fervor is ill-conceived. Recycling isonly a second-order goal. The more basic objective is topursue the efficient use of all resources.   In my hometown of Santa Barbara, Calif., four years ofdrought have left us scrambling for water. Recyclingrequirements that might induce consumers to switch towashable cloth diapers from disposable ones would mean morelocal water consumption -- all with the aim of saving onlandfill space that, if not abundant, is nonethelessreasonably available.   Mandated recycling policies, designed to save landfillspace (or trees, or whatever), actually require, for manycities, the expenditure of more resources at a time whenmunicipal budgets are already strained. One New Jersey studyshowed recycling programs sometimes cost cities $200 per tonof materials collected. Even in New Jersey, with the highestlandfill disposal costs in the nation, this cost exceeds theamount required to simply landfill trash. Even low-pricedrecycling programs, at $40 per ton, cost more than theaverage landfill fee of $28 per ton.   Curbside recycling programs put more collection trucks --one set to pick up recyclables, another for the remainingwaste -- on the road. This means more fuel consumption, whichmeans more air pollution. And some recycling processesproduce high volumes of water waste and are energy intensive.In short, what saves landfill space may use more water orfuel.   Recycling does sometimes make sense, of course, and themarketplace stimulates recycling under these conditions. Therecycled aluminum can, for example, requires less than 10% ofthe energy necessary to transform bauxite into aluminum.These savings have given industry an incentive to purchaserecycled aluminum, which in turn gives entrepreneurs anincentive to collect used cans.   A few decades ago soda cans were made of heavy tinplatewith soldered lead side seams. As manufacturers looked forway to cut costs, they engineered lighter weight cans. Theintroduction of aluminum cans resulted in a decadelongcompetition between steel-can and aluminum-can manufacturersto bring the costs of their products down. The three-piecesteel can gave way to the two-piece can; the soldered sideseams gave way to adhesive bonding.   The aluminum can, too, underwent a series of changes --all the result of competitive processes. In the '60s,squashing a soda can was a sign of virility among teenageboys. It took real muscle to crush a can. Try the same deedtoday. A middle-aged, out-of-shape man (or woman) can crushthe soda can one-handed and then, Godzilla-like, tear it intotwo pieces.   What happened in the intervening years? New processingtechniques reduced the thickness of the can. In the '60s ittook 164 pounds of aluminum to make 1,000 cans. It now takesonly 35 pounds. Competition resulted in conservation.   Product bans and waste reduction engineered by governmentcentral planners interrupt this process and force inefficientproduction. Maine, for example, recently banned asepticpackages -- those little juice boxes -- under the excuse thatthey are nonrecyclable. This ban has forced out of themarketplace a product that emerged from the continuous searchby manufacturers for less-costly packaging.   This search for cost reduction has meant decreases inenergy usage and waste. Filling aseptic packages requiresabout half the energy needed to fill glass bottles.Transporting the aseptic package from its manufacturer to thebottling site also dramatically reduces resource use,primarily fuel. For a given beverage volume, it takes 15times as many trucks to transport empty glass bottles thanaseptic boxes.   Because the end-product is lightweight, small andrectangular, the filled aseptic package can be moreefficiently transported, as well, using 35% less energy perunit than alternative glass packages. And the asepticcontainer is the only one in which dairy products can bepackaged without requiring refrigeration -- again savingenergy and reducing the need for CFC-using refrigerants.   Several cities -- for example, Portland, Ore., and Newark,N.J. -- have essentially banned polystyrene food packages,yet a Franklin Associates comparison of polystyrene packagingand its alternative, paperboard containers, showed that thepolystyrene hamburger clamshell uses 30% less energy thanpaperboard. Its manufacturing results in 46% less airpollution, and 42% less water pollution.   Much of the so-called excess packaging condemned by thecurrent environmental movement conserves resources byreducing breakage or spoilage. The U.S. produces less foodwaste than anywhere else in the world except parts of Africa,where the threat of starvation means even rotten food isconsumed.   Recycling has symbolic appeal -- it makes us feel virtuousand frugal. Product bans and waste-reduction mandates seem toput the environment first, efficiency second. But the two --environmental protection and economic efficiency -- aren'treally competitors. In a market economy, prices containinformation about the relative scarcities of resources -- allresources, including labor, land, materials, capital andenergy. The search for cost-effectiveness thus drives ustoward, not away from, environmental conservation.   In the real world, there are, of course, all sorts ofimpediments to competition. And some &quot;scarce resources&quot; --like air basins -- don't figure into the process well, hencethe drive for regulatory standards. But the processes ofproducing, using and disposing of consumer goods that are nowthe target of solid-waste regulations have none of thehallmarks of public goods. Competition exists. Andregulations are already in place that incorporate the costsof protecting health and safety in disposal.   If there is a problem in this picture, it is that too manylocal governments have failed to charge anything -- oranything like the actual costs -- for collecting anddisposing of garbage. Cities such as Baltimore, Denver andLos Angeles do not directly charge households for garbagecollection. In fact, a study of more than 200 U.S. citiesfound that 39% charge no direct fees at all for garbageservice, giving consumers little incentive to &quot;conserve&quot; ontheir waste production. Instituting pricing for collectionand disposal will remedy that. Seattle's introduction ofper-can charges a few years ago encouraged more than 70% ofall residents to recycle and reduce waste.   Product bans and the mandated use of certain materials notonly reduce competition and undermine the drive towardresource conservation and efficiency, but they also neglectthe big environmental picture. They treat one resource,landfills, as the most important, while failing to considerthe whole set of resources that any product uses from itsinitial production, through its consumption, and then on toits disposal. The result? We get bans of aseptic packagesbecause they are not recyclable, although they conserve otherresources, especially energy.   The goal of efficiency doesn't have the same emotionalring as &quot;saving the planet.&quot; But this seemingly mundane goal,sought in the context of competition, yields resourceconservation. That, not recycling, is the fundamental goal.   ---   Ms. Scarlett, vice president of research at the SantaMonica, Calif.-based Reason Foundation, is author of severalstudies on solid-waste management policy.</TEXT></DOC>