<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910709-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>910709-0095.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Many House Democrats Seize Race for Chief Whip   As Chance to Express Ire About Party's Direction   ----   By Jackie Calmes   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- For House Democrats, there's no escape thisweek from reminders of the continuing ferment within theirranks.   Tomorrow, they'll watch as a portrait of former SpeakerJames Wright is unveiled at the Capitol, two years after hisbrief reign ended in scandal. Then, on Thursday, they mustchoose between two liberals, David Bonior of Michigan andSteny Hoyer of Maryland, to be majority whip -- thethird-ranking leadership job, which opened up with thesurprise retirement of Pennsylvania Rep. William Gray.</LP><TEXT>   Despite the trauma of the Wright era, there's just a touchof nostalgia for it among many House Democrats these days.Liberals long for the hot-blooded zest with which the Texandrove legislation and battled GOP presidents. Southernersgrouse that they go unheard, because Rep. Wright's exit hasleft them without a place in the top ranks for the first timein more than a half-century. Women and black members, too,vie for a place at the table.   Now, faced with a choice between Reps. Bonior and Hoyerthat poses few stark contrasts in ideology, many Democratshave seized on the race for their chief vote-counter as achance to vent their dissatisfaction with the party'sdirection under Speaker Thomas Foley of Washington andMajority Leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri.   &quot;That's not an uncommon phenomenon in leadership races,and that's clearly the case here,&quot; says Rep. Bonior, theapparent front-runner who is currently the chief deputy whip.He adds, &quot;I've gotten an earful over the last couple ofmonths now.&quot;   So has Rep. Hoyer, the fourth-ranking leader as chairmanof the House Democratic Caucus. He pledges to help bring &quot;asharper image for the party, and one that each member'sdistrict will relate to.&quot;   In important ways, though, both candidates also personifytheir party's current problems. Mr. Bonior promises greateractivism even as he runs with the backing of most of thecommittee chairmen, who equate such activism with meddling ontheir turf. Meanwhile, Mr. Hoyer is receiving covertassistance from some of the same special interests -- theIsrael lobby and women's groups -- that critics say hold theparty in thrall. And both candidates are busily promising allfactions of the party, from Black Caucus liberals to Southernconservatives, that their views will be heeded.   Both men see potential to galvanize and unify HouseDemocrats around such issues as health-care reforms andmiddle-class tax breaks. But the current leadership likewisehas made those issues its goals, only to be stymied bydisagreements over details. And agenda items that most rileSoutherners, such as bills for civil rights and againststriker replacements, are critical to many liberals and laborallies.   Adding to the stakes in the race is the conjecture thatMajority Leader Gephardt, No. 2 in the House hierarchy, coulddecide as early as this fall to run for president again. Thenew whip gains a leg up in any succession contest.   Rep. Hoyer's camp has cast the race as Old Bulls vs. YoungTurks, a theme with potential in a year in which Democratsdumped two aging, weak chairmen. And, in fact, Rep. Bonior'sbackers include such powerful House barons as fellowMichigander John Dingell, chairman of the Energy and Commercepanel, and Illinois Rep. Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of thetax-writing Ways and Means Committee.   But Rep. Bonior also has backing among party firebrands,and is known himself as an impassioned advocate, even of lostcauses. Considered politically vulnerable in his blue-collar,suburban Detroit district until last year, he nonetheless ledthe fights against President Reagan's bids to aid Nicaragua'srebels, and in the end helped broker a compromise.   Two years ago, Rep. Bonior lost the whip's race to Rep.Gray, who already had many Democrats' pledges in hand. Thistime, Rep. Bonior got the head start, and he now claims 160votes; 136 votes are needed for a majority of the 267Democrats and four delegates. Rep. Hoyer, a late entrant,insists that the candidates are evenly split at about 125votes, with the remaining Democrats undecided.   With little that divides the two men politically, thecontrasts are ones of style. Here the advantage goes to Rep.Bonior, 46, a sad-faced, intensely private man whonevertheless is widely popular after 14 years. Rep. Hoyer, 52and a gregarious back-slapper, was the youngest-everpresident of Maryland's Senate before his election to theHouse a decade ago. But he strikes even his fellowpoliticians as too glib and ambitious. Like Rep. Bonior onthe Rules Committee, he has been mostly an inside operator onthe Appropriations panel. To outsiders, he is best known forshepherding a 1990 rights bill for the disabled through theHouse.   Despite their similar records, Rep. Hoyer has used threeissues -- abortion, Israel and defense -- to woo theuncommitted.   Rep. Bonior is anti-abortion, a stance he believes hascost him as many as eight votes among the mostlyabortion-rights Democrats. He tells abortion-rights advocatesthat, as whip, &quot;I'll express the views of the party, but Iwill reserve my right to vote my conscience.&quot;   On the Middle East, Rep. Bonior says he supports Israel'ssecurity but will continue to stand up for Arab rights. Thecongressman has bucked the strong pro-Israel lobby, just lastmonth voting against Israel's settlements in its occupiedterritories. Some in the Israel lobby worked against him twoyears ago. Douglas Bloomfield, a former official with theAmerican Israel Public Affairs Committee and now a columnistfor Jewish newspapers, says, &quot;There is an immense amount ofconcern among friends of Israel.&quot;   In running this time, Rep. Bonior met privately with Aipaclobbyist Thomas Dine, who insists, &quot;Aipac will not, does not,take a position on these things.&quot; However, Mr. Dine told Rep.Bonior that he couldn't control the actions of individualswithin his group -- and in fact, some Jewish contributors andpolitical activists have contacted undecided lawmakers topress Mr. Hoyer's case.   Rep. Sam Gejdenson of Connecticut, a Bonior supporter whois the son of Holocaust survivors, says efforts by outsidersto affect leadership races &quot;don't have an impact, becausethis is an inside game.&quot;   On defense issues, Rep. Hoyer has been marginally lessliberal than Rep. Bonior -- supporting the MX missile, forexample. That has helped him with more conservative members,especially in the South, who complain that they are isolatedfrom the current leaders. &quot;They don't have anyone in the roomwho understands the philosophy of the moderates and canadvocate it,&quot; says Rep. Pete Geren, a Hoyer supporter who isRep. Wright's successor in his Fort Worth district. &quot;Worse,there's disdain in the caucus for the whole moderateviewpoint.&quot;   Like Southerners, black and female representatives alsofeel left out. As a result, they have been pressing to expandthe leadership with new, appointive spots reserved for thehave-nots. The final call is Speaker Foley's, but theprospect has whetted ambitions, adding subplots to the whipstory.   Connecticut Rep. Barbara Kennelly, a Hoyer supporter,wants to be the caucus vice chairman if he wins. That assumesthat Rep. Vic Fazio, who declined the whip race and helpeddeliver many of his fellow Californians to his friend Mr.Hoyer, would be elected to replace him as caucus chairman.Meanwhile, New York Rep. Edolphus Towns, the chairman of theCongressional Black Caucus, says most of its members supportRep. Bonior -- and at least four of them would like toreplace him as chief deputy whip.</TEXT></DOC>