<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900611-0155</DOCNO><DOCID>900611-0155.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Wellesley and Barbara Bush Redux</HL><DATE>06/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><LP>   In response to Enola G. Aird's May 8 editorial-pagearticle &quot;Feminism's Skewed Definition at Wellesley&quot;: Thedebate at Wellesley centered around the appropriateness ofBarbara Bush as a graduation speaker for a group of women whohave completed four years of a unique education. Thiseducation is based on the philosophy that women historicallyhave made valuable contributions in all areas of societyincluding business, politics, law, medicine and family.   Their contributions often have been unnoticed orunappreciated, but attest endlessly to their abilities.Wellesley women are encouraged to use their talents andskills in striving to accomplish whatever their goals andaspirations may be, regardless of the barriers with whichthey are faced. They have become successful writers,actresses, lawyers, bankers, politicians and educators. Inaddition, many have become important community volunteers.Many of these women are also mothers and homemakers.</LP><TEXT>   With so many accomplished women from whom to select, whythen did the students choose Barbara Bush? Mrs. Bush was borninto a wealthy family and dropped out of college to marryinto another fortunate position. Perhaps she is a goodmother. No one doubts her dedication to public service.However, her ability to give is not based on her own, earnedaccomplishments but on those of her husband and her family.Mrs. Bush's achievements are derived from a class status thatallows her the time, money and luxury to be a full-timemother and volunteer. I do not mean to belittle hercontributions, for they are noble and valuable. I believe,however, that her activities did not qualify her to speak tothe graduating class of 1990.   Rebecca A. Hatch   Wellesley Class of 1987   New York   ---   It's about time we moms at home stood up for ourselves andMs. Aird did that beautifully.   I am sick of living in a community and a country wheresnotty feminists are allowed to dominate public opinion withtheir narrow outlook. I am a college graduate who gave uppursuing a second degree to stay home and care for mychildren, and few of my &quot;enlightened&quot; professors or fellowstudents could understand why I would be content being afull-time mom. Yet I can't think of a better use for mylearning than to benefit my family. After all, anybody can bea doctor, lawyer, secretary, etc. these days, but nobody elsecan be Mom to my children.   It is interesting to note that the decline of marriage andfamily has paralleled the decline in the number of women athome. Despite an increased number of college graduates (a&quot;smarter&quot; population, you might say), families seem to besuffering more. I await Ms. Aird's &quot;Militant Mothering,&quot; butwith such blind and deaf opponents the battle should be easyto win.   Barbara L. Wiedenbeck   Waunakee, Wis.   ---   Ms. Aird misinterprets the thrust of the protest asprimarily anti-motherhood, misrepresents all Wellesleystudents as full of &quot;disdain for women who choose to care fortheir children full-time,&quot; and ends her convoluted argumentby accusing the protesters of somehow devaluing children. Herreaction to what she perceives as the protesters' lack ofrespect for motherhood is written in anI'm-not-gonna-take-it-anymore rhetoric usually reserved forflag-burning, drug-dealing terrorists. But she neglects toaddress the point most central to the protest: AlthoughBarbara Bush is now an advocate of education in her campaignsfor literacy, she dropped out of college to marry herhusband. Because she did not ever complete her collegedegree, she is an inappropriate role model for a graduationceremony of a women's college. She lacks the one valueobviously shared by the Wellesley Class of '90: a commitmentto women's higher education.   Celeste A. Cleary   Brooklyn, N.Y.   ---   Ms. Aird has indeed been fortunate in receiving a fineeducation, practicing her profession, and being able to be afull-time mother and serve her community. However, most youngwomen today do not have those choices.   My own experience has run the gamut: full-time mother andcommunity volunteer, three children, back to graduate school,divorce, and working outside my profession to support myfamily. Frankly, although Barbara Bush is an admirableperson, she does not represent a role model to me, mydaughter or her contemporaries. Accomplishments like hers arecelebrated -- when community activists are recognized and onMother's Day -- but not at college commencements.   Let's face it -- women today still have a difficult timebeing recognized as equals in so many fields. New graduatesneed to hear from women who have faced those obstacles andtriumphed in spite of them. They need that inspiration.   Kathy Kaufman   Livermore, Calif.   ---   Mrs. Bush's role as the mother at home is fast becomingobsolete. For me, the alternative of not working has neverbeen an option, nor has it been, nor will it be, for agrowing portion of American women. Both Mrs. Bush and Ms.Aird have that option. That is wonderful. But the simplefacts now are that living costs have gone so high that mostfamilies cannot exist on one income. A few months ago, Ilistened with amazement when Mrs. Bush told an interviewer onpublic radio that women with young children should not beworking for that extra television set. My salary -- I shoutedto the radio -- pays the mortgage] And, I know I am not theexception.   So, the real question facing most of the new mothers ofthis generation which includes these Wellesley graduates --is not whether full-time motherhood is a waste of talent.That is not the issue here. Many of these graduates, like me,are going to have to continue to work when their children areborn and when they are young. There will be no choice. Theproblems that cry out for more attention -- to name a few --include support from business for the working mother orfather, more child-care options and more job flexibility.   Eileen E. Spinner   Mother and Wife and Senior Economist   Nakagama andamp; Wallace Inc.   New York</TEXT></DOC>