<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920317-0079</DOCNO><DOCID>920317-0079.</DOCID><HL>   Going It Alone:   As He Builds a Nation,   Ukraine Chief Becomes   Thorn in Yeltsin's Side   ---   Kravchuk Defies the Russians   On Rubles and Nukes, Is   Slow to Reform Economy   ---   Shifting With Political Winds   ----   By Laurie Hays   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/17/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)RUSSIA (RS)UKRAINE (UKR)COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (UR)</RE><LP>   KIEV -- In 1989, two years before Ukraine made its finalbreak from the Soviet Union, the Communist Party selectedLeonid Kravchuk, a little-known apparatchik, for a specialmission. His job: confront the group that was pushing forUkrainian independence, discredit its leaders and stop themovement.   A gifted public speaker, Mr. Kravchuk slammed thenationalists in private meetings and on television. He becameknown as the man who hated nationalism. He said Rukh, thegroup leading the independence movement, was ruining theideals of the Communist Party.</LP><TEXT>   But behind the scenes, the affable bureaucrat was playinga clever game. Unlike other party officials, he saw thefuture in the independence movement. He switched to speakingUkrainian instead of Russian and began a private dialoguewith independence leaders, secretly arranging for Rukh tohold its first mass convention.   Today, Mr. Kravchuk is the president of an independentUkraine and arguably the most powerful figure in the newCommonwealth of Independent States after Russia's PresidentBoris Yeltsin. Whatever happens next in the former Sovietempire is likely to bear the mark of this crafty,unpredictable politician.   The one-time servant of Moscow played a key role infinally bringing an end to the Soviet Union's agonies lastfall. Now, on the eve of an important meeting of Commonwealthleaders this Friday, he is setting an agenda that could pushthe alliance close to a breaking point. He is establishingUkraine's own army and its own currency, thus puttingpressure on other republics to do the same.   Mr. Kravchuk also has challenged Mr. Yeltsin's leadershipby refusing to continue sending nuclear weapons stored inUkraine to Russia for dismantling. Moscow's IndependentNewspaper recently named him &quot;nemesis of the month&quot; forstirring up so much trouble.   In the past, Mr. Kravchuk has been able to outsmart hisopponents. The question now is whether the 58-year-oldleader, an accomplished chess player, will prove as clever atmoving around the political pieces left over from the SovietUnion's breakup.   Mr. Kravchuk's task is to remake Ukraine as aneconomically viable democracy, free of Russia. &quot;It won't beeasy to defend our statehood. It means defending its culture,its land and everything that's connected to our life,&quot; thepresident says, seated at a round table in the capitalbuilding as bodyguards stand at the door. His plan, he saysvaguely, is to employ &quot;wise, balanced policies. We must bewiser than Moscow. Only then can we win.&quot;   Of all the new nations born on the Soviet Union's ashpile, Ukraine has perhaps the best chance of thriving. To theWest, it represents the potential of a major new tradingpartner. It has rich farmlands, coal and other minerals and abroad industrial base.   The region is important for another reason: 7% of theformer Soviet Union's nuclear weapons are stored there. Mr.Kravchuk shares control over the entire nuclear arsenal withMr. Yeltsin and the presidents of two other &quot;nuclear&quot;republics. He vows to destroy Ukraine's nuclear weapons by1994.   Reforming Ukraine will require considerable jugglingskills. Ukraine's industries aren't internationallycompetitive. Like the other former Soviet states, the regionfaces food shortages. In Kiev, some cars sit idle for lack ofgasoline. Buildings are often chilly and dark as a result ofefforts to conserve heating fuel and electricity.   Meanwhile, Mr. Kravchuk must placate Ukraine's 15different political groups. Most of them united behind himafter his election, yet any one of them has the potential topull the country apart. Mr. Kravchuk also faces the possiblesecession of Crimea, a Russian-dominated peninsula on theBlack Sea.   All this has Ukrainians -- and the rest of the world --wondering whether Mr. Kravchuk is up to the task. In person,he is disarmingly charming. Trim and of medium height, hewears nicely tailored double-breasted suits. His thick whitehair is carefully coiffed. His dark eyes make warm contactand he gives the impression of caring about people. He playschess as cautiously as he plays politics, often pittinghimself against a computer partner. Once, as part of a groupof players taken on simultaneously by former world championAnatoli Karpov, he managed a draw.   But many here question who is the real Mr. Kravchuk. Willhe prove to be a closet Communist, a nationalist, ademocratic reformer or simply an opportunist? Such questionssurround many of the pliable former Communists now in charge,even Mr. Yeltsin. &quot;Such a man {as Kravchuk} is born only onthe ruination of the Soviet empire. He is not the only one ofhis kind,&quot; says Yuri Shcherbak, Ukraine's environmentalminister.   But Mr. Kravchuk in particular defies easy definition. Theonly thing consistent about him is how inconsistent he hasbeen. &quot;This comes from Mr. Kravchuk's philosophy that aleader should feel the nation and go with the nation,&quot; saysIvan Plusch, chairman of Ukraine's parliament. &quot;I think aleader should lead the nation.&quot;   At times the new president has shown himself capable ofgreat cunning and grit. That came through in the way hehelped engineer the breakup of the Soviet Union last year.For months, Mr. Kravchuk, then chairman of the UkrainianSoviet republic's parliament, refused to support a new uniontreaty Mikhail Gorbachev was proposing as a way to preservethe U.S.S.R. In private, Mr. Gorbachev repeatedly told Mr.Kravchuk there could be no union without Ukraine. Hethreatened to squelch Ukrainian independence moves. Then camethe August coup attempt. After it failed, Mr. Gorbachev beganpleading publicly for Ukraine's support. Mr. Kravchuk had hisopponents where he wanted them.   &quot;I wanted them to say it out loud,&quot; Mr. Kravchuk recalls.&quot;Once they said the union couldn't exist without Ukraine, Isaid, `Okay, Ukraine is out.' I just had to wait for theright time to say this.&quot;   But many Ukrainians still mistrust Mr. Kravchuk for theway he waffled during the coup. Before it failed, Mr. Yeltsinclimbed atop a tank to denounce the plotters; Mr. Kravchukinitially went on television and merely repeated thestatement of coup leaders.   When a group of parliamentarians called on him to condemnthe plotters, his response was, &quot;What can I do?&quot; recallsSerheiy Molavaty, who was part of the group. Only on thesecond day, when it looked as if the coup would fail, did Mr.Kravchuk condemn it.   A top aide to Mr. Kravchuk, who was also there, says Mr.Kravchuk was waiting for the right time to make a move. Butmuch bitterness remains. &quot;I don't trust him,&quot; says Mr.Molavaty, &quot;even though he led us to independence. People . .. may change their behavior, but they don't change theirinternal nature.&quot;   In just the past week, Mr. Kravchuk surprised Westernnations by changing his position on Ukraine's nuclear arms,announcing he wouldn't send any more weapons to Russia fordismantling. Instead, he suggested Western countries shouldhelp Ukraine build its own dismantling facility. In anotherturnaround, he went back on his agreement to participate in ajoint military force for the commonwealth, saying insteadUkraine will set up its own army.   Mr. Kravchuk recognizes that a lack of convictions hascolored much of his life. He tells the story of how hismother used to try to get him to reflect on the icons shekept in her living room. &quot;She would say, `Sonny, sit down inthe corner,'&quot; he recalls. &quot;I knew why she wanted me to sitthere. Because of the icons. She wanted me to sit at leastfor a little while.&quot; He adds tenderly, &quot;She was a veryreligious person.&quot;   The new president confesses that, until recently, he wasafraid of Communists. He was born into Stalin's forcedcollectivization of Ukrainian peasants, in the former Polishvillage of Velykiy Zhytyn. His father died in World War II.His mother joined one of the first collective farms in theregion when his village was annexed after the war.   Mr. Kravchuk took the normal path of party members inschool, eventually becoming his republic's ideology chief. Hewould gather news editors in Kiev to dish out articles onbirthdays of various party leaders and instructions on suchmatters as how to play statements by Leonid Brezhnev.Nationalist-leaning editors got chastised. &quot;He was the normalexecutioner&quot; of the party line, recalls Vitaly Korotich, whoedited a Ukrainian magazine back then.   Mr. Kravchuk says he reached a turning point in 1987. Somescientists asked him for permission to research the greatfamine of the 1930s, in which an estimated seven millionUkrainians perished. Against party wishes, he ordered upthousands of documents and read them. In 1990, he permittedpublication of &quot;The Famine of 1932-33,&quot; a book thatdocumented Stalin's efforts to starve the Ukraine'spopulation into submission.   &quot;For the first time in my life -- and I was no longer ayoung man -- I felt the horror. I couldn't believe this hadhappened,&quot; Mr. Kravchuk says.   Today, he does his best to distance himself from his yearswith the party. He says it was never his job to dream upparty ideology. Opinions were &quot;poured into&quot; him, he says,until he no longer had ideas of his own. &quot;Even if you didn'tbelieve completely {in what the party was saying}, you beginto think that this does have some sense and nothing anydifferent exists,&quot; he says.   When Ukraine finally got its chance to elect a presidentlast year, Mr. Kravchuk drew 55% of the vote in a field ofsix candidates. John Hewko, an American lawyer who is helpingthe new nation draft a constitution, contends that Mr.Kravchuk's ability to play all sides makes him the right manfor the job. &quot;He is best for Ukraine now because this is avery complex society and this is not a time for radicalpolitical positions,&quot; Mr. Hewko argues.   Right now, Mr. Kravchuk is riding a wave of good will overindependence. Last December, 91% of the people voted to endalmost a thousand years of domination by others, includingRussia, Poland, the Austro-Hungarian empire and for a shorttime Nazi Germany.   Mr. Kravchuk has played the nationalist role effectively.Ukrainians leapt to his defense recently when he refused tospeak Russian on a recent trip to Germany. Mr. Kravchukwouldn't proceed until a Ukrainian interpreter could befound.   He has whipped up the most support defending Ukraine'sinterests against Russia. It isn't clear whether Mr. Kravchuksees the Commonwealth as a divorce court, as some Ukrainianswould like, or a permanent relationship, which others favor.He often says he won't let Russia impose any &quot;imperialistpositions&quot; on Ukraine. He wants Ukraine to get a 16% share ofthe former Soviet Union's property, including gold, embassiesand armed forces, in return for paying 16% of its $65 billionforeign debt.   Mr. Yeltsin's advisers say they don't doubt Ukraine willleave the Commonwealth if Mr. Kravchuk feels the relationshipwith Moscow is too big-brotherly. &quot;He wants to be independentof the Commonwealth, and we understand this,&quot; says GalinaStaravoitava, Mr. Yeltsin's adviser on ethnic affairs.   So far, Mr. Kravchuk hasn't proposed severing relations.But many Ukrainians believe the tensions with Russia aremaking life worse here. Ukraine is subsisting on a chaoticsystem of emergency coupons. Newspaper editors are forced togo begging to Moscow with Ukrainian sugar to exchange forpaper. Russia reduced oil shipments to Ukraine last year. Ina desperate move, Ukraine signed an oil deal with Iran.   For all his nationalist bluster, Mr. Kravchuk has yet tolay out a far-reaching economic reform the way Mr. Yeltsinhas in Russia. Mr. Kravchuk was forced into followingRussia's lead in freeing prices to prevent a run on Ukraineproducts. But most former Communist officials still holdtheir old government posts here. Mr. Kravchuk continues tosupport Prime Minister Vitold Fokin, a conservative who isseen as holding up moves toward a market economy.   The slow pace of reform riles some members of the Rukhindependence group. &quot;If you look at a map of Ukraine to seehow democratic it is, then three-quarters of the territoryshould be painted red or pink because, even today, they areunder control of our sovereign Ukraine communism,&quot; Rukhleader Vyacheslav Chornovil said to great applause at arecent convention. Mr. Chornovil is trying to build theopposition against Mr. Kravchuk.   But so far, Mr. Kravchuk's grip on this fledgling nationremains secure. And he remains confident of his ability toadapt to any situation that arises, just as he changed fromCommunist functionary to independence fighter. &quot;The older onegets, the more one changes,&quot; he says, &quot;The more one'sthinking can become profound.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>