<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911121-0018</DOCNO><DOCID>911121-0018.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>11/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   G-7 NATIONS SET strict terms on Soviet debt relief as Bushauthorized U.S. aid.   A spokesman for the republic of Byelorussia said G-7officials want almost half the Soviet gold reserves to serveas collateral for a debt package. Meanwhile, Bush authorizednearly $1.5 billion in grain and other credits. AgricultureSecretary Madigan said the package included $1.25 billion inloan guarantees to be divided among the 12 republics, and$165 million in grants to buy food.</LP><TEXT>   Gorbachev, warning of catastrophe, asked the SovietParliament to approve an emergency budget calling for a bigdeficit. The Russian republic said it would refuse to backthe budget plan.   ---   CRANSTON DEFENDED himself but accepted a rebuke fordealings with Keating.   The California senator accepted a rebuke from the SenateEthics Committee for his dealings with former thriftexecutive Keating. Cranston denied that his conduct violatedSenate norms. The panel presented its findings againstCranston, including a resolution reprimanding him forviolating &quot;commonly understood standards of Senate behavior&quot;by linking his official actions with fund raising.   The committee's action, which didn't require a vote by thefull Senate, concluded a two-year investigation of theso-called Keating Five.   ---   Bush advisers urged the president to issue an anti-quotadirective when he signs the civil rights bill today. Theproposed statement reportedly would direct federal officialsto abolish &quot;quota-type programs,&quot; an official said.Conservatives in the administration hoped to demonstrate thatBush didn't cave in to political pressure on rightslegislation.   ---   The U.S. is discussing with European nations the idea ofimposing sanctions on Libya -- possibly including an embargoon purchases of its oil -- if it maintains links toterrorists, officials said. The model for the oil-purchasecurbs would be U.N. sanctions imposed on Iraq after itinvaded Kuwait.   ---   The Michigan Board of Medicine voted unanimously tosuspend the license of Jack Kevorkian, a retired pathologistwho has helped three women commit suicide in the past twoyears. The board members said they wanted to send a messagethat Kevorkian's action was unacceptable. He is expected toappeal the ruling.   ---   The House passed a $270 billion military spending bill for1992 that preserves most of the Bush administration's topdefense priorities but halts, for now, production of the B-2bomber. The measure boosts spending for an anti-missiledefense system and continues production of the Navy's mostmodern strategic nuclear missile.   ---   U.S. lawmakers demanded that the Bush administration findan alternative to its policy of forcibly repatriating Haitianrefugees. Meanwhile, the administration announced it hadceased sending back the boat people, in compliance with atemporary restraining order in effect through Monday.   ---   The Senate confirmed William Barr to be U.S. attorneygeneral. Barr, who has been serving as acting attorneygeneral, succeeds Thornburgh, who left the post to wage anunsuccessful campaign for the Senate.   ---   North Korea agreed in principle to a call to rid theKorean peninsula of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons,according to government aides. If confirmed, such anagreement could signal a change in Pyongyang's resistance toa pact with Seoul on eliminating nuclear weapons.   ---   The U.N. is launching a push to free the remaining Westernhostages in Lebanon, diplomats said. U.N. envoy Picco is duein Tehran within days, hoping to secure Iran's help inwinning the release of three Americans and two Germans heldby pro-Iranian kidnappers. Picco has been working to arrangea swap of Mideast prisoners.   ---   The Soviet Union handed over to Sweden some 70 hithertosecret documents on the case of missing Swedish diplomatWallenberg. Wallenberg, who saved thousands of Hungarian Jewsfrom Nazi death camps, disappeared after Soviet troopsentered Budapest at the end of World War II.   ---   Fighting spread across the Yugoslav republic of Croatia asthe 13th cease-fire in the country's civil war crumbled.Croatian radio said federal artillery hit the port of Zadarand the eastern town of Osijek. Meanwhile, hundreds ofpatients were evacuated from a bombed-out hospital inVukovar, which fell to federal forces on Monday.   ---   A dissident Chinese journalist returned home to Beijing,saying she had been abducted on Saturday and taken to aseaside resort. Dai Qing had been preparing for a possiblemeeting with Secretary of State Baker, who visited China lastweekend.   ---   Suleyman Demirel took office as the leader of Turkey'sfirst coalition government since the 1970s. Demirel's32-member cabinet was approved by his political rival,President Ozal, whose party lost last month's generalelections.   ---   Hundreds of wounded people are filling the hospitals ofSomalia's capital, Mogadishu, as forces loyal to Gen. Aididbattle to take control of the city, relief workers said.Aidid reportedly ousted interim President Ali Mahdi onMonday, but shelling is said to continue in the capital.   ---   Congress is moving toward postponing the White House'scontroversial new rule that restricts the methods that can beused by individual states to finance the Medicaid health careprogram for the nation's poor.</TEXT></DOC>