<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910228-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>910228-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Iraqis Smashed in Tank Battles;   Bush Sets Conditions for Cease-Fire   ---   Saddam Hussein Said   To Comply With All   Resolutions of U.N.   ----   By Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The core of Saddam Hussein's army wasshattered in a series of large-scale tank battles, convincingU.S. commanders and President Bush that Iraq no longer posesa credible offensive threat to its neighbors.   An allied strike force of nearly 1,500 tanks and 150,000soldiers overwhelmed Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard,prompting President Bush to announce a cease-fire. The groundassault defeated at least five of the Guard's eight divisionsand tightened a noose around the remaining units. Althoughthere were reports of continued fighting late yesterdayevening in a few areas west of the Iraqi city of Basra,Pentagon officials said most Guard units still able tomaneuver were disorganized and simply searching for a way tosave equipment and retreat from the battlefield.</LP><TEXT>   In a televised address last night, President Bush declaredthat the allies would suspend offensive military operationsas of midnight last night -- just 100 hours after the groundwar was launched.   He said the suspension would remain in effect unless Iraqitroops shoot at coalition forces, or Iraq fires more Scudmissiles at any other nation. If Iraqi forces do either, hesaid, the allies will feel free to resume their punishingmilitary campaign.   The president added that, in order for Iraq to turn thesuspension into a formal cease-fire, four conditions must bemet. The Iraqi government, he said, must:   -- Release all allied prisoners, third-country nationals,Kuwaiti detainees and the remains of allied troops killed inaction.   -- Inform the allies of the location of all mines.   -- Comply with all United Nations resolutions, especiallythose annulling Iraq's annexation of Kuwait and requiringIraq to pay compensation to Kuwait and other countries. Latelast night it was reported that Iraq told the U.N. it wouldcomply with all the resolutions.   -- Designate military commanders to meet with alliedcommanders somewhere on the battlefield within 48 hours, todiscuss military aspects of a cease-fire.   The president didn't say what would happen if Iraq refusesto meet the conditions.   U.S. Army Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the mastermind of thefour-day ground campaign that paved the way for thesuspension of offensive operations, described the climacticclashes inside Iraq as &quot;a classic tank battle&quot; unmatchedsince World War II. The overall attack combined speed,overwhelming firepower and clever military ruses to pin downand confound the enemy. Relying on the U.S. M1A1 Army tanksand air power, the four-star general said, U.S. forces were&quot;outflanking (the Iraqis), taking them from the rear andusing our attack helicopters&quot; to comply with President Bush'sorders to &quot;put the Republican Guard out of business.&quot;   Pentagon officials, who had drafted contingency plans onthe assumption that the land war could last as long as twomonths, said that serious fighting probably would have beenover today even without Mr. Bush's announcement.   Allied forces have captured well over 50,000 Iraqiprisoners so far, and Gen. Schwarzkopf suggested that tens ofthousands of other enemy soldiers -- many already beingburied in mass graves near the trenches where they fell --may have died during the intense air war that preceded theground battles.   Mr. Bush's announcement last night means that the Pentagonshortly can begin bringing home many of the U.S. units thathave been deployed in the Gulf region since last summer andfall.   &quot;Soon we will open wide our arms to welcome back home toAmerica our magnificent fighting forces,&quot; the president toldthe nation.   The suspension of offensive operations also shouldsafeguard U.S. forces from the potentially dangerous andtime-consuming task of pursuing small-scale Iraqi unitstrying to flee into Basra or other parts of Iraq -- a riskyjob that senior U.S. commanders and their civilian bosses inthe Pentagon worried about and hoped to avoid from the momenthostilities broke out.   Gen. Schwarzkopf yesterday providing the first detailedpublic explanation of the strategy that produced theunexpectedly swift -- and, for the allies, almost painless --victory. The general was, in turn, feisty, humorous andopenly mocking of Saddam Hussein's leadership. &quot;He is neithera strategist . . . nor is he a tactician&quot; nor a competentgeneral, Gen. Schwarzkopf asserted, adding, &quot;Other than that,he's a great military man.&quot;   The fruits of the allied victory were evident in KuwaitCity, as jubilant citizens hugged and kissed U.S. and Arabsoldiers who were mopping up the last remnants of Iraqiresistance there. Disregarding muffled artillery andmachine-gun fire coming from the city's InternationalAirport, Kuwaitis danced and paraded in the streets,surrounded by bombed-out high-rise buildings.   Military analysts couldn't hide their amazement at theone-sided ground assault, in which 28 U.S. soldiers had beenkilled. &quot;What we accomplished is unbelievable,&quot; said militaryhistorian and retired Army Col. Harry Summers. &quot;I lost moremen in one day in a rifle company in Korea.&quot;   The timing of both the president's speech and Gen.Schwarzkopf's briefing underscored that the major goaldriving U.S. policy was the destruction of the RepublicanGuard as a major military force in the Middle East. Thedramatic tank battles, according to the general, have leftSaddam Hussein with too little top-notch equipment &quot;for himto be a regional offensive threat.&quot;   Indeed, a few hours before the military briefing in SaudiArabia, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said allied forces were&quot;on the verge of complete and total victory.&quot; Later in theday, Mr. Cheney received a standing ovation following abriefing for members of Congress about the battlefieldsuccesses. Military officials estimate that about 3,700 ofthe 4,200 tanks Iraq massed in and around Kuwait have beenput out commission, along with the vast majority of SaddamHussein's formidable artillery arsenal.   Gen. Schwarzkopf's glowing report stressed that thecenterpiece of the U.S.-conceived battle plan was a pair ofelaborate and painstakingly carried-out feints. One was thethreat of an amphibious Marine assault along Kuwait's heavilyfortified beaches, which turned Iraqi attention away fromground movements and tied down large numbers of Iraqisoldiers. The ruse prompted Saddam Hussein's generals todevote much of their time and scarce resources to shoring upcoastal defenses that ultimately were never used. And Gen.Schwarzkopf acknowledged that he relied heavily on thestrategy to prevent the Iraqis from shifting troops from thecoast to reinforce units facing actual allied assaults duringthe initial phase of the ground war.   There also were reports that worries about mine-infestedwaters may have cooled some of the Marine Corps' interest inattempting to storm Kuwait from the sea.   The other element of the deception was to convince Iraqigenerals that the main allied thrust would come on theeastern side of the front, along the Kuwaiti-Saudi border.The Seventh and 18th U.S. armored corps were held in thatarea until just before the ground war broke out. Then, theywere shifted further west for the actual attack. Some of theunits roared as much as 130 miles in a giant loop deep insideIraq to slam into the Republican Guard from the oppositedirection than the enemy expected.   The move meant that the allies -- particularly Frenchforces, heavy U.S. tank divisions and the Army's 101stAirborne division -- outflanked the Guard, cutting off itsroute home to Baghdad. During this maneuver, Gen. Schwarzkopfsaid, the allied forces were perfectly positioned to make adash toward Baghdad without meeting any significantopposition. &quot;If it had been our intention to destroy thecountry&quot; or occupy it, the general told reporters, &quot;we couldhave done it unopposed for all intents and purposes.&quot;   The Republican Guard units involved in the tank battleswere described by U.S. officials as well equipped, well fedand highly motivated. Most of their equipment was intactdespite weeks of bombing raids because it had been wellcamouflaged and spread over a large area.   One of the heaviest battles reportedly occurred 50 mileswest of Basra, where the Guard's Hammurabi Division wasbelieved trying to screen the retreat of other units towardthe northeast. U.S. units, including the Third ArmoredDivision, threw more than 470 M1A1 tanks and hundreds ofarmored vehicles against an estimated 250 to 300 Soviet-madeT-72 tanks.   A retreating Iraqi division reportedly destroyed some ofits own equipment so it wouldn't fall into allied hands.   Along the south shore of the Euphrates far to thenorthwest, according to another battlefield report, theArmy's 101st Airborne attacked retreating enemy troops nearthe city of Nasiriyah. This report said more than 8,000airborne troops had moved deep into Iraqi territory during 72hours of continuous airlifts, and that the command post ofthe 101st Airborne was less than 100 miles from Baghdad.   Noting that the Iraqi leadership was willing to sacrificeuntrained conscripts at the front lines in order to shieldbetter units from attack, Gen. Schwarzkopf said theRepublican Guard was located far from Kuwait so they &quot;wouldbe the first ones to bug out&quot; if the battle went againstIraq. &quot;But it didn't turn out that way,&quot; he added.   Late last night, there were only sketchy and preliminaryreports from reporters with the ground combat units. But forthe first time, the military revealed fascinating detailsabout how it conducted the assault against what had been oneof the world's five largest armies.   Special Forces teams penetrated deep behind enemy lines toprovide intelligence about Iraqi movements and to attack keyinstallations. Airborne units established supply andrefueling operations to support allied tanks. And air attacksin support of the ground thrust ranged as far north as theEuphrates River, effectively cutting off the Guard's lastavenue of escape.   &quot;The gates are closed,&quot; Gen. Schwarzkopf said, adding thatgetting such a huge force and its supplies behind enemy linesin a matter of days was &quot;absolutely an extraordinary move.&quot;   Gen. William Pagonis, the senior U.S. logistics officer,boasted that the end-run around Iraq's deadly defensive linesturned out to be &quot;the most deceptive operation in history.&quot;He said that keeping the true allied battle plan a secretfrom the Iraqis was &quot;better than D-day ever was,&quot; referringto the invasion of Normandy in World War II.   Some U.S. and Arab forces moved almost straight north fromthe Kuwaiti border. Marines on the ground executed whatmilitary officials described as a &quot;textbook&quot; breachingoperation of minefields and barbed wire. But the hammer blowcame from the west and the north. For Saddam Hussein, leadingan army that U.S. officials estimate already was reeling froma 30% desertion rate in some frontline units, it was the laststraw.   Blinded and cut off from some of his commanders byconstant pounding from the air, confused about U.S.intentions and outgunned on the rugged southern Iraqi plainsthat serve as home base for his elite Republican Guarddivisions, the Iraqi leader's dream of sucking the U.S. intoa prolonged, Vietnam War-style struggle died abruptly.   Marine Lt. Gen. Walter Boomer, the top Marine in the Gulfregion, said he expected the Iraqis to fight harder than theydid. &quot;Their heart just wasn't in it,&quot; he said, adding thatmany troops simply didn't know why they were fighting fellowArabs and never supported the invasion of Kuwait.</TEXT></DOC>