<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910502-0117</DOCNO><DOCID>910502-0117.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Jobless Peasants Swarm Through China   ---   Millions of Wandering Poor,   Their Numbers Swelling,   Set a Dangerous Course   ----   By James McGregor   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/02/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>CHINA (CH)</RE><LP>   CHENGDU, China -- Faces covered with grime, their bodiesbundled in multiple layers of soiled clothing, thousands ofpeasants sprawl atop huge sacks stuffed with quilts, clothingand cabbages.   They camp in every nook and cranny of the train station.Mothers fiddle with makeshift cooking pots; children chomp onstrips of fried pig's face; the men huddle with ticketscalpers, negotiating for transportation to newopportunities.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;It's really bad back home, so I have to go earn somemoney to send back for buying clothes and fixing the house,&quot;says a 17-year-old surnamed Chen, who is heading northeastwhere coal mines are said to pay $75 a month.   Says Mr. Hou, a 45-year-old going southeast in search ofconstruction work on the coast: &quot;We all have to leave if wewant to work. There is nothing to do here and not enoughmoney to go around.&quot;   These people are known as the &quot;Sichuan Army,&quot; up to threemillion peasants from rural Sichuan, China's most populousprovince, who roam the country in search of work. They arepart of a growing itinerant population -- estimated to rangebetween 30 million and 50 million -- that poses seriousproblems for China's government.   Since the killing of demonstrators in Beijing in June1989, Beijing hard-liners have concentrated on pacifying thecities with the carrot-and-stick of subsidies andsurveillance. But future instability also could arise in thecountryside, where economics and demographics are on adangerous course.   The problem boils down to this: China now has a rural workforce of 400 million. But only 200 million are needed on thefarms. Some 90 million of these surplus farmers currentlywork in peasant-owned rural industries. That leaves 110million people in rural areas with nothing to do.   That number will grow -- even if China enjoys remarkableeconomic growth, which is not expected. During the nextdecade, as the baby boomers born during the CulturalRevolution years of lax population controls reach maturity, arecord 10 million people each year will join China's ruralwork force. Rural industries, under the rosiest scenario,will absorb less than three million new employees annually.As a result, by the turn of the century, the mostconservative forecasts say China will have another 70 millionsurplus farmers to join the 110 million who are idle today.   This portends trouble for the government because the dayswhen rural peasants were inspired by Maoist maxims and rootedto the land by communal controls are long gone. These days,they are mobile and motivated by cash. China's city dwellersare always under the prying eyes of their work units orneighborhood party committees. Peasants who take to the roadare outside the system.   Not long after the Tiananmen massacre, He Xin, a Beijingsocial scientist who advises Premier Li Peng and otherhard-liners warned: &quot;The emergence of a mobile part of therural population has created a huge unorganized force. It isalready a hotbed of crime. Once they get organizations withan educated leadership and a political program, the floatingpeasant population could be molded into a political force, amobile, armed and formidable anti-social coalition.&quot;   At this point, the government doesn't seem too worriedabout roving workers organizing a rebellion. But there isconsiderable anxiety that if China's economy stalls, sendingsurplus peasants scurrying home, competition for scarce jobscould erupt into rural unrest.   &quot;The cities must be able to provide conditions to absorbsurplus labor,&quot; says Xie Hong of the Sichuan economic reformoffice. &quot;We solve a lot of our problems by exportingworkers.&quot;   A senior Sichuan party official puts it more bluntly: &quot;Ifthese people come home we would have terrible trouble.&quot;   It's normal for developing countries to undergo atransition period when the rural population shifts toindustrial work and city living. In China, this course seemsimpossible simply because of the staggering numbers -- 860million of China's 1.13 billion people live in rural areas.   The situation is exacerbated by the fact that many largecities already have chronic housing and job shortages. Thevast majority of state factories, which employ almostone-third of China's urban work force of 150 million, aresurviving only by virtue of government cash subsidies. Manyanalysts say that China's cities will be hard-pressed toemploy their own during the next decade, much less absorb aninflux of farmers.   One can see the overpopulation and underemployment problemin Sichuan, where one-tenth of China's people cultivateone-sixteenth of the country's arable land. A Sunday drive ona four-lane rural highway in this land-locked province of 107million is a painstaking squeeze through swarms ofbike-pedaling peasants who choke the roadway.   In Chengdu, a passing peasant in tattered clothes reachesin the window of a state-owned eatery to beg for scraps. Thewalls of the nearby courthouse are plastered with noticesannouncing the recent execution of several dozen peasantsconvicted of rape, theft or murder.   At Qingcheng Mountain, the home of Daoism, peasant boysrevive feudal traditions by carting people up the mountain insedan chairs. In Chongqing, a hilly Yangtze River city of 14million, thousands of peasants with coolie poles totegroceries and packages for city dwellers who pay them a fewcents per trip.   In Daxian, a poor mountain area not far from DengXiaoping's hometown, a dozen male peasants in their 20s and30s wile away a morning in a local park by spitting on acaged peacock, trying to frighten the bird into fanning itstail feathers. Standing nearby watching the scene, a35-year-old man surnamed Ren says: &quot;Last year I wasted a lotof money going to Shenzhen, Guangdong and Shanghai lookingfor a job. But I plan to try again this year. I can't juststay here and do nothing.&quot;   China's rural reforms were launched in Sichuan in the late1970s. In a pattern later followed throughout China, thecommunes were disbanded and all farm land leased to peasantfamilies.   The peasants are free to sell whatever they grow abovetheir state quotas on free markets. At first this led toleaps in farm income. In the late 1980s, however, farm incomestagnated. Today, annual per-capita farm income averagesabout $121, less than half the $266 urban average.   The idea that selling excess crops on free markets ismaking farmers rich is overblown. Most farmers withrefurbished homes and televisions and refrigerators got themoney working in rural industries or dispatching a familymember to work in the cities.   Rural crowding will get worse in the 1990s. Each year,Sichuan loses over 49,000 acres of farm land to development.Meanwhile, the population is projected to grow by one millionannually. Land is already so scarce that individual farmersaverage one-tenth of an acre of leased land.   The government appears too preoccupied with maintainingstability in the cities to focus on potential rural unrest.In January 1990, the Ministry of Labor directed ruralofficials to &quot;keep laid-off workers in the countryside wherethey live.&quot; In recent months, police in major cities haveclosed informal labor markets where peasants and potentialemployers used to meet.   Some officials in Beijing talk about creating new citiesin the countryside to absorb surplus farm workers. Butthere's no money behind their words. The central governmentis projecting a $10 billion budget deficit this year, andoutlays of $17 billion to keep money-losing state factoriesopen and provide cash subsidies to shield city dwellers fromprice rises.   In late March, former agriculture minister He Kang toldthe National People's Congress, China's rubber-stamplegislature, that the central government would spend $577million each of the next 10 years to solve the problem ofsurplus peasant labor. This amounts to 12 days of outlays forurban subsidies.</TEXT></DOC>