<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900416-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>900416-0049.</DOCID><HL>   One Man's Quest:   Sen. Kerrey's Return   To Vietnam Opens   Wounds Old and New   ---   Two Decades After Leaving,   A War Hero Comes Back   On a Fact-Finding Mission   ---   Beggars and Bomb Craters   ----   By Dennis Farney   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   HANOI, Vietnam -- &quot;The Operator.&quot;   That is how Bob Kerrey once saw himself. He was a NavySEAL then, trained to kill with a blow or a bullet. Friendssay he had &quot;a SEAL personality&quot; -- can-do, supremelyself-assured, even cocky. He had the cool ability to distancehimself from the killing and the suffering.</LP><TEXT>   But that was 21 years ago, before an enemy grenade cameflying out of the predawn darkness during a commando raid.Before his lower right leg was torn apart. Before Vietnam,the defining event of his life.   Last week, the Operator came back -- now a 46-year-oldUnited States senator from Nebraska on a fact-finding tourfor the Foreign Relations Committee. Now being weighed byDemocrats in Washington as a potential presidentialcandidate, he is in some ways still cocky, still can-do.   But in a fundamental way, the man who returned was not theman who had left. Mr. Kerrey is now acutely sensitized topain. He would witness an abundance of it on his SoutheastAsia trip. He saw and felt such things, he said, &quot;that if Ihad stopped to look very long I might not have been able togo back to the United States. I would just become tooengaged.&quot;   Sen. Kerrey delivered that summation as he stood in thegray mist of an early Hanoi morning. Soon, he would attendEaster Sunday Mass and be besieged outside the church byclutching beggars -- children, mostly, and women withinfants. Then he would fly out of this country, his militaryplane lifting above the bomb craters that still pockmark thebrilliant green fields.   Just now, though, he was watching a stiff-leggedVietnamese war veteran play badminton. The veteran had beenshot through the knee, but in compensation his opponentallowed him to use a racket in each hand. The whole trip waslike that moment -- full of present pain and reminders ofpast pain.   In Cambodia, the senator visited a hospital filled withchildren on intravenous tubes. In his presence, a girl ofabout seven abruptly vomited up black fluid, twitched anddied. In Thailand, he helicoptered through the heat and thehaze toward mountains that reared up like those of ancientChinese scroll paintings. A mile away from Cambodia and itssmoldering civil war, he walked stoically and wordlesslythrough an outdoor hospital ward filled with amputees.   In Thailand, he became the highest-ranking U.S. visitor toa refugee camp controlled by the Khmer Rouge. Touring thecamp, the senator, whose lower leg has been replaced by aprosthesis, passed by one-legged men who had no prosthesis.He heard tales of leprosy, tuberculosis and sporadicartillery shelling of the camp from across the border.   Then, inside a sweltering shelter, he had a tense, terseexchange with three cold-eyed Khmer Rouge officials --political descendants of those Communists who snuffed out atleast one million of their fellow countrymen in the CambodianKilling Fields of 1975 to 1978.   &quot;No one {in the U.S.} mourns the driving of the KhmerRouge out of Cambodia,&quot; he told the men across the table.(The Vietnamese pushed them to the Cambodian-Thailand borderafter invading in 1978.) Cold-eyed himself, he probed forsome hint of remorse for the genocide.   &quot;We were so young,&quot; volunteered one Khmer Rouge official.   It wasn't enough. The senator stiffly said goodbye andreturned to his helicopter. &quot;I think they would go back intothe Fields in about five minutes, those guys,&quot; he burst out.   For Mr. Kerrey, this trip was as much a journey of theself as it was a fact-finding mission -- a chance to furtherintegrate, and apply, his Vietnam experience.   Despite the intensifying interest he is generating inWashington, he went out of his way to discourage publicity onthis trip. He turned down the television networks, the newsmagazines, several newspapers. In the end, he took onlycorrespondents from The Wall Street Journal and the OmahaWorld-Herald. And at times we seemed to discomfit him.   While visiting the amputee ward, he was approached by GaryParrott, an ex-SEAL and close friend who had joined thetraveling group. Mr. Parrott, looking for some way to offerhope to a Cambodian amputee, suggested: &quot;You ought to showhim what you've got.&quot; (The senator's prosthesis enables himto run and walk with scarcely a trace of a limp.)   &quot;Yeah, if I can get alone,&quot; muttered Mr. Kerrey. But thechance never came.   The journey, however, did offer this intuitive, outspokensenator a chance to test tentative foreign policyassumptions. His central thesis is that even as U.S.-Soviettensions ease dramatically, both countries, along with China,continue to treat Vietnam and Cambodia as Cold War pawns. Thepawns themselves not only tolerate but encourage thisbehavior. The only losers, he believes, are the people.   &quot;Sometimes, you've got to get beyond the ideology andfocus on humanitarianism,&quot; he said.   In Cambodia, he startled his hosts, who tried to bottlehim up in a Phnom Penh government guest house, by borrowing abicycle from a maintenance man and pedaling down to themarket. He disconcerted his Hanoi hosts by insisting onattending Mass, even though he belongs to a Presbyterianchurch back home. By wandering around and asking questions,he discovered that Vietnam's cardinal is under virtual housearrest.   In one remarkably frank exchange with Foreign MinisterNguyen Co Thach, he chided Vietnam for winning its war ofindependence only to suppress the independence of its owncitizens. &quot;Some of us believed we were fighting for thefreedom of the Vietnamese people,&quot; he said in one of his fewallusions to his own war activities. Mr. Thach, witty andurbane, parried.   &quot;I like to let the dreamers dream,&quot; Mr. Kerrey said. &quot;Onlyat night,&quot; admonished Mr. Thach. &quot;Day and night,&quot; insistedMr. Kerrey.   While his wartime experiences were seldom mentioned, theynever seemed far from the senator's mind. He enteredSoutheast Asia last week by commercial jet, a decidedcontrast to his entry in January 1969. Then it was by aconverted cargo plane. He remembers disembarking in the warmdarkness, then nervously holding his weapon at the ready ashe and other new arrivals were driven up the coast. Bydaylight, though, he concluded that nervousness had beenunwarranted: &quot;We could see guys surfing along the beach.&quot;   Less than three months later, he led a pre-dawn assaultagainst an enemy unit on the island of Hon Tre. He and hismen scaled a cliff. They began to advance. Then things wentterribly wrong.   A firefight erupted. The grenade came out of nowhere. BobKerrey never saw the man who got him. The rest of his smallunit was evacuated with relatively minor wounds; Mr. Kerrey,who remained behind until all his men had been rescued, wouldeventually receive the Congressional Medal of Honor fromPresident Nixon.   But first there would be the below-the-knee amputation,the long journey of pain, a protracted lesson in humility. Itbegan in a Naval hospital in Japan. Angry at his fate, angryat the medical personnel, he was not a model patient. &quot;I'vegot to get out of here,&quot; he lashed out. The next thing heknew, he recalls, a burly male nurse appeared at his bedside,ripped him out of bed, carried him through the hospital ward-- and dumped him on the grass outside. It was a brutal, buteffective, warning against self-pity.   His electoral career has represented the politicalcoming-of-age of the Vietnam generation. Some Democraticprofessionals see his almost unique credentials --particularly his war-hero record, which would neutralize anyRepublican charges that Democrats are soft on nationalsecurity -- as potential salvation. As governor of Nebraska,divorced and the father of two, he had a much-publicizedrelationship with actress Debra Winger; it only seems to haveadded to his political appeal.   He's already taken criticism for being too impulsive, tooerratic. &quot;Cosmic Bob,&quot; Newsweek magazine called him recently.A &quot;non-linear personality&quot; -- that's how staffers describedhim when he was governor. He has a healthy ego. Yet he cantalk of the wish to live more like Mother Teresa. &quot;Sheneedn't fear losing anything,&quot; he says wistfully, &quot;becauseshe's given it all away.&quot; This trip seemed, in some ways, anattempt to meld those sentiments with his ambitions.   In Hanoi, he found a city of gracious boulevards but fadedelegance, a primitive city where bicycles throng the streetsand calloused hands work the fields on the outskirts. Sen.Kerrey's schedule also included a visit to that secularshrine of Vietnam, the mausoleum of Ho Chi Minh. The body isspotlighted, and an honor guard stands at attention in thesemi-darkness. Then the senator was off in a horn-honking,bicycle-dodging motorcade for meetings with governmentofficials.   He found those officials eager for outside capital,especially now that the Soviet Union seems to be trimming itsaid, and anxious for the U.S. to relax economic pressures.   His hosts took him to a war monument near the site whereNaval pilot and now Sen. John McCain was captured after hisplane went down. Mr. McCain was to endure five and a halfyears of captivity and torture. The monument shows a U.S.airman on his knees, head bowed and hands upraised insurrender.   &quot;His name is spelled wrong,&quot; Sen. Kerrey informed ForeignMinister Thach. &quot;The wrong name in the right place,&quot; repliedMr. Thach. &quot;I think,&quot; Sen. Kerrey replied dryly, &quot;he wouldagree.&quot;   One of his main goals was to deliver a warning toofficials: He repeatedly argued that the Cambodian governmentinstalled after Vietnam's invasion is vulnerable to chargesthat it is nothing more than a puppet. That, he said, givesthe Khmer Rouge a potent rallying point. In the end, Sen.Kerrey said he felt somewhat more encouraged about thepossibility of an agreement on Cambodia.   Much of Mr. Kerrey's message was reconciliation. &quot;Part ofwhat America must do in coming to terms with Vietnam is tocome to terms with the Vietnamese people,&quot; he said. In ameeting with Vietnamese Prime Minister Do Muoi, he likenedthe U.S. and Vietnam to &quot;a couple that has gone through abitter divorce. They have divided the property. They havefought over the children. They now live in separate houses.Both must say, `We made mistakes.'&quot;</TEXT></DOC>