<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900830-0074</DOCNO><DOCID>900830-0074.</DOCID><HL>   We Saudis   No Longer Belong   In OPEC   ----   By Abdulaziz H. Fahad</HL><DATE>08/30/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   As part of their strategy to confront Saddam Hussein, theSaudis have committed themselves to boost their oilproduction to make up, at least partially, for the lossesresulting from the international boycott of Iraqi and Kuwaitioil. Before it did so, Saudi Arabia felt that it needed theapproval of OPEC.   Although it obtained that approval yesterday, this need toseek foreign approval for acting in the Saudi nationalinterest at a moment when Saudi Arabia is facing what mightbe the greatest challenge in its modern history, should makeit clear that OPEC, from a Saudi perspective, has outlivedits usefulness -- if it was ever useful to Saudi Arabia atall. To protect its vital interests, which happen to coincidewith those of the world at large (including the developing aswell the industrialized countries), Saudi Arabia should leaveOPEC.</LP><TEXT>   Multinational oil companies once enjoyed great discretionto decide where oil was produced and in what quantities. Thefact that many oil producing regions were under colonial rulegreatly enhanced oil company power. OPEC was created in 1960by Venezuela, Iraq and Saudi Arabia as a counterweight to thepower of the multinational oil companies. The founders ofOPEC hoped to enhance their bargaining position bynegotiating with the companies jointly.   These hopes were disappointed, despite the powers that themass media and sanctimonious politicians have attributed toOPEC. It is probably correct to say that the emergence ofOPEC restrained the oil companies somewhat and impelled themto pay more attention to the interests of their hostcountries. But the crucial events in the subsequent historyof oil had very little to do with OPEC.   Specifically, the success of the producing countries inincreasing oil prices and wresting control over productionlevels from the oil companies were effected essentiallyindependently of OPEC. The rise of oil prices prior to theArab oil embargo in 1973 was the result of favorable marketconditions and the quirky nature of Libyan politics.   When Col. Gadhafi seized power in Libya in 1969, he tookadvantage of tight oil supplies of the &quot;sweet&quot; -- low sulfur-- oil that Libya produces to play one oil company againstthe other. Rises in Libyan oil prices naturally led the othercountries to demand equal treatment. OPEC made littledifference.   OPEC was even less relevant to the truly revolutionarydevelopments in the fall of 1973 when the producingcountries, once and for all, gained control over productionlevels and prices from the oil companies. It was the Arab oilembargo that achieved these results. OPEC again had nothingto do with it.   With the producing countries making the decisions that oilcompanies had once made, OPEC became irrelevant as acollective bargaining agency. It took on, however, a newmission in the 1980s: enforcing oil production quotas toprevent oil prices from dropping. These efforts havebasically proven unsuccessful. Whatever results were achievedwere realized because Saudi Arabia sacrificed its owninterests and held its production far lower below capacitythan any of its OPEC partners.   As the largest oil producer in OPEC and the possessor ofthe largest reserves in the world as well, Saudi Arabia hadto assume the leadership of OPEC. But instead of offeringSaudi Arabia a vehicle to protect its national interest, OPECproved to be an instrument in the hands of its adversaries toimpose undesirable constraints upon Saudi decisions.   The national interest of Saudi Arabia is obvious: stableand reasonable oil prices. Oil prices should never be allowedto rise to the point where energy alternatives become soeconomically competitive as to displace oil. Saudi Arabia isa one-resource country. It needs to market its oil for aslong as it lasts, which will be a long time.   Other countries, with bigger populations and smallerreserves, have different interests. And these countries haveoften sought to use OPEC to impose their goals on SaudiArabia. In the 1970s, the Shah of Iran led the pack; today itis the unholy alliance of the Ayatollahs and Saddam Hussein.   It was these other interests that had begun to prevaileven before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The July OPECmeeting agreed to raise the price of oil to $21 a barrel.This was a clear threat to the Saudi interest in maintainingthe competitiveness of oil. After the turmoil of the early1980s, oil prices collapsed and so did the demand for OPECoil. It took a long time for oil prices and consumption torecover, but by the late 1980s the trends were encouraging.Saudi Arabia could increase its income by boosting productionwhile maintaining the lower prices.   Iraq and Iran, unable to increase output, advocated a risein oil prices. The July meeting, had its outcome not beenmade obsolete by Iraq's military move, put Saudi Arabia in aposition where it would have had to choose between its owninterests and obeying an OPEC edict.   In light of this discouraging history and to deprive itsenemies of whatever levers they enjoy under the OPECumbrella, Saudi Arabia should simply walk away from OPEC.OPEC might be retained as a harmless but useful &quot;tradeassociation&quot; to collect information and publish oilstatistics. But Saudi Arabia should no longer permit it anypolicy-making power.   Saudi Arabia is the superpower of oil. With this statuscome challenges and responsibilities -- challenges andresponsibilities that Saudi Arabia is fully capable of facingwithout the OPEC cover.   The Middle East is a nasty neighborhood with armed thugson the loose. We cannot do much about that, but the Saudisowe it to themselves (and to the world) not to be exploitedby those thugs through the mechanism of OPEC.   ---   Mr. Fahad is a Saudi attorney.</TEXT></DOC>