<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900518-0094</DOCNO><DOCID>900518-0094.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Prosecutor Notes Link to Boesky   As Mulheren's Fraud Trial Opens   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen and Edward Felsenthal   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B3</SO><CO>   U.SN FUJIY RTRSY ITCH EUROP</CO><IN>STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The relationship between John A. Mulheren Jr. and Ivan F.Boesky was described as a &quot;two-way street of mutualadvantage&quot; by the prosecution at Mr. Mulheren's fraud andconspiracy trial in federal court in Manhattan, N.Y.   Assistant U.S. Attorney E. Scott Gilbert told a jury ofseven women and five men that Mr. Boesky, the convictedformer stock speculator, provided Mr. Mulheren with &quot;valuableinformation.&quot; In return, Mr. Gilbert said, Mr. Mulherenhelped Mr. Boesky commit crimes. Mr. Boesky is expected to bethe government's principal witness.</LP><TEXT>   In opening arguments, Thomas Puccio, Mr. Mulheren'slawyer, countered that Mr. Boesky has &quot;manipulated people,he's manipulated the government, and he will attempt tomanipulate&quot; the jury.   Mr. Mulheren, 40 years old, is charged with 41 counts ofconspiracy, mail fraud and securities fraud for crimes heallegedly committed with Mr. Boesky in 1985 and 1986. Thegovernment claims that Mr. Mulheren &quot;parked&quot; stock for Mr.Boesky. Parking occurs when an investor sells securities withthe understanding that they will be repurchased, usually at aprearranged time and price.   Prosecutors allege that Mr. Mulheren used the tactic toconceal the true ownership of the parked securities and tohelp Mr. Boesky evade taxes and avoid net capitalrequirements for broker-dealers.   Leonard DeStefano, 34, a former trader for JamieSecurities Co., Mr. Mulheren's defunct securities firm, ischarged with two counts of conspiracy and fraud. Mr. Gilbertsaid Mr. DeStefano was the &quot;scorekeeper&quot; who kept &quot;chitsheets&quot; that enabled Mr. Boesky and Mr. Mulheren to keeptrack of how much each was owed and to hide their scheme fromthe government.   Mr. Gilbert told jurors they would hear from witnessesincluding Mr. Boesky and his former chief trader, MichaelDavidoff. Mr. Boesky has completed a three-year prison termand agreed to pay $100 million in fines. Mr. Davidoff pleadedguilty to one felony count. Mr. Gilbert said Edward Harvey, aformer partner of Mr. Mulheren's, would testify that Mr.Mulheren held stock for Mr. Boesky.   Arguing on behalf of Mr. Mulheren, Mr. Puccio, a partnerin the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley andamp; McCloy,said his client never believed he was doing anything wrong orillegal in his dealings with Mr. Boesky, once a closepersonal friend. &quot;It's what's in Mr. Mulheren's mind thatreally counts,&quot; Mr. Puccio said, as his sportily attiredclient looked on. Mr. Puccio told the jury &quot;accommodations&quot;are part of the business of Wall Street. He said evidencewould show that when Mr. Mulheren did anyone a favor it was&quot;legal and he believed it to be legal.&quot;   Thomas Fitzpatrick, the New York lawyer representing Mr.DeStefano, told jurors that his client is simply a pawn in ahigh-stakes battle. &quot;In every war, innocent non-combatantsget caught up in the crossfire,&quot; he said.   Mr. Fitzpatrick described Mr. DeStefano as a &quot;clerk&quot; whofilled out trading tickets and took orders from Mr. Mulherenwithout asking questions.   ---   INVENTOR WINS $102 million in California trade-secretscase.   A Superior Court jury in San Mateo, Calif., granted $83million in compensatory damages and $19 million in punitivedamages to Dr. Agnostis Zachariades, owner of Polteco Inc., aresearch and development laboratory in Alameda, Calif.   The jury found Smith andamp; Nephew Richards, a unit ofLondon-based Smith andamp; Nephew PLC, guilty of fraud, breach ofcontract and theft of trade secrets. The award is believed tobe among the largest ever in a trade-secrets case.   The technology developed and patented by Polteco enhancesthe durability of plastics used in artificial hips and knees.In 1987, Smith andamp; Nephew Richards, of Memphis, Tenn., enteredinto a contract with Polteco to incorporate the strengthenedplastic into its orthopedic implants. Smith andamp; Nephewterminated the agreement in 1988, claiming Polteco's productdidn't satisfy the requirements of the contract.   The jury determined Polteco proved its improved plasticworked and that Smith andamp; Nephew breached the agreement andfraudulently sought to keep Polteco from selling the newtechnology elsewhere.   Marla Stark, a lawyer with the Palo Alto office of Brown andamp;Bain of Phoenix, Ariz., which represented Dr. Zachariades,said the jury's verdict &quot;confirms society's generalinclination to reward inventors and to prevent companies frommisusing their technologies.&quot;   If affirmed by a higher court, the case could open the wayto larger damage awards for breach of contracts withtermination clauses, according to Michael Ladra, anintellectual-property expert at the Palo Alto law firm ofWilson, Sonsini, Goodrich andamp; Rosati. In this case, damageswere calculated based on the 17-year life of the Poltecopatent even though the contract contained a provision fortermination by either party on 60-days notice.   A Smith andamp; Nephew spokesman called the verdict &quot;amiscarriage of justice&quot; and said the company would appeal.   Judge Thomas McGinn Smith hasn't decided whether to award$25 million in additional damages for willful and maliciousmisappropriation of trade secrets.   ---   FUJI PHOTO FILM unit pleads guilty to making illegalcampaign donation.   Fuji Medical Systems USA Inc., the unit of Japan's FujiPhoto Film Co., pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor charge infederal court in White Plains, N.Y. The charge involved thedonation of $7,400 to the unsuccessful 1988 re-electioncampaign of Joseph DioGaurdi, a former Republican congressmanfrom New York.   Richard Lawler, a lawyer for Fuji Medical, said thecompany violated the law by reimbursing four of itsexecutives who contributed to the campaign. Companies arebarred from contributing to political campaigns.   &quot;It was an inadvertent mistake and it won't happen again,&quot;he said.   The U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan, which prosecutedthe case, said the company could face a maximum fine of$200,000. Sentencing hasn't been set.   ---   THREE LARGE LAW FIRMS negotiate to form venture in Europeand New York.   Hogan andamp; Hartson of Washington, D.C., Hale andamp; Dorr of Bostonand Brobeck, Phleger andamp; Harrison of San Francisco would openoffices in New York and London this summer and Brussels bythe end of the year to jointly serve corporate clients. Thenew entity would be named Brobeck, Hale andamp; HoganInternational.   Several U.S. law firms have affiliations with Europeanfirms to expand their reach abroad. This proposal, firstreported in the Recorder, a San Francisco legal tradepublication, would be the first such arrangement amongdomestic firms.   Hale andamp; Dorr and Brobeck Phleger have large hi-techpractices. Hogan andamp; Hartson has expertise in internationaltrade and government regulation. The three firms &quot;have verycomplementary strengths,&quot; said John Larson, Brobeck Phleger'smanaging partner.   All three firms said a joint venture would offer theadvantages of pooled resources without the risk anddifficulty of a full-blown merger. But key details --including compensation, management questions and potentialconflicts -- are still being ironed out. The three firmsbelong to a national referral network of eight regional lawfirms, none of which has an office in New York or Europe.   If the idea plan succeeds, said Mr. Larson, combinedoffices may also be opened in Germany and Japan.   ---   ARKANSAS IS TOLD to pre-clear election guidelines withJustice Department.   In the second stage of a suit alleging bias against blacksin Arkansas elections, a panel of federal judges on Wednesdayordered the state to seek Justice Department approval beforeimplementing any changes in its rules governing majorityvotes in state and local elections.   Arkansas had been the only southern state that wasn'trequired to seek such Justice Department clearance, accordingto Penda Hair, staff attorney for the NAACP Legal Defense andEducational Fund. Other states were subject to thepre-clearance requirement by the federal Voting Rights Act.   The ruling marked the second win for the defense fund inthe Arkansas suit. In December the panel of judges orderedthe state to redraft state legislative districts insoutheastern Arkansas to make it easier to elect blackrepresentatives.   Elections in the newly drawn districts are slated forlater this month.   ---   MOST CHARGES against Leona Helmsley are dropped in NewYork state case.   In state court in Manhattan, Justice John Bradley threwout 180 of the 188 charges against Mrs. Helmsley. JusticeBradley said she couldn't be tried on the counts because theyare essentially the same as the ones on which she wasconvicted in federal court in August. Mrs. Helmsley, head ofthe Helmsley hotel empire, was sentenced to four years inprison and fined $7.2 million for tax evasion in the federalcase, which she is appealing.   Nathan Dershowitz, a lawyer for Mrs. Helmsley, said JudgeBradley &quot;eliminated the heart of the case, and we fullybelieve she will be vindicated on the remaining eightcounts.&quot;   A spokeswoman for the New York attorney general said theremaining charges are serious and involve omissions orfalsifications on tax forms. The spokeswoman said the statehasn't decided whether to appeal Justice Bradley's decision.   ---   UPI WINS ROUND in battle with Reuters overpicture-contract dispute.   The U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals approved apreliminary injunction sought by United Press Internationalto prohibit Reuters Holdings PLC from breaking a contract toprovide international news photos to UPI. The decisionreverses a lower court judge who denied the injunction.   The appeals panel said the lower court judge was wrong toconclude that UPI, a subsidiary of Infotechnology Inc.,wouldn't suffer irreparable harm if Reuters were allowed tobreak the contract. The appeals court cited evidence thatsome of UPI's customers indicated they will immediately dropsubscriptions to the news service if it can't provide thephotos.   Financial difficulties prompted UPI to sell the foreignnews-picture service to Reuters in 1984. As part of thattransaction, Reuters agreed to furnish foreign news photos toUPI, and UPI was to provide Reuters with photos from the U.S.In 1989, Reuters told UPI it was dissatisfied with the photosfrom the U.S.   UPI sought the injunction when Reuters sued to terminatethe agreement a few weeks ago.   ---   Wade Lambert contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>