<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900823-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>900823-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Notice to Iraq:   Hostage-Taking   Is a War Crime   ----   By Mark Helprin</HL><DATE>08/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Even if all lawyers should not be killed, most shouldprobably be isolated from the conduct of foreign relations.Trained in a system that requires consensus and civil order,they tend to confront barbarian outrages with impotentlegalities, applying the softest tools to the hardest stone.   But the call to international law is not always an attemptto dignify capitulation by the construction of illusion. Inconcert with a great array of forces such as the U.S. and itsallies are now assembling in the Gulf, even the patheticlegalisms that give meaning to the word toothless can springto the life for which they were originally intended. And,just as finely crafted resolutions and declarations are oflittle value unaccompanied by real power, real power isimproperly realized absent finely crafted declarations andresolutions.</LP><TEXT>   The number of Saddam Hussein's hostages andhostages-in-waiting ranges from a hundred or so to almost amillion, depending upon whether or not you are Egyptian. AsSaddam's assets dwindle he turns to local traditions such asthe refusal to distinguish between combatants andnoncombatants. Though most Westerners find this asincomprehensible and difficult as the urge to martyrdom, wehave our own traditions that, for our enemies, can besimilarly threatening. To punish the transgressions we mostabhor, we have created institutions of long memory, noteddetermination, and infinite patience.   The president has wisely avoided precipitate action whilemilitary and political activity increase the range of hisoptions. Reinforcing Saudi Arabia and choking Iraq was thebest initial strategy, and until new opportunities arise itremains so. Nonetheless, it accentuates the role of thehostages. Mr. Bush has said that he will hold Iraqisresponsible for the Americans among them, but he would dowell to be more specific. An uncertain threat can meannuclear retaliation or absolutely nothing. Iraq should betold that the U.S. and its allies will pursue and try warcriminals. Every soldier under Saddam, from generals toprivates, should know what we have done before and will doagain, that when it was done it was not easy, that wepersevered through 50 million deaths, that half a centurylater we are hunting down the criminals, that if men lived1,000 years we would be hunting these criminals still. If theimplication they draw from such a declaration is that Baghdadwill be overrun as was Berlin, then that implication shouldstand.   Early in the Second World War, Roosevelt and Churchillinsistently made the punishment of war crimes one of the aimsof victory, and many of the guiding declarations issued inthe war years were emphatic: The St. James, Moscow, andPotsdam declarations, the last of which stated withcompelling simplicity that &quot;Stern justice shall be meted outto all war criminals including those who have visitedcruelties upon our prisoners.&quot;   In October 1943, the Allies established The United NationsWar Crimes Commission as an institution for the practicalapplication of the near universal sentiment against warcrimes. The effectiveness of such steps is hard to judge, butit is impossible to ignore the difference in treatmentexperienced by Allied prisoners of the Reich, whosegovernments made clear what they would do after the war theyhad the potential of winning, and others, notably the Jews,who had no such shield. No guarantee exists that similarsteps will deter across the exquisitely delineated culturallines that separate Iraq and the West, especially in light ofJapanese treatment of Allied prisoners. Still, Japan'sChinese prisoners fared far worse, and American and Britishexhortations were directed mainly at Germany. Perhaps had asimilar tactic been used in regard to Japan, history wouldhave been slightly different.   One of the problems of the Nuremberg tribunal, TheSubsequent Proceedings, which followed, and the InternationalMilitary Tribunal for the Far East was that though littlethey affirmed in law was new, they had to break new ground inits application. Now, however, precedent and procedure areclearly established. Though Iraq has already violated theFourth 1949 Geneva Conventions -- in deporting prisoners,taking hostages, discriminating among captives according tonationality, and using civilians to shield military targets-- we are concerned above all with the hostages' survival andthe length of their captivity. The more specific the demandsand threats in this regard, the better.   Were the nations whose citizens are prisoners in Iraq tooffer in the United Nations a resolution, backed by thedeclarations of their parliaments, to the effect that theywill hold each and every individual to account for the fateof the hostages, the Iraqi security and military apparatusthat blindly follows Saddam's orders might hesitate. Saddammight discover a certain viscosity in his chain of command.The desire to overthrow him might become simultaneously morefervent and more logical. Lives might be saved.   In isolation, a U.N. resolution is worth little more thanthe collected speeches of Cyrus Vance, but in combinationwith the armies and fleets now gathering in the desert andupon nearby seas, an unambiguous statement of intent would befar more than a misplaced legality. Not only might it be ofinterest to the Iraqis, but it would elucidate our aims,principles and values, make clearer our purpose, and solidifyour resolve. In addition, it would be yet another of the manyactive responses to the crisis. When Iran held our hostageswe were debilitated not so much by the arduous passage oftime as by the days and weeks that passed during whichabsolutely nothing was done. Americans are impatient. We needaction each day, even if this means that our politicalleadership must actively guide us through the greatdifficulty of waiting. Action each day. And why not? SaddamHussein began with the initiative. We have wrested it fromhim, and we must keep it from him.   ---   Mr. Helprin, novelist and political commentator, is agraduate of Harvard's Center for Middle Eastern Studies andserved in the Israeli infantry and air force.</TEXT></DOC>