<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910617-0082</DOCNO><DOCID>910617-0082.</DOCID><HL>   South Africa's Alternative Futures   ----   By Francis Fukuyama</HL><DATE>06/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>AFRICA (AF)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)SOUTH AFRICA (SF)</RE><LP>   As South Africa moves toward full democracy, it possessesthree things that Eastern Europe is now desperately seeking:a functioning market economy, a democratic tradition (albeitlimited to whites), and a civil society. On the other hand,most of the former communist world has one advantage notshared by South Africa: an almost universal abhorrence of thesocialist system and a broad consensus on the need to replaceit with democracy and free markets.   The economic thinking of the African National Congress hasbeen in a deep freeze for several decades, and what isthawing is a mixture of orthodox Marxism and a kind of '50sKeynesianism exemplified by the slogan &quot;growth throughredistribution.&quot; The winds of perestroika, so strong inEastern Europe, have not reached South Africa: According toJoe Slovo, head of the ANC's close ally, the South AfricanCommunist Party, socialism -- despite having failedeverywhere else in the world -- will be built correctly forthe first time in South Africa.</LP><TEXT>   As the political parties -- both black and white -- nowprepare to hammer out a new constitution based on one man,one vote, three possible futures await South Africa.   The first, and most optimistic, scenario is that thefuture South Africa will be something like Germany -- thatis, the developed part of the country will peacefully absorbthe less developed part and, while suffering a temporary dropin living standards, will ultimately bring it up to itslevel. At the opposite end of the spectrum is the nightmareof Lebanon, with uncontrolled civil strife and violence amongSouth Africa's ethnic populations. In between is a LatinAmerican model where decline is not so much political aseconomic: massive increases in public spending followed byhyperinflation, leading to a situation like that of Brazil(if one is optimistic) or Peru (if one is pessimistic).   Of these different futures, the least probable is theGerman model. Indeed, the Germans themselves are discoveringthat absorbing their formerly communist neighbors, who sharea common language, ethnicity, and culture, is going to be farmore costly and difficult than they initially thought. SouthAfrica's five million whites simply do not have the resourcesto bring 30 million blacks up to the level of a modern FirstWorld country.   The current township violence suggests that the secondscenario is more likely -- that South Africa will come toresemble Lebanon. This is the fate that has befallen SouthernAfrica's two most recent ex-colonies, Angola and Mozambique,with truly horrific results. Though many of the sameingredients exist in South Africa, many South African whitesare surprisingly confident that they can avoid the politicalfree-fall that characterized Angola and Mozambique.   First, the whites know that they are the best-armed andmost cohesive tribe in Southern Africa; if push comes toshove, they are positioned to defend themselves and couldsend the black economy into a rapid and abysmal tail-spin.Following the collapse of communism, the internationalclimate is also much more favorable for a peaceful transitionthan when Angola and Mozambique gained their independence inthe 1970s. And third, many white South Africans are confidentthat, despite the troubling policy positions taken by theANC, there is a flexibility and lack of fanaticism in blackpolitical culture that will make it possible for the radicalsto be &quot;brought along&quot; to support a core of Western liberaleconomic and political institutions.   If a future South Africa will resemble neither Germany norLebanon, and if its economy remains too strong for it to sinkinto African poverty in the short-run, the question thenbecomes which Latin American country it will take after. Forif it seems just possible that South Africa can skirt apolitical maelstrom of instability and violence, it is hardto see how it can avoid a long-term economic deterioration.The starting point for this deterioration is the undeniableneed for the redistribution of wealth within the country. Theproblem is that any large-scale attempt to right thiseconomic wrong over a short period of time would underminethe basis for wealth creation that is the only hope for blackSouth Africa itself.   Were the ANC to attempt to implement its current economicprogram today, it would begin by massively increasing publicspending on precisely those social services that were solacking for blacks in apartheid South Africa. The ANC has arather naive belief in how much foreign capital it canattract, based in part on overzealous promises by Westernsympathizers. Like others around the world, its leadersbelieve in the Cargo Cult of the 1990s, the mythical&quot;Japanese investor&quot; or American foundation that will bringcapital to South Africa once its industries have been&quot;democratized.&quot; In fact, financing would have to be largelyinternal.   One of the most urgent tasks for the ANC or any futureblack government of South Africa will be to prevent an exodusof skills. However unfair the current degree of whiteproperty ownership, and however insulted and injured theblack population has been by the apartheid system, the futureeconomic prospects of South Africa will depend to a verylarge extent on whether the whites can be persuaded to stayon in a nonracial, postapartheid democracy. The same sort ofbitter irony also characterizes the Soviet Union and EasternEurope, where former communist managers and party bosses areending up as the entrepreneurs and businessmen of theregion's marketizing economies, as they have the know-hownecessary to make the economy work. The whites will not bepersuaded to stay unless the new government undertakes toprotect their property rights and to ensure their physicalsecurity.   It is hard to overstate the potential economic disasterfor South Africa were a white exodus to occur. The rest ofsub-Saharan Africa has been moving backward economically at abreathtaking pace for most of the past decade. While SouthAfrican per-capita gross national product has also beenfalling, the rate of decline is nowhere near that of the restof the continent; absolute GNP for the six most populouseconomies of sub-Saharan Africa fell at an average rate of0.8% a year between 1981 and 1987, while per-capita GNP fellat a rate of about 4% a year. Africa's cities have beende-industrializing, its roads and communications systemscollapsing, and its environment undergoing rapid degradation.All of this region's 450 million people now produce about asmuch wealth as Belgium's 10 million, and many parts of Africaare poorer than when they gained their independence.   Sadly, it would appear that colonialism, far from havingbeen responsible for Africa's poverty, was in fact a majorsource of skills and infrastructure, and that the region hasbecome worse off economically the further from colonialism ithas moved. This is not meant to justify either colonialism orapartheid, but only to be realistic about the economicdangers facing this part of Africa. Brazilians say ofthemselves that their land has such natural plenty that theycan repeatedly mess up economic policy and still not starve;South Africa, for all of its mineral wealth, does not havethis kind of margin for error.   The best long-term guarantee for stable democracy in afuture South Africa would be for the black population toundergo the same process of social evolution that theAfrikaners experienced earlier in the century -- from poor,illiterate farmers to literate blue-collar industrial workersto college-educated white-collar managers and professionals.South Africa's problem is that the forces of economicmodernization have only begun to operate on the much largerblack community, whose starting point was in any caseconsiderably behind that of the Afrikaners. In manytownships, it is impossible to re-create even the sweatshopsof Hong Kong, since potential seamstresses cannot read theinstructions on their sewing machines.   The architects of the apartheid system have themselves toblame for much of this state of affairs, since apartheidsought to obstruct the social modernization of the blackcommunity. This bad situation was made much worse, however,by the politicization of the past 15 years. Blacks haveretreated significantly in social terms: There is an entiregeneration of township &quot;comrades&quot; who refused what educationthey were offered and are now part of a semi-criminalunderclass. For this, the ANC must share the blame.   The main obstacle to black social modernization in thefuture may well be the belief in socialism on the part of theANC and its communist allies. Capitalism, if left to itselfunder a system of truly equal political rights, will tend tomodernize South African society and bring about whatTocqueville called an &quot;equality of condition.&quot; Unplanned andwithout resort to coercion, capitalism fosters an enormoussocial revolution, tearing people away from traditionalattachments and forms of authority, and bringing about a neworder in which education, skill and work rather than race ortribe determine a person's status.   Socialism has always presented itself as a higher and moreprogressive form of social organization than capitalism. Butin the contemporary world, socialism has been revealed to bean obstacle to social and economic modernization -- thehallmark of a certain kind of backwardness that needs to beovercome just like illiteracy and superstition. The countriesof Eastern Europe are now moving rapidly backward into thefuture, undoing the legacy of 40 years of dictatorship andsocialist planning. Let us hope that South Africa, as itmakes the necessary transition to democracy, does not moveforward into the past.   ---   Mr. Fukuyama, formerly with the State Department, is theauthor of &quot;The End of History and the Last Man,&quot; out inJanuary from Free Press. This article is excerpted from thesummer issue of The National Interest.</TEXT></DOC>