<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900718-0110</DOCNO><DOCID>900718-0110.</DOCID><HL>   Socialism Is Dead; Leviathan Lives   ----   By James Buchanan</HL><DATE>07/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><LP>   More than a century ago, the German philosopher FriedrichNietzsche announced the death of God. This dramatic statementwas intended to suggest that religion had ceased to serve asan organizing principle for the lives of individuals or forthe rules of their association. Since Nietzsche, the Godpronounced dead was replaced in man's consciousness by&quot;socialism.&quot; And I want to match Nietzsche's announcementwith the comparable one that &quot;socialism is dead&quot; -- astatement that seems much less shocking than Nietzsche'sbecause it is being heard throughout the world in 1990.   In a very real sense, the loss of faith in socialism ismore dramatic than the loss of faith in God, because the godthat was socialism took on forms that were directlyobservable. There were no continuing unknowns waiting to berevealed only in another life, and the promised realizationof the socialist ideal could not be infinitely postponed.Socialism promised quite specific results; it did notdeliver.</LP><TEXT>   One can only look back in amazement at the monumentalfolly that caused the intellectual leaders of the world, formore than a century, to buy into what F.A. Hayek called the&quot;fatal conceit&quot; that socialism embodied. How did we come tobe trapped in the romantic myth that politically organizedauthority could satisfy our needs more adequately than wemight satisfy them ourselves through voluntary agreement,association and exchange?   This fatal conceit was almost universal. Let us now bewareof current attempts to limit acceptance of the socialist mythto those who were the explicit promulgators and defenders ofthe centrally planned authoritarian regimes of the SovietUnion and its satellites. There were socialists everywhere,in all societies and, even in the face of the evidence thatcontinues to accumulate, there are many who still cannotescape from the socialist mind-set. And even for those of uswho have, however begrudgingly, acknowledged that thesocialist god is dead, there may not have emerged any faithor belief in any non-socialist alternative. We may acceptsocialism's failure; we may not accept the alternativerepresented by the free market or enterprise system, even astempered by elements of the welfare state.   Socialists everywhere, confronted with the evidence thateconomies organized, wholly or partially, on socialistprinciples cannot deliver the goods, are now making desperateefforts to redefine the term &quot;socialism,&quot; which Britishsocialist and scholar Alec Nove defined in 1987 as a societyin which &quot;the means of production of goods and services arenot in private hands.&quot;   It is now almost universally acknowledged that aprivate-ownership, free-enterprise economy &quot;works better&quot;than Mr. Nove's socialized economy, in which decisions aremade by state or cooperative agencies. The individualizedmarket economy &quot;works better&quot; than the socialized economy inthe sense that it produces more goods. But it also worksbetter in the sense that it allows individuals more libertyto choose where, when and to what purpose they will put theircapacities to produce values that they expect others todemand.   A threshold was crossed in the 18th century when welearned how the rule of law, stability of private propertyand the withdrawal of political interference with privatechoices could unleash the entrepreneurial energies that arelatent within each of us. Humankind seemed near to theultimate realization of its social potential. How did thesocialist vision emerge to threaten, and in part forestall,this future? And why did the principles of classicalpolitical economy, which seemed so strongly to suggest therelative superiority of a market economy, lose theirpersuasive powers so quickly?   We must, I think, appreciate the rhetorical genius of Marxand his ability to convert arguments advanced in support ofmarket organization into what could be made to appear to besupport for a particular distributional class, thecapitalists. By clever substitution of emotion-ladenterminology, the market system became &quot;capitalism,&quot; and thesearch of every person for his own advantage became theprofit-seeking of the greedy capitalists. This rhetoricalgenius, coupled with totally erroneous economic analysisembedded into pseudoscientific jargon about the laws ofhistory, was highly successful in elevating thedistributional issue to center stage, to the relative neglectof the allocational and growth elements that were central inthe classical teachings.   (I speak as one who shared fully in the socialistmind-set, from which, thanks to Frank Knight, I escapedrelatively early in my career. But I appreciate the appeal ofthe Marxist-socialist ideas even if, now, I cannot explainit.)   Recall that during its early decades, the Soviet Union washeld out as paradise by socialists in the West. After WorldWar II, Eastern Europe was absorbed into the Soviet politicalorbit and the countries of Western Europe socialized theireconomies to greater or lesser degrees. Even where economieswere largely allowed to remain free, Keynesian-inspiredmacromanagement was supported by arguments about the tendencyof capitalism to generate massive unemployment.   Between the early 1960s and today, socialism became illand died. What happened? There were two sides to the coin:&quot;market success&quot; and &quot;political failure.&quot; The accumulation ofempirical evidence must ultimately dispel romance. And theevidence did indeed accumulate to demonstrate thatfree-market economies performed much better than politicallydirected or planned economies. Contrast, for example the WestGerman &quot;Wirtschaftwunder&quot; with the demonstrable failures ofthe socialist experiments in Britain in the late 1940s andearly 1950s. Honest evaluation suggested that the centralizedeconomies of the Soviet Union, China and East Europeancountries were not successful in producing goods andservices.   Ideas also matter. And here the record of the academiceconomists remains, at best, a very mixed bag. The welfareeconomists of the early and middle decades of this centurywere almost exclusively concerned with demonstrating thefailures of markets, in order to provide a rationale forpolitical interferences. But the public-choice revolution inideas about politics, and political failures, was alsosparked primarily by academic economists.   When the behavioral models of economics are applied to&quot;public choosers&quot; -- to those who participate variously inpolitical roles, as voters, politicians, bureaucrats,planners, party leaders, etc. -- the romantic vision that wasessential to the whole socialist myth vanishes. If those whomake decisions for others are finally seen as just likeeveryone else, how can the awesome delegation of authoritythat must characterize the centralized economy be justified?   This loss of faith in politics, in socialism broadlydefined, has not, however, been accompanied by anydemonstrable renewal or reconversion to a faith in markets,the &quot;laissez-faire&quot; vision that was central to the teachingsof the classical political economists. There remains aresidual unwillingness to leave things alone, to allow thefree market, governed by the rule of law, to organize itself.We are left, therefore, with what is essentially an attitudeof nihilism toward economic organization. There seems to beno widely shared organizing principle upon which persons canbegin to think about the operations of a political economy.   It is in this setting, which does seem to be descriptiveof the era into which we are so rapidly moving, that thenatural forces that generate the Leviathan state emerge andassume dominance. With no overriding principle that dictateshow an economy is to be organized, the political structure isopen to exploitation by the pressures of well-organizedinterests. The special-interest, rent-seeking, churning statefinds fertile ground for growth in this environment. And,depending on the relative strength of organized interests, weobserve quite arbitrary, politicized interferences withmarkets.   This setting, which I have referred to as Leviathan, hasmuch in common with the mercantilist-protectionist politicsthat Adam Smith attacked so vehemently in &quot;The Wealth ofNations&quot; in 1776. The same barriers that Adam Smith sought toabolish are everywhere resurging; and the same arguments areheard, both in support and in opposition. The arguments forLeviathan's extensions are not versions of the socialist'sdream; they are, instead, simple efforts to claim a publicinterest in a single sector's private profit.   There will be no escape from theprotectionist-mercantilist regime that now threatens to becharacteristic of the post-socialist politics in both Westernand Eastern countries so long as we allow the ordinary ornatural outcomes of majoritarian democratic processes tooperate without adequate constitutional constraints. If weknow that politics fails and that its natural proclivity isto extend its reach beyond tolerable bounds, we mustincorporate constraints into a constitutional structure. Adepoliticized economic order is within the realm of thepossible, even if the accompanying faith in marketorganizations is not fully regained. We can protect ourselvesagainst the appetites of the monster that the Leviathan statethreatens to become.   The organized polities of the nation-states, and theassociations among those states, must be kept withinconstitutional boundaries. The death throes of socialismshould not be allowed to distract attention from thecontinuing necessity to prevent the overreaching of thestate-as-Leviathan, which becomes all the more dangerousbecause it does not depend on an ideology to give it focus.Ideas, and the institutions that emerge as these ideas areput into practice, can be killed off and replaced by otherideas and other institutions. The machinations ofinterest-driven politics are much more difficult to dislodge.Let us get on with the task.   ---   Mr. Buchanan, a Nobel laureate in economics, is professorof economics at the Center for Study of Public Choice atGeorge Mason University. This article is adapted from aspeech he delivered in Sydney, Australia, in March.</TEXT></DOC>