<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910607-0128</DOCNO><DOCID>910607-0128.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Those in LBO That Failed keep   Money They Made, Judge Decides   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Ellen Joan Pollock   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   ELPA F.ACC GREY</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)BAHRAIN (BA)EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)</RE><LP>   In one of the first fraudulent-conveyance cases to go totrial, a federal judge in Pittsburgh ruled that participantsin the leveraged buy-out of a company that later went brokedon't have to return the money they made on the deal.   The issue of responsibility for failed buy-outs has beenraised in pending cases involving Revco D.S. Inc. andWieboldt Stores Inc., among other companies, but hasn't beendefinitively resolved. The Pittsburgh ruling, although notbinding in other jurisdictions, is likely to be cited bydefendants in fraudulent-conveyance cases nationwide.</LP><TEXT>   The Pittsburgh case involves Jeannette Corp., a glasswarecompany based in Jeannette, Pa., that was acquired fromCoca-Cola Bottling Co. of New York in 1981 by a group ofinvestors. Fourteen months later, a creditor forced Jeannetteinto involuntary bankruptcy.   The trustee later brought a suit against the buy-outparticipants seeking to recover $12 million for the estate inbankruptcy. The trustee alleged that the transactionconstituted a fraudulent conveyance because the buy-outgroup, the bank that financed the deal and the sellers hadreason to know that the resulting company would carry toomuch debt to survive.   But after a bench trial, federal judge Gustave Diamondruled in favor of the defendants who profited from the deal.In his decision, Judge Diamond found that the benefits thecompany received -- such as new management and access toadditional capital -- were inadequate considering the hugedebt the company assumed. Nonetheless, he said, thedefendants didn't intend to commit fraud at the time of thetransactions and therefore couldn't be held liable.   &quot;While there likely were mistakes made. . . .thefraudulent conveyance laws were not designed to insurecreditors against all possible consequences of a company'spost-leveraged buy-out errors in judgment or poor businesspractices,&quot; Judge Diamond wrote.   The principal cause of the company's failure, the judgewrote, was the large drop in sales resulting from increasedforeign and domestic competition and a continuted recession,which was further exacerbated by management errors.   Robert B. Sommer, a Pittsburgh lawyer representing thebuy-out group, said the decision would make deal-makers morewilling to proceed with leveraged transactions provided theyare based upon business projections that are reasonablyprudent at the time of the deal.   Robert J. Cindrich, the Pittsburgh lawyer representing thetrustee, said his client planned to appeal the decision.   ---   ARNOLD andamp; PORTER agrees to sell affiliate to GreyAdvertising Inc.   The sale of the Washington, D.C., law firm'sgovernment-relations arm, Apco, is believed to be the firstsale of a non-legal subsidiary by a law firm.   Apco, which does lobbying and international businesscounseling, will become part of GCI Group, a public-relationssubsidiary of Grey Advertising. John D. Bergen, GCIpresident, said that Grey had approached Arnold andamp; Porterbecause it wanted a Washington presence to advise clients onregulatory and public policy issues. He said that Apco's andGCI's expertise on Eastern European and other issues wouldoverlap.   Apco, founded in 1984, had 1990 revenue of about $4million, according to Arnold andamp; Porter managing partner JamesW. Jones. The law firm's revenue was about $125 million, hesaid. GCI, which has 25 offices in 15 nations, had revenue ofabout $30 million. Neither Grey nor Arnold andamp; Porter disclosedthe purchase price.   Mr. Jones said that Arnold andamp; Porter hadn't planned to sellApco. But, he added: &quot;We came to believe that the sale madevery good business sense from our standpoint. Essentially,what this does is give Apco access to a global network ofservices.&quot;   Arnold andamp; Porter and Apco will continue to have what Mr.Bergen called a &quot;collaborative relationship.&quot; In the past,the firms worked on joint projects, referred business backand forth and pitched business together. They have nooverlapping personnel, although Apco's board is made up of 10Arnold andamp; Porter partners and Margery Kraus, the consultingfirm's president. When the acquisition is complete, Mr.Bergen said, a strategic planning committee would be formedof Arnold andamp; Porter partners and personnel from Apco, GCI andGrey.   About 70 law firms are believed to have developedancillary non-legal businesses since the mid-1980s.Nevertheless, the legal profession continues to debatewhether such arrangements lead to conflicts of interest andbreaches of client confidentiality by lawyers.   At the American Bar Association's annual meeting thisAugust in Atlanta, two competing proposals are expected to bedebated by the organization's House of Delegates.   The ABA's ethics committee is advocating amending theorganization's model code of conduct to continue to permitancillary businesses but to subject them to regulationsclarifying some ethical issues. A second proposal wouldprohibit lawyers from performing nonlegal services unlessthey were offered within the law firm in connection withlegal work for clients.   ---   RICO APPLIES to securities-fraud cases involving tradesabroad, court rules.   The federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled thatinvestors can sue under the Racketeer Influenced and CorruptOrganizations law over alleged fraud schemes that includetransactions outside the U.S.   RICO is often used when defendants are accused of apattern of wrongdoing. The Second U.S. Circuit Court ofAppeals said that RICO can apply as long as some of theimportant steps in committing the fraud occurred in the U.S.   The case involves a group of investors from Saudi Arabiaand Bahrain who claim they were defrauded when they boughtshares in Saudi European Investment Corp. They allege thattheir stake in the company was diluted when more shares thanannounced were later sold, including a 15% stake bought byLincoln Savings andamp; Loan Association. The sale of stock toLincoln, the failed thrift unit of Charles Keating's AmericanContinental Corp., is the aspect of the alleged fraud schemethat occurred in the U.S. Lincoln wasn't named as adefendant.   Geoffry D.C. Best, an attorney for the investors from thelaw firm LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby andamp; MacRae, said the decisionclarifies the use of RICO in cases involving internationalsecurities transactions. George A. Davidson, of the firmHughes Hubbard andamp; Reed, an attorney for Saudi European andother defendants, declined to comment on the decision.   A lower court had dismissed the case after finding thatthe alleged fraud occurred outside the U.S. But the appellatejudges said enough of the allegations had occurred in theU.S. for the lawsuit to proceed under RICO.   ---   EL PASO ELECTRIC indicted for an alleged securities-fraudscheme.   The utility was named in an alleged conspiracy to defraudpurchasers of annuities sold by certain insurance units ofFirst Financial Enterprises Inc., a holding company based inEl Paso. El Paso Electric Co. also bought the annuities --about $120 million worth -- but is accused of arrangingrecovery of much of its money when smaller investorscouldn't. The maximum fine, on conviction, would be $20,000.   Eduardo Rodriguez, the utility's general counsel, said thecompany is innocent of the charges. He added that the utilityis still owed $20 million in annuities and is suing torecover the money.   Also indicted was El Paso Electric's outside law firm,Kemp Smith Duncan andamp; Hammond. The law firm negotiatedcollateral for certain of El Paso Electric's annuityinvestment with First Financial. &quot;We're convinced the chargeis wrong. A law firm should be able to do legal work withoutbeing indicted,&quot; said Joseph Hammond, a partner. He said thefirm is blameless for the loss of other investors' funds.   First Financial Enterprises is now in receivership,according to Andrew Thomas, an assistant district attorney inEl Paso. He said that one of First Financial'sannuity-selling units, First Service Life Insurance Co.,Cayman Islands, wasn't chartered to make such transactions inTexas.   ---   EEOC ACCUSES three employment agencies of discriminationin job referrals.   In lawsuits filed in federal court in Manhattan, the EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission accused the companies ofusing codes on job orders to indicate when racial minoritiesand older applicants shouldn't be referred to certainemployers. The defendants named in the lawsuits are DoverEmployment Agency Inc., Al Perkell Personnel Agency Inc. andAllegheny Personnel Agency Inc., all based in Manhattan.   The EEOC asked the court to order the defendants to takesteps to &quot;eradicate the effects of their unlawful employmentpractices&quot; and to pay unspecified damages to some applicants.Joel A. Klarreich, an attorney of the firm Klein, Heisler andamp;Klarreich, who represents the job agencies, said he hadn'tseen the lawsuits and couldn't comment.   ---   LAWSUIT OVER RAPE at chain's motel is settled for $10million.   Dallas-based Motel 6 L.P. agreed to settle a negligencesuit brought against it by a woman who was raped at one ofthe company's motels. Houston attorney G. Robert Friedman,who represented the victim, says he believes it is one of thelargest rape settlements in history.   The agreement came during the third day of testimony in astate district court in Houston. In her complaint, whichsought unspecified damages, the victim blamed her rape oninsufficient security and lack of concern for guests at theMotel 6 in Fort Worth, Texas, where the crime occurred.   An attorney for Motel 6, a unit of the French companyAccor S.A., declined to comment except to call the outcome&quot;an insurance settlement&quot; that he said wouldn't affectearnings.   ---   JUDGES BLAST Justice Department for policy on evaluatingjudicial nominees.   In a scathing letter, four influential federal judges inManhattan criticized the department's recent move to stop theNew York City bar association from evaluating judicialnominees. Earlier this week, a top aide to U.S. AttorneyGeneral Dick Thornburgh instructed the local bar associationto end its practice of independently evaluating nominees. Theaide, Murray Dickman, also told nominees not to cooperatewith the review process.   The judges said the plan was a &quot;policy of intimidation&quot;that violated free-speech rights. The letter to Mr.Thornburgh was signed by James L. Oakes, chief judge of theU.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals, and three judges of theSecond Circuit Court of Appeals: J. Edward Lumbard, Irving R.Kaufman and Wilfred Feinberg. Judges Lumbard, Kaufman andFeinberg are all former chief judges of the circuit court,which covers New York City and the states of New York,Connecticut and Vermont.   &quot;Refusing to consider the views of the city bar is aninvitation to mediocrity or worse,&quot; the judges said. &quot;Thegreater the input, the better the result.&quot;   Mr. Dickman said it is too laborious to allow local barassociations to review candidates. Earlier this week, theJustice Department said that only the American BarAssociation should be allowed to evaluate judicial nominees.   Previously, Mr. Thornburgh required the ABA to promise notto consider ideological or political matters in evaluatingpotential judicial nominees.</TEXT></DOC>