<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920306-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>920306-0080.</DOCID><HL>   International:   GATT Bargaining Goes Down to Wire   ---   World's Trading Nations   Must Set Accord Soon,   Or Face Likely Failure   ----   By Terence Roth   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/06/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE, GATT (GTT)TAXES (TAX)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>CANADA (CN)EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   GENEVA -- Five years after its inauguration at a Uruguayanresort, the most ambitious effort ever to reorganize theworld's trading system seems finally to have arrived at thejuncture of success or failure.   Unless differences are resolved this spring, the so-calledUruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Tradeis likely to be postponed for another year and riskswithering away.</LP><TEXT>   GATT Director General Arthur Dunkel, the harried Swissbureaucrat who rides herd on the 108 nations that aresquabbling over everything from high European farm subsidiesto the dolphin-snaring nets of Pacific tuna fishermen, callsthis the moment of truth.   &quot;We are coming to a crossing point,&quot; Mr. Dunkel says in aninterview. &quot;We have to force the pace to come to a situationwhere people make decisions. Otherwise, we prolong thesituation of insecurity. It's also a matter of politicalcredibility.&quot;   This isn't the first time that the GATT proceedings --sometimes referred to as the General Agreement to Talk andTalk -- have limped into a critical phase. But this time,trade negotiators are pushing to conclude a new agreementbefore a confluence of outside pressures can scuttle thetalks. A faltering world economy is feeding the causes ofspecial interests, and the U.S. election campaign, in whichtrade already has become an overheated issue, could turn intoa major obstacle for an agreement.   &quot;Either we get the breakthrough now, or five years of workwill have been for nothing,&quot; says one European negotiator.   To reach a final accord now, the U.S. and the EuropeanCommunity must agree in the next few weeks on a series ofcompromises on farm aid, the toughest nut to crack in thetalks. The results then could be sold to the 30 or 40 othercountries with significant influence on the talks, and a dealwould be sewn up, a U.S. official says. But it isn't thatsimple, with almost every point bearing potential for apolitical backlash back home.   EC negotiators themselves are divided over how to craft ECagricultural reforms to fit into a GATT agreement. Aftermeeting in Brussels Monday, EC agriculture and economicsministers remained split over reductions in farm subsidies.This forced a delay in their response, due this week, tocompromise proposals put forth by Mr. Dunkel in December.   Other GATT members, including the U.S., are looking toGermany to exercise its close relationship with France andnew muscle in Europe to pull Paris and other dissenting ECcapitals into a compromise. Lately, Germany has been as vocalas any country in pushing for a conclusion. But so far,Bonn's pressure has been less than persuasive.   A month ago, German Economics Minister Juergen Moellemanncalled for a special meeting of the industrialized nations'Group of Seven by April to step in and complete the work. Theresponse was a telling silence -- even from Mr. Moellemann'sown chancellor, Helmut Kohl.   Mr. Kohl, an avowed anti-protectionist who isn't facing anational ballot until 1994, is a personal friend of FrenchPresident Francois Mitterrand, who is on extremely fragilepolitical ground at home. At the same time, Mr. Kohl is underpressure from his own farm lobby and within his owngovernment coalition to resist deep cuts in subsidies.   &quot;Everyone knows that Germany now holds the key in the ECand hopes they'll be firm in moving the community into line,&quot;says one Geneva-based official.   The prevailing principle at the GATT talks is that nothingis final until everything is agreed. Thus there is a riskthat all the points of tentative agreement could unravelunless the loose ends are tied up this year.   These matters include tentative rules on industrialsubsidies, on tighter anti-dumping controls and oninvestment, and a plan for bringing textile trade, which hasbeen governed by a separate agreement, under the GATTframework. There also has been provisional agreement on amore effective system for settling disputes and on conditionsunder which a country could take emergency action if a floodof imports threatens an industry.   Never before has the give-and-take of a GATT round beenunder more public scrutiny. &quot;In the old days it was a debateamong technicians,&quot; Mr. Dunkel recalls. The scope of thetalks, affecting almost every field of human endeavor, andhard economic times have changed all that. The Uruguay Roundall but rewrites the way the world trades -- and then addsseveral new chapters.   If finally concluded, the current round would replace theGATT, essentially an agreement among governments, with a newentity to be called the Multilateral Trade Organization. TheMTO would be elevated to an institution with internationallegal stature similar to that of the World Bank andInternational Monetary Fund.   Since December, a 450-page draft compromise proposal putforward by Mr. Dunkel has provided new impetus for thestalled negotiations. But it also stirred new controversiesby identifying the knottiest problems. These include a Dunkelproposal to cut all export subsidies for farm products 36% bythe end of the 1990s and a 24% cut in the amount ofsubsidized exports.   Certain EC countries, led by France, call the cuts toodeep. Germany is uncomfortable with a parallel plan to cutall internal agricultural subsidies 20%. The U.S. and Canada,supported by developing nations hoping for more market accessfor their farm products, say the result is still far short oftheir demands.   The U.S. would like zero tariffs for many goods rangingfrom steel to pharmaceuticals. European countries, in turn,seek a &quot;rebalancing&quot; of imported goods from the U.S. thatskirt EC tariff rules. Imported cattle feed, for example,isn't subject to tariffs on grain imports.   Mr. Dunkel's proposal to set up uniform protection ofintellectual properties, which include copyrights andpatents, would allow developing countries a 10-yeartransition period. Concerned especially over pharmaceuticalpatents, the U.S. calls the grace period too generous.   The aim to achieve uniform market access for services,hitherto uncovered by GATT, is stuck on such arcane issues asmaritime shipping, common rules for financial and legalservices and even whether an airline has a right to its owncounter at a foreign airport.   Member countries this week are to submit their proposalsfor reducing tariffs on industrial goods to achieve moremarket access. In agriculture, they also are asked to replaceother forms of protection, such as quotas or outright importbans, with tariffs to harmonize trade rules and hopefullyease market access. The EC and the U.S. are in generalagreement on this idea, called &quot;tariffication,&quot; but Japan isbalking on a crucial point.   The problem is that Japan bans the import of rice, itsmain food staple, which helps make rice many times costlierat home than in world markets. Tokyo is offering to reduceimport tariffs on 6,500 industrial goods and 1,000 farmproducts -- but is leaving the rice ban in place for fearthat even a tariff onerous enough to keep foreign rice out ofJapan could one day be reduced. The ban waves a red flag infront of U.S. negotiators, whose rice farmers are denied amajor market.   &quot;When people have begun to hear that the Japanese aren'tprepared to tariffy rice,&quot; Mr. Dunkel says, &quot;it will be muchmore difficult for other countries to say to theirconstituencies, `You have to follow the rules.' . . . Theywill be under pressure by some lobbies to do the same thingfor other products. And that could lead to the unraveling ofthe whole thing.&quot;   Officially, the Bush administration and the EC arecommitted to completing the trade talks. But France, facingbelligerent farmers and a powerful grain lobby at home,opposes the Dunkel draft. And a senior Bush administrationofficial concedes that getting a GATT accord through Congresswill be difficult. American farmers and textile mill workersare watching Geneva as carefully as Washington.   Says one senior administration official: &quot;We're not aboutto give up agricultural quotas or textile tariffs withoutsomething significant in return.&quot;   Yet most negotiators, including U.S. officials, are stilloptimistic, because in Geneva optimism is measured in directproportion to growing fear the Uruguay Round could collapse.Failure of the GATT round could lead to a free-for-all ofrising tariffs, subsidies and import quotas while leavingunresolved fair access for textiles, financial and legalservices and protection of intellectual properties.   Trade experts say new barriers to the $3 trillion in worldgoods traded annually would be devastating for industrialnations trying to regenerate sluggish economies, whiledeepening poverty in the developing world.</TEXT></DOC>