<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910510-0120</DOCNO><DOCID>910510-0120.</DOCID><HL>   I Am Not a Drudge   ----   By Michelle Markel</HL><DATE>05/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><LP>   One of the few things I can count on in my line of work isthe entitlements of Mother's Day. I expect I'll be taken tobrunch. Maybe I'll get a necklace or a blouse, and my elderdaughter will give me a card scrawled with crayon andglitter. The waitress may even hand me a single long-stemmedrose.   Do I feel honored and appreciated? By my family, yes. Butnot by society at large. As a stay-at-home mother with aninconsequential and very part-time job, I am consideredunmotivated, unfulfilled and unenlightened. The domesticlabor I undertake I do for free, and my work is cheapened bythe substandard-to-middling wages paid to &quot;surrogate mothers&quot;-- the increasing number of babysitters and daycare workerswho are raising many of America's children under the age ofsix. In a society where status is all too often in directproportion to the size of our paychecks, will mothering everbe considered to be more than a menial and degrading job?</LP><TEXT>   During feminism's formative years, motherhood wasdescribed as not much more than serving the base physicalneeds of children. In their rush to join men in the moreglamorous world of the workplace, feminists focused on thegrunt work of child-rearing -- the bundling up andde-bundling, the wiping of bottoms and runny noses, theendless cycle of feeding and cleaning. They neglected theother, more delicate and vital, job responsibility ofparenting -- enculturating children.   Young children need more than protection and routinemaintenance during their waking hours. Someone has to showthem how beautiful the clouds are today, tell them not tosquish the ladybugs, and explain why they should share theirpail and shovel with the child who has none. Someone has towildly applaud their first stick people and precarious towersof alphabet blocks. The person most eminently qualified forthe job, the one whose devotion and zeal is most authentic,is a parent.   Until recently, child-development experts have been waryof claiming that kids thrive optimally in the care of theirmothers. In the April issue of Parenting, however, PenelopeLeach, author of several popular books on child-rearing,argues that we are short-changing our children by providingthem with material goods instead of our involvement in theirlives. Researchers of &quot;attachment theory&quot; have found thatyoungsters raised by caring, attentive mothers, or at thevery least consistently over several years by the same lovingcaregiver, grow up to be more secure children.   Many women are beginning to recognize the importance ofparenting and desire a larger role in raising theiroffspring. According to several recent surveys on attitudestoward work, the majority of women with young children wouldprefer to work part-time, and half would quit their jobs ifgiven the financial equivalent of their salaries.   This should come as no surprise. Over the past 20 years itis the vagaries of the economy, in an unhappy marriage tocreeping materialism, that have been driving women to workoutside the home in unprecedented numbers. Most women havenot been happily abandoning parenthood in their quest forself-actualization. As revisionist feminists will admit, theyneed to be fulfilled through both work and motherhood.   It's time to retire the age-old view of mothering asselfless servitude and droning, uninspiring work. Thatopinion was created by a male-dominated society and swallowedwhole by the women's movement. We already acknowledge thatthe American family has deteriorated, and that greaterparental involvement is most likely the antidote for avariety of ills ranging from drug abuse to lack of motivationin school. Now employers should recognize the importance ofparenting by creating more opportunities for part-time andflex-time work, job-sharing and extended parental leave.   If society is not going to reward stay-at-home motherswith wages for housework, or economic perks like SocialSecurity or tax breaks, it should at the very least regardthe choice to mother as an estimable one. Does the woman whoworks on an assembly line in Detroit, or the woman who sellsthe cars, markets the cars, or owns the company that makesthe cars, contribute more to society than the mother whoproduces a moral, well-adjusted human being? Is the attorneywho defends a life more important than the person who createdthat life and nurtured it?   In 10 or 15 years, I'll still have my college degrees andwork experience, but I won't have my two little girls. In themeantime, I'm giving up a house of my own, a new car, and theother features of middle-class nirvana to be with my childrennow, when they need me. Do you think this might be worth morethan brunch?   ---   Ms. Markel lives in Los Angeles.</TEXT></DOC>