<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910130-0068</DOCNO><DOCID>910130-0068.</DOCID><HL>   The Lingering -- and Fatal -- Gorbachev Illusion   ----   By Gary Kasparov</HL><DATE>01/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   The U.S. must make the right moves while communism isdying in the Soviet Union. That means doing the rights thing,the human rights thing, for the Baltic republics. Democracyis at issue there and, indeed, throughout what admiringWesterners once called &quot;the socialist sixth of the earth.&quot; Ifever there was a time for America to base its Soviet policyon long-term strategy rather than short-term calculations,this is it.   Those of us who play chess know that tactics not mated tostrategy lead to unintended consequences -- to dictatorshipinstead of democracy; to new world wars instead of new worldorders; to, in fact, the sacrifice of a strategic interest,the development of democracy across Soviet Eurasia, to thetactical convenience of Mikhail Gorbachev's tepid support inthe Persian Gulf.</LP><TEXT>   The U.S. needs to turn things right-side up again byadopting a strategy to manage the demise of communism -- astrategy that has as its first principle the promotion ofliberal democracy, a product that America is fitted to supplyand that the Soviet peoples demand. They demand it becausethe system that Westerners call &quot;communist&quot; or &quot;Soviet&quot; ismorally and politically dead in the Soviet Union. Attempts toprop it up by propping up Mikhail Gorbachev can be made onlyover the bodies of millions of people who want genuineperestroika -- perestroika of society not perestroika ofcommunism.   The Armenian genocide, the gassing in Georgia, the attackon Baku and other terrors throughout Soviet Central Asia, therumble of tanks in the streets of Vilnius, Lithuania andRiga, Latvia -- these are the logical outcomes of Mr.Gorbachev's attempts to reform the communist system.   For well over a year, many voices from my country havecalled on the U.S. to cancel its no-fault policy covering Mr.Gorbachev. We warned that there was no delicately balancedHolmes-vs.-Moriarty struggle between Mikhail Gorbachev andYegor Ligachev. (Quick, can anyone even recall the positionthat Ligachev occupied?) We argued that the real struggle wasnot between a brave general secretary and dangerousconservatives led by What's-his-name, but between adessicated, though still violent, totalitarian system, and apeople attempting to breathe beneath its crushing weight.   &quot;The debate over the ultimate intentions of MikhailGorbacahev,&quot; I warned last March at a symposium in the U.S.,&quot;may soon come to an abrupt and unpleasant end in Lithuania.&quot;Given the murder of unarmed civilians in Lithuania and Latviathis month, and the effective imposition of martial law byassigning soldiers to police duty, this fear has been provenhorribly correct.   Yet how could anyone have imagined that events would turnout differently? Following the repeal of Article Six of theSoviet Constitution, which provided for the &quot;leading role&quot; ofthe Communist Party, Mr. Gorbachev's first act was to havehimself appointed to the powerful new post of Sovietpresident. No elections, limited discussions -- that was it.Soviet citizens discovered that the controlling CommunistParty had transformed itself into an uncontrolled communistgovernment.   Moreover, ever since March 1988, when the authoritiesprovoked violence between Armenians and Azerbaijanis tojustify the imposition of martial law, there has been apattern of conduct by the central apparatus that in importantrespects recalls Joseph Stalin's crackdowns in Eastern Europefollowing World War II:   First, use KGB thugs to perpetrate what is later called&quot;ethnic violence.&quot; Second, use official propaganda organs tofan the flames of ill will (in Lithuania, the party presswhips up the Russian minority against the Lithuanianmajority). Third, stand by idly while a slaughter occurs (forsix days last January, Soviet authorities in Azerbaijanpermitted wholesale murder of Armenians by ultra-nationalistAzerbaijanis). Fourth, dispatch troops only after the killingis over and then use those troops to crush indigenousnational-democratic forces. Fifth, make no effort to punishthose who conducted this attack or that pogrom. And sixth,establish regimes of occupation or, in the case of Lithuaniaand Latvia, &quot;national salvation committees&quot; that justifytheir existence by promising, if that's the right word, to&quot;restore order.&quot;   With a different face here and a changed circumstancethere, this is how Stalin twisted steel in Czechoslovakia in1948 and how Gorbachev turns the trick in 1991.   None of this surprises most Soviet citizens. What Mr.Gorbachev and the West call &quot;new thinking&quot; is old thinking tous. Force is still &quot;prima ratio&quot; in resolving politicaldisputes, and state-organized robbery is still the engine ofeconomic policy. Mr. Gorbachev's recent decree removing 50-and 100-ruble notes from circulation is no different fromStalin's forced &quot;state loans.&quot; In the hoariest of Bolsheviktraditions, the life savings (granted, at least it is not thelives) of millions of people are wiped out by a decision fromabove.   Less obviously, whatever little political capital theSoviet government managed to accumulate with the populationsince 1985 has also been destroyed. Not a shred of confidenceremains in the government.   On Thursday the U.S. Senate passed a resolution, 99-0,calling on the Bush administration to suspend all technologyexchanges, review all economic aid proposals and withdrawsupport for Soviet membership in the International MonetaryFund, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and theWorld Bank.   It's a start. But the problem with the Senate vote isidentical with the problem of overall U.S. policy toward theSoviet Union. Both are reactive rather than proactive. Mr.Gorbachev acts, the U.S. protests; act, protest; act,protest; etc. The U.S. is constantly behind the curve ofevents because it has yet to identify its own interests inthe outcome of these events and to develop a strategy toimplement those interests.   If the Bush administration is serious about a new worldorder based on free trade and peaceful relations amongsovereign states, then it must become serious about democracyin the Baltic republics. The political outcome in Lithuania,Latvia and Estonia will probably determine the fate ofdemocracy elsewhere across the Soviet Union. For withoutdemocracy in the various countries of the Soviet Union, therewill be no new world order, though there may be a new worldwar.   That's the bad news. The good news is that the course ofevents, if not impeded by the U.S. and other liberaldemocracies offering aid and comfort to Mr. Gorbachev, isleading toward the development of several nationaldemocracies from a fast decaying union.   At this juncture, the U.S. is unquestionably at the helmand can steer events. Here's what it should do to promotedemocracy:   1. Cooperate closely with the various Soviet republics,placing special emphasis on developing economic relationswith Russia. Instead of offering the anti-market centralgovernment most favored nation status and membership in theIMF, GATT and the World Bank, invite Russia and othermarket-oriented republics to join the world financialcommunity. In the case of the Baltic countries, confirm thelegitimacy of their redeclarations of independence. Thiscourse of action would embolden democrats throughout SovietEurasia, while simultaneously restoring the good name of theU.S.   It is crucial to understand that after 74 years ofdictatorship, many people in the Soviet Union have littleconception of this thing called &quot;democracy.&quot; To anastonishing degree, they judge democracy by the extent ofsupport offered to Soviet democrats by Western governments.   2. Recognize that the old black (Brezhnev) vs. white(democratic dissidents) paradigm for Soviet society is dated.Today, there is a powerful middle class of&quot;nomenklaturshchiks&quot; who expected Mr. Gorbachev to deliverstability and Western credits, not civil war and canceledloans. These managers, though necessary for the survival ofthe central regime, carry no brief for the currentarrangements. If they and the emerging democratic leadershipsin the republics were to join forces, there could be a neworder with sufficient consent to avert civil war.   3. Promote human rights. Postponing the FebruaryU.S.-U.S.S.R. summit is fine, but because of the war in theBaltics, not the war in the Gulf. Cancel plans to hold thisyear's Helsinki human rights conference in Moscow.   Thomas Carlyle once remarked that what really counts isthe mights rather than the rights of man. If the &quot;annusmirabilis&quot; of 1990 taught us anything, it ought to havetaught us that rights, too, have mights and that if Americanpolicy makers can summon the nerve to conduct policyaccording to a strategy that employs this country's politicalanalog of the Patriot missile, then they may actually createa new world order.   ---   Mr. Kasparov, the world chess champion, is head of theMoscow region branch of the Democratic Party of Russia.</TEXT></DOC>