<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911126-0072</DOCNO><DOCID>911126-0072.</DOCID><HL>   Continental Drift:   Europe's Economies   Are Dragging Along   Despite Hopes for 1992   ---   German Anti-Inflation Moves   Worsen Unemployment,   Social Tensions Elsewhere   ---   A Major Worry: Immigration   ----   By Craig Forman and Tim Carrington   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)</NS><RE>ALBANIA (ALB)BULGARIA (BU)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)GREECE (GR)ITALY (ITA)POLAND (PL)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   BELFORT, France -- The scene is an eerie flashback.Hundreds of strikers occupy part of Bull S.A.'s plant,cutting off the power and halting all work for a secondconsecutive week. Graffiti on the wall read: &quot;Give us backour livelihoods, and we'll give you back the juice.&quot;   The sit-in, reminiscent of angry demonstrations bysteelworkers and miners near here a decade ago, is protestingthe state-owned computer maker's plans to lay off 1,000 ofits 1,400 workers. Caused by slack sales, the cutbacks wouldall but close down operations.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Computers were the diversification that was going to savethis region. Instead, the same thing that happened to coaland steel is happening again,&quot; says Jackie Drouet, a Bullworker.   Such scenes don't conform with the picture of dynamismassociated with Europe in 1992, the year in which momentumwas expected to build toward inauguration of the vauntedsingle market at year end. But problems are multiplying at arate that may dispel much of the Europhoria. As the date forthe Continent's great leap forward approaches, its economiesaren't cruising along as well as anticipated.   Instead of firing on all cylinders, Europe's main economicengines -- Germany, France, Britain and Italy -- aresputtering. Unemployment -- in some places already far higherthan in the U.S. or Japan -- is rising relentlessly.Inflation, though down in many countries, ranges from below2% to more than 18%. On the periphery, less-developedEuropean Community members trying to mesh their economieswith the richer ones are stalled despite 10 years of trying.And just outside the gates, East Bloc multitudes clamor foraid, access and, most notably, the right to move inside. Theprospects for these have-nots depend on the haves' ability togenerate growth and jobs. That seems shaky now.   Investment by German, British and French companies isplunging. As unemployment swells throughout Europe, consumersare hesitant to spend. Months of talk about a recovery havedone little to raise confidence. At a Copenhagen unemploymentcenter, lines have rarely been longer or job-seekers moredepressed. Though the public debate has moved on to thechallenges of developing a single currency and a unifiedfederal political system, Europe faces a difficult presentbefore reaching any prosperous future.   &quot;Our revenues are already down 20% from 1989, with a 25%reduction in work force,&quot; says Francois Perret, president ofFrance-Ebauches, a watchmaking and industrial concern inBesancon. &quot;And I don't see any improvement likely before themiddle of next year. People don't have confidence in theeconomy.&quot;   The present malaise differs from the &quot;Eurosclerosis&quot; of 10years ago, which stemmed from high wage demands, lowproductivity and consequent stagnation. Now, the problemarises partly from a slump in much of the developed world,including the U.S. In addition, Europe is suffering somedismaying peculiarities, especially an inability to createjobs.   Much of the problem lies with Germany, until recentlyEurope's locomotive but now a source of high interest rates.Germany is keeping its base business interest rates at nearly10% in an effort to offset the inflationary effects ofunification. Real rates in Germany are about triple those inthe U.S., and many economists expect further increases.   But as Germany's central bank, the Frankfurt-basedBundesbank, squeezes the economy, Germany's EC partners aregasping for air. The German anti-inflation drive hits in twoways: As western German economic growth slows to about 2%next year, export orders are slackening, especially in Franceand the Benelux countries. Meanwhile, German interest ratesare transmitted to other Europeans via the European MonetarySystem, whose exchange-rate mechanism forces Europeancountries to adjust interest rates so that their currenciesstay within fixed bands.   The upshot: Instead of Mercedes-Benzes, the Germans thesedays are exporting economic sluggishness. Perhaps thestriking French workers ought to be picketing in front of theBundesbank.   &quot;France hasn't much room to maneuver,&quot; says Albert Merlin,chief economist at Cie. de Saint-Gobain S.A. &quot;Most things aredecided by Germany. The problem is Germany is slowing downbut probably not enough to encourage the Bundesbank to looseninterest rates.&quot;   At times, the bad old days of the early 1980s seem to havenever ended. South of the Bull plant in Besancon, thefastest-growing employer recently has been city hall. As thetextile plants and watch factories laid off workers,local-government employment rose about 50%, by more than1,000 people. The surge in the city payroll sparked adeadening cycle of rising taxes and an eroding tax base, ascompanies fled one of France's highest-tax municipalities.New businesses in Besancon have the highest failure rate inFrance.   A similar despondency is afflicting Britain's WestMidlands, where over the past year the number of unemployedworkers has risen more than 50%, to 236,000. &quot;The governmentreckons we're coming out of the recession, but I don't seeany signs of it,&quot; complains Trevor Clarke, a 30-year-oldpipe-fitter whose employer failed two months ago. Since then,he has tried to get to Kuwait to work on its rebuildingprojects but was blocked by visa problems. Now, he comesevery day to a job center run by the Employment Department inBirmingham -- without any luck. &quot;This is the worst I canremember,&quot; he says. For him, at least, the slump a decade agodidn't cut as deep.   Although Britain's unemployment rate is 8.7%, it's stillwell below France's 9.6%, Spain's 16% and Italy's 11.3%.&quot;Even with strong growth, we've not been able to create jobslike the U.S.,&quot; says Dominique Graber, economist at Cie.Financiere de Paribas in Paris. The slump adds tounemployment levels already high because workers have troublemoving to more expensive regions where jobs exist or becausetheir education and training are ill-suited for what work isavailable.   That inability to generate growth and jobs is especiallytroubling at a time when hundreds of thousands of immigrantsare pouring in from the East. In Greece, the EC economyfurthest from the mainstream, officials are struggling withan influx of Albanians, Poles and ethnic Greeks from theSoviet republics.   &quot;I'm scared about this winter,&quot; says Virginia Tsouderos,Greece's secretary of state for foreign affairs. &quot;Albania isin complete anarchy now, Yugoslavia is in civil war, Bulgariais a shambles.&quot; She thinks hunger will drive &quot;a big number&quot;of people from all three nations to Greece.   While the Greek army readies reception camps for them,hundreds of immigrants already line Athens streets, sellingwatches, shirts and cheap toys. Dionisis Zouznazjialis hawksthe dregs of a hoard he lugged from Kazakhstan seven monthsago. &quot;After I finish selling these things, I'll look for ajob -- anything I find,&quot; he says, standing over a pitifularray of nail files, wilted stuffed rabbits and knives.   His search will probably be difficult. In Greece,foreigners, mostly &quot;illegal&quot; arrivals without officialpapers, already make up 5% of the work force. But the economyis mired in recession, with unemployment almost 10% andrising. Under EC pressure, Greece is trying to trim itsdeficit, which is estimated at 20% of gross domestic product.That will require layoffs and closures of bloated state-ownedcompanies now operating at a loss. Meanwhile, the war inYugoslavia has stanched the flow of central Europeanvacationers to Greece and cut into exports that had beentrucked north through what's now a combat zone.   All in all, 1992 is arriving amid considerable gloom inGreece, which, despite a decade of EC membership, isn't anycloser to being in sync economically with its richer partnersto the north. &quot;We're going to live through a very tough anddifficult environment for the next couple of years,&quot; saysByron Ballis, a managing director of Interbank, aninternational financial-services concern in Athens. &quot;We lostthe boom years of the 1980s because of our socialistgovernment. Now we're trying to restructure in a difficultenvironment. I think inflation will go up in Germany and theGermans will increase interest rates. There'll be problems inFrance and Italy, and the U.K. won't have a strong recovery.&quot;   Italy, though one of the EC's founding members, hassimilar problems conforming its economy with the EC core. Itsenormous government deficit could relegate it to the slowlane in the monetary union that the EC states are likely toestablish at their summit in Maastricht, the Netherlands,next month. However, Italy's underdeveloped Mezzogiornoregion suffers from unemployment of about 20%. With newinvestment evaporating, the region is hoping forstate-financed projects.   With Europeans picking over an economic pie that isn'tgrowing, social and political strains are already evident.   French airlines haven't run on time for months because ofstrikes by ground personnel, controllers and others. Dailyprotests rock Paris's Left Bank, snarling traffic andtempers. At one point, the premier's office barred ministersfrom traveling outside Paris because their safety couldn't beassured. The edict was quickly overturned by French PresidentFrancois Mitterrand.   Predictably, high unemployment and dissatisfaction areundermining incumbent governments. Britain's ConservativeParty, after a 12-year rule, is lagging behind its opponentsin the polls and must call a general election before mid-1993in an economy likely to be, at best, soggy. PresidentMitterrand's government has hit a new low in popularity andmay soon face the prospect of an unwieldy coalition.   Meanwhile, right-wing movements are on the ascent,capitalizing on economic apprehensions and resentment ofimpoverished immigrants from the east and the south. France'sright-wing parties have gained in the south, where many NorthAfricans have moved; Austria's Freedom Party recently scoredbig gains on an anti-immigration platform, and Germany hasbeen troubled by violent right-wing youth groups.   Some economists worry that the political and socialstrains will cloud the Europeans' main triumph of the pastdecade: taming inflation. With their currencies harnessed tothe sturdy German mark, France's inflation rate has declinedto 3.1%, and Britain's to 3.7%. Italy, despite a deficitexceeding 10% of GDP, has reduced inflation to 6.3%, low byhistoric standards. Economists say that when the Europeaneconomies do take off again, they will finally get a chanceto build on stable, noninflationary foundations.   However, the current social and political pressures arepushing governments to raise spending to relieve thehardships stemming from the war on inflation. In a Londonnewspaper, Sir Alan Walters, an economic adviser to formerPrime Minister Margaret Thatcher, recently accused PrimeMinister John Major of throwing money at problems through anarray of spending plans. &quot;Nothing can disguise the newprofligacy,&quot; he wrote. He accused the current Conservativeleader of adopting the free-spending tactics of the LaborParty as a way to win votes in the next election.</TEXT></DOC>