<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0141</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0141.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   The Finnish Window to the Eastern Bloc   ----   By Robert J. Radway</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   On a recent flight to Stockholm, a Seventh Avenue fashionexecutive told me of a New York merchant who recently set upshop on a main street in Moscow. What currency is he gettingpaid in? I asked automatically. &quot;Oh, he is confident ofworking something out,&quot; he said, glibly.   When China opened up, it was the same story. Starry-eyedAmericans made junkets there full of ideas of selling to onebillion Chinese. Then they learned about the currencyproblems. Some left immediately. Others thought they couldbeat those problems, and lost their investment. Still othersfigured out that they could export and earn hard currency,but then they learned about other problems.</LP><TEXT>   If, despite recognizing all the hazards, one is stillintent on testing the waters in the Soviet Union or EasternEurope, there is a better way: the Finnish connection. TheFinns have been trading with and investing in the SovietUnion, Hungary, Poland and the Baltic countries for decades,perhaps centuries.   After World War II the Finns owed the Soviets a sizablereparation. And they paid it off, essentially by tradinggoods to reduce the debt. Despite a deep-seated mistrust ofRussian intentions (based on years of outright andsemi-feudal domination by Russia), the Finns learned a lotabout doing business with the Russians. And because the Finnsalways delivered on their promises, the Russians learned totrust them and rely on their word. Until the past few years,the Soviet Union was Finland's number one trading partner.   While many people have traded places during MikhailGorbachev's perestroika, the language, culture, businesspractices and bureaucracy have not changed. And the Finnshave profited nicely from their knowledge and experience.   Estonia is the closest Baltic republic to Finland, and theonly country outside of Finland where most people alsounderstand the Finnish language. Naturally, Finns have morejoint ventures in Estonia than elsewhere, including twohotels, industrial maintenance projects, twomicrocomputer-software joint ventures, and a fish processingplant in Tallinn.   Elsewhere in the Soviet Bloc, examples of recent Finnishjoint ventures are practically limitless. They include aplywood project, a copper-wire joint venture, a petrochemicalproject, ice crushers, ferry vessels, and the remodeling ofhotels in Leningrad and Moscow.   Several shrewd American companies have noticed all this.One well-known example is Combustion Engineering, which witha unit of Neste, the giant Finnish-state oil andpetrochemicals firm, hopes to penetrate the Soviet market.   Two lesser-known examples -- one financial, the otherindustrial -- may end up becoming more typical of theAmerican-Finnish-Soviet &quot;troika&quot; arrangement.   The parties involved in the banking and finance troika areFirst Chicago, the Moscow Narodny Bank, and Finland'sPostipankki, one of the four largest banks in that country.Postipankki's experience in Soviet ventures, even before thetroika was formed, included the first Western loan for aventure based on Vnesheconombank's (the Soviet bank forforeign economic affairs) risk. The expertise and financingability of the Finnish bank was crucial to the success ofthis three-way venture.   First Chicago brought the regional marketing strength ofits U.S. client base, including depth of experience infinancing the Midwestern grain trade with the Soviets.Postipankki brought, in addition to its expertise infinancing Soviet joint ventures, a triple-A rating andoffices in New York, London and Moscow. Moscow Narodny isLondon-based and Soviet-owned, with widespread and closecontacts throughout the U.S.S.R. And its main business isfinancing East-West trade. It knows every trick in the book,and its management keeps up with the latest innovativefinancing techniques.   The initial aim of this joint venture is to sell financingservices, primarily in support of capital-intensive projectsin Eastern Europe. Its minimum project size is $20 million toachieve economies of scale. Typical projects use a 70-30debt-equity structure, majority Western equity, exportcredits and other government guarantees where available, anddebt-equity swaps and other mechanisms to reduce risk wherepossible.   One industrial troika has as its Finnish partner thenation's largest construction company, Haka (part of EKACorp.). The U.S. partner is Transisco Industries Inc., arelatively small San Francisco-based firm with a patentedUni-temp heating system that can be used to retrofit railtank cars. These retrofitted cars are then leased along withother special-purpose cars to customers.   The Russian partner? There actually are two. The largershare is owned by the Soviet Ministry of Railroads, and theother by the Ministry of Petrochemicals. In the U.S.S.R., 80%of all transport is by rail, which represents, in turn, 50%of commercial rail transport world-wide. Most Soviet exportsare chemicals. Thus the link between these two ministries.And nobody produces specialty rail cars in the U.S.S.R.   Haka had been cooperating with the Soviet Railways since1982 with the construction of a repair workshop for railcars. Haka then formed a group to concentrate on solvingproblems in rail communications, which deepened itsrelationship with SovRails.   When Haka learned of Transisco and its Uni-temptechnology, the parties signed a licensing agreement in 1987,including rights to sell to the U.S.S.R. Then they made acontract to retrofit two prototypes for the Ministry ofPetrochemicals. Rail cars used for oil products build uplarge residues, which are difficult to clean. The Uni-tempprocess requires less cleaning, and results in lower costs.By entering into this joint venture, the Soviet Ministry ofRails showed progress on solving an important problem.   The Transisco joint venture was registered in June 1989,having submitted documents in March. In the meantime,Transisco also has become involved in several East Europeantroika ventures with its Finnish partners. Says MarvinHughes, president of Transisco Trading Co. (a subsidiary ofTransisco Industries): &quot;There's no way we would have gotteninvolved in the Soviet and East Bloc ventures without usingthe Finns as our partners. They can speak to and sound outthe Russians like nobody from the States can. And this isn'tthe last of our ventures with the Finns in Russia or the EastBloc, either.&quot;   By taking advantage of the Finnish window, U.S. firms cansave a lot of time and money when trying to penetrate Sovietand East European markets.   ---   Mr. Radway is a New York-based international managementconsultant.</TEXT></DOC>