<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910201-0079</DOCNO><DOCID>910201-0079.</DOCID><HL>   Medical Experiment:   Some Companies Try   `Managed Care' in Bid   To Curb Health Costs   ---   Physician Networks Negotiate   Fee Discounts in Exchange   For the Flow of Patients   ---   The Southwestern Bell Test   ----   By Ron Winslow   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR SBC</CO><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)</IN><LP>   LITTLE ROCK, Ark. -- Larry Bennett was suffering fromCrohn's disease, a chronic intestinal ailment that caused himto lose 80 pounds, when he left the doctor he had been seeingfor 10 years.   The 40-year-old safety manager at Southwestern Bell Corp.was happy with his doctor and trusted him. But the doctorwasn't on a list of physicians participating in the company'snew health plan. Southwestern Bell promised Mr. Bennett thathe would save money by switching, and he reluctantly wentalong.</LP><TEXT>   Thousands of Mr. Bennett's co-workers did likewise, and indoing so they have also saved Southwestern Bell money.   The St. Louis telecommunications company is in theforefront of a movement that could reshape U.S. health care.Known as &quot;managed care,&quot; it is corporate America's latestattempt to stanch hemorrhaging health costs, which a recentsurvey says have risen more than 40% in the past two years.On average, health care last year cost U.S. companies anamount equal to 26% of their net income, according to thesurvey, by A. Foster Higgins andamp; Co., benefits consultants.   Under managed care, companies -- usually through aninsurance carrier -- set up networks of doctors and hospitalsthat, in return for the flow of patients, negotiate discountsin the fees they charge. Employers give workers financialincentives to use the networks, whose quality, costs andservices are monitored. Southwestern Bell won't say exactlyhow much money it has saved since it adopted the program inmid-1987. But a study Southwestern Bell commissioned says thecompany's costs rose 7% in 1989. The increase was held toless than 10% last year, Southwestern Bell says. That's lessthan half the national average increase.   &quot;It comes around to applying good purchasing principles tothe practice of medicine,&quot; says Craig Campbell, SouthwesternBell's associate director for benefits planning.   Most companies shy away from such direct involvement intheir employees' personal lives, but so far, nothing hasworked very well to curb health-care costs, which regularlyoutpace inflation. The Foster Higgins survey suggests whybenefit managers and corporate executives are frustrated:Corporate medical costs soared 21.6% last year, the surveyconcluded, on top of a 20.4% jump in 1989. Half the 1,955employers surveyed said current efforts to hold down pricesand limit the use of medical services were having little orno effect.   For better or worse, hundreds of companies are likely tofollow Southwestern Bell and others into managed care. &quot;Ifcosts in any other part of your business were going up 20% to30%, you'd learn about it in a hurry,&quot; says Joseph Duva, aconsultant with Ernst andamp; Young and a prominent advocate ofmanaged care. &quot;Companies are going to be in the healthcarebusiness, not only as payers but as managers of cost andquality.&quot;   For Southwestern Bell, the results so far have beenencouraging. In the first 2 1/2 years of its plan,per-employee costs in the 13 cities where the company offersmanaged care as an option were 13% lower than would have beenexpected under its traditional fee-for-service plan, says RonZ. Goetzel, director of data analysis at Johnson andamp; Johnson'sHealth Management Inc. division, which has studied the effortfor Southwestern Bell. In those cities, costs for employeeswho used the approved physician and hospital networks rose 6%in 1989, compared with 16% for employees who chose to seedoctors outside the networks.   But Southwestern Bell also learned that managing healthcosts isn't easy. It upsets employees at first, and it hassubstantial startup costs. Employee satisfaction is high now,company surveys suggest, but ending longstandingrelationships with particular doctors and hospitals iswrenching. And in the first year of managed care, thecompany's health costs increased 26%.   Managed care isn't, of course, the only game in town. Inrecent years, companies and insurers have resorted to anumber of strategies to limit health expenses, among themrequiring second opinions for certain surgery, andprecertification of hospital admissions. One result:Hospitalizations have declined and outpatient treatment hassoared. Spending is redirected -- sometimes, but not always,curtailed.   Some companies use health maintenance organizations, orHMOs. The employer pays premiums, and the HMO providesmedical services and manages costs. The employee sees doctorsemployed by the HMO. Unfortunately, HMO costs and premiums inrecent years have risen in tandem with group health-insurancereimbursements.   Managed care in some ways is an amalgam of these otherstrategies, and its success is far from certain. RobertEicher, a principal with Foster Higgins, says he has seensome managed-care plans in which savings from negotiateddiscounts were wiped out when doctors started billing foradditional services. From the patient's standpoint, &quot;success&quot;also hinges on whether or not discount service turns out tobe inferior care.   Even some supporters believe that while many companieswill benefit initially from the managed-care approach, it isultimately doomed unless Congress sets a national health-carebudget. &quot;Managed care is nothing other than buying healthservices wisely,&quot; says Walter Maher, director of federalrelations at Chrysler Corp. &quot;It still has to work within astructure that controls {total} health expenditures.&quot;   For now, while more and more companies are adopting theapproach, few have been at it long enough to gauge itseffectiveness. &quot;At this point, we don't have enough managedcare in place to have any impact on national statistics,&quot;says Carl Schramm, president of the Health InsuranceAssociation of America.   So Southwestern Bell's experience is interesting as a testcase. The company's effort began in 1986, when it decided tomake health costs a priority issue in bargaining with theCommunications Workers of America. The company had cause forconcern: Between 1979 and 1985, its spending on healthbenefits had jumped 217%.   But union cooperation was essential, and the CWA didn'twant to see benefits undermined. The union appreciated theproblem. &quot;At the time, we looked at it as a choice betweentwo evils -- help them pay, or help them save money,&quot; saysVictor Crowley, an official of the CWA in St. Louis, whichrepresents about 45,000 of the Southwestern Bell's 67,000employees. Ultimately, company and union agreed to maintainbenefits at existing levels. Southwestern Bell would assume arole in employees' health-care decisions, and the union wouldhelp develop the new approach.   The plan devised, known as Custom Care, is administered byPrudential Insurance Co. of America, which set up doctor andhospital networks in 13 cities in five states, making itavailable to 65% of the company's 87,000 workers andretirees. Those who select network care choose aparticipating general practitioner, who assumesresponsibility for managing the patient's care. That can meanmaking referrals to specialists, ordering diagnosticprocedures, and sending the patient to the hospital.Employees pay $10 per doctor visit, and the plan covers 100%of everything else except prescription drugs and certainlong-term psychiatric treatment.   Employees can still visit a doctor outside the network anytime they wish, but they must pay the price -- currently a$350 annual deductible for an individual, and a 20%co-payment (up to a maximum of $2,350 per year).   A third option for Southwestern Bell employees is an HMO,for which the company pays the annual premium. But benefitsaren't as comprehensive, and employees pay the full cost ofany care they seek outside the HMO.   For Mr. Bennett, the safety manager, the choice wasdifficult. &quot;You knew this was being done to save money,&quot; hesays. &quot;The biggest question was: What kind of quality were wegoing to get?&quot; In the end, fearing that his illness was goingto be expensive, he chose Custom Care.   Despite cost incentives, as well as months of meetings andnewsletter mailings to acquaint employees with the program,many of Mr. Bennett's colleagues were wary.   One major problem occurred in St. Louis when the plan wasfirst offered. Employees had to choose between Custom Careand the HMO option before Prudential had time to set up anetwork there. Not knowing who their doctors might be, 12,000employees -- nearly 20% of the work force -- selected an HMO.That was a costly decision for Southwestern Bell. The companypaid an average HMO premium of $1,966 for those employees.Custom Care, it was reckoned, would have been less expensive-- averaging $1,673. The difference cost the company an extra$36 million in 1987.   Additional costs were incurred when many employeesscheduled elective surgery for early in 1987, before the newplan kicked in. Also, a lot of employees were makingunaccustomed visits to doctors because the company was urgingthose who signed up for Custom Care to establishrelationships with new physicians. All of that costSouthwestern Bell money. When its medical expenses rose 26%the first year, &quot;there were a few concerned individualsupstairs,&quot; says Mr. Campbell, referring to senior executives.   The biggest hang-up for most participants was having tochange doctors if it so happened that their own doctor hadn'tjoined the network. Ruth Krone, a St. Louis employee who hadhad open-heart surgery in 1984, gave up her cardiologist in1987 because he wasn't in the network, and now she seesvarious heart doctors on referral from her primary-carephysician. &quot;I'm really happy with Custom Care, but I hatedthe part of losing my heart doctor,&quot; she says.   Prudential won't disclose details of its discountingarrangements, other than to say that prices paid to networkmembers are lower than the customary charges paid undertraditional insurance. Prudential says it carefully screensdoctors for board credentials, malpractice history and othercriteria and selects for its networks those who agree tocertain quality standards. The insurer also monitors thedoctors, using various cost and quality measures.   Southwestern Bell surveys its employees, 84% of whom lastyear said they thought the quality of Custom Care wasexcellent or very good. It uses data generated by Johnson andamp;Johnson to monitor Prudential's performance. That &quot;keepsPrudential focused on what is going on in the field,&quot; saysMr. Campbell.   Gradually the program has won acceptance among employees.One big plus: Patients going to network doctors don't have tofill out claim forms. Another: They might pay next to nothingfor major surgery, while people who go outside the networkhave had to pay hundreds of dollars (up to the cappedmaximum) from their own pockets.   Enrollment in the company plan among eligible employeesrose to 83% in 1989 from 77% in 1987, says Mr. Goetzel ofJohnson andamp; Johnson, while HMO enrollment declined. Nearly3,700 employees who live in cities where networks aren'tavailable have actually commuted to network cities for healthcare. And last year, 85% of medical dollars spent in networkcities were paid to network providers, up from 75% in 1988.&quot;As more and more employees face a big {medical} event, theydo come into the network and they stay,&quot; Mr. Campbell says.</TEXT></DOC>