<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900801-0115</DOCNO><DOCID>900801-0115.</DOCID><HL>   Senate Should Put Souter to Scholarship Test   ----   By Gary L. McDowell</HL><DATE>08/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   Several years ago, Jerzy Kosinski wrote &quot;Being There,&quot; astrange little book (later turned into a Peter Sellers movie)about a strange little man who, through no fault of his own,was suddenly thrust into the whirl of American politics. Asimple fellow who had grown to maturity tending to hisbusiness was an instant hit in official Washington: It hadnot seen his like before. His every utterance was taken withthe utmost seriousness; he was acclaimed profound. All theworld hung on his every word.   His words, however, were not what they appeared. He was asimple man, with simple thoughts, who sought simply toexpress them. His depth was added by his audience; the littleman had no depth at all. The joke was that his audience didnot know that; indeed, they did not care. He spoke to theirfears and their hopes and in so doing gave them what theyboth wanted and needed.</LP><TEXT>   Enter Judge David H. Souter.   By all accounts, Judge Souter is a very nice man: kind tofriends and family; a quietly pious fellow; a hard worker; anold-fashioned frugal Yankee. But that is not what got him thenomination to the Supreme Court of the United States. Whatgot him to the courthouse door is the notion that he isbrilliant; he is, we are assured, &quot;a scholar.&quot;   To say the least, the evidence is thin. In a legal careerthat has spanned nearly three decades, Judge Souter haspublished nary a word on the law; delivered no memorablespeeches; and, if it is to be believed, has not so much asengaged in spirited discussions with his closest friends andassociates about the most intellectually interesting ideas ofour time. By all accounts, the great public issues of our daydo not interest Judge Souter very much. This should betroubling to conservatives and liberals alike.   Neither side of the ideological divide should accept atface value the assurances of President Bush and Sen. WarrenRudman (R., N.H.) that Judge Souter is indeed a scholar and abrilliant thinker. If the process of advice and consent is tomean anything, the Senate has to refuse to limply accept thathe is a scholar worthy of the Supreme Court: It has to makehim prove it. The Constitution and the country deserve atleast that much.   The one way to make sure that does not happen is to focuson abortion to the near exclusion of everything else. Thatstrategy is already being put into play, at least in themedia. And the political shadows cast by Roe v. Wade (moreaccurately now, Webster v. Reproductive Health Services)threaten to obliterate any serious consideration of JudgeSouter's worthiness to sit on our highest court.   The question is not how Judge Souter would or would notvote on the issue of abortion; the question is how heunderstands the Constitution and the nature and extent ofjudges' power under that Constitution.   At a minimum, the Senate -- both sides of the aisle -- hasto get to the bottom of this enigmatic man from Weare, N.H.It has to resolve to know him, to know what he thinks, tounderstand his conceptions of the law and judicial power.   That will be easier said than done. But there is a way, away that would also carry with it political advantages forall concerned -- including the country as a whole. The Senateshould refuse to broach the abortion issue during theconfirmation hearings. Period.   By so doing, the Senate Judiciary Committee can give thisnominee a good deal greater scrutiny than if it allows theprocess to slide into the abortion mire, there to sinkbeneath the surface of reason. Indeed, it would provide theperfect opportunity to exhibit something akin tostatesmanship by going beyond the instant heat of politicalpassion to the more permanent concerns that will confront theSupreme Court as it lopes into the next century.   There are many other areas of fruitful inquiry the Senatecan and should undertake. How does Judge Souter understandthe idea of separated powers; of federalism; of the role ofthe founders' intention in constitutional construction?   What is his view of &quot;stare decisis,&quot; the binding power ofprecedent? Does he believe precedents are sacrosanct or doeshe, with Thomas Hobbes, believe that precedent merely showswhat was done, not what was done well? Again, going beyondthe particular cases to more general principles.   Or take the big one: Is there a right to privacy in theConstitution or not? But beyond that, how would he criticizeboth Justice William O. Douglas's majority opinion inGriswold v. Connecticut and Justice Hugo L. Black's famousdissent? In other words, force the nominee to bring thescholar's way of thinking to bear on one of the most famouscases in American constitutional history.   More generally on the question of the relationship ofhigher law to the Constitution, the Senate can go beyond thepassions of the moment and focus on what is fundamental. Askthe judge, for example, to share his views of Justice JamesIredell's rejection of natural law in constitutionalconstruction and Justice Samuel Chase's defense of it in the1798 case Calder v. Bull. The fundamental legal issue is thesame -- only the politics have changed, have calmed down.   To allow Judge Souter to escape close scrutiny would be aninjustice to the Constitution and the process of advice andconsent it provides. This is the nation's one chance to knowwhat this man thinks before he dons the robes that affect ourlives on a daily basis; perhaps more important, this is theonly chance to know how he thinks.   The Senate can easily do this in a way that honors ratherthan besmirches its reputation as a great deliberative body.The acrimony of the Bork debacle can be avoided if the Senatechooses to examine this man's scholarly credentials in ascholarly way. That, after all, is what advice and consentshould be about.   ---   Mr. McDowell is a visiting scholar at Harvard Law School.</TEXT></DOC>