<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910823-0119</DOCNO><DOCID>910823-0119.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Theater:   Housewife on the Run   ----   By Joel Henning</HL><DATE>08/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5</SO><LP>   Chicago -- Anne Tyler has created several memorably weirdfamilies in a series of funny novels. Frank Galati knows howto lift her characters off the page and make them perform foran audience. His screenplay of &quot;The Accidental Tourist&quot; wasnominated for an Academy Award. He also did well by anotherset of fringe characters, those inhabiting John Steinbeck's&quot;The Grapes of Wrath.&quot; Mr. Galati won Tony Awards for hisadaptation and direction of the classic Depression novel forthe Steppenwolf Theatre Company here.   The same director/adaptor and the same ambitious Chicagocompany have now combined forces in a lively adaptation ofMs. Tyler's 1977 novel &quot;Earthly Possessions,&quot; in its worldpremiere at Steppenwolf's new theater. The story follows thepicaresque journey of Charlotte Emory, a 35-year-oldhousewife and mother who decides to abandon her quietmiddle-class life. She goes to the bank to withdraw money forthe journey but is taken hostage by Jake, a bank robbermaking his getaway.</LP><TEXT>   It transpires that Charlotte is not at all a stablemiddle-class lady, nor is Jake much of a bank robber.Charlotte's husband is a preacher, whose connection to hisGod and the assorted wanderers he shelters in their home isfar more intimate than his connection to her. But Charlotte'swhole life has been disconnected. Although she is only nowgetting around to running away, she has wanted to flee eversince she was a kid, and thought about it even as sheaccepted her husband's proposal of marriage. She believesthat she is not the real daughter of her mother. All kidssuspect as much, but Charlotte's suspicion was deeplyreinforced by her grotesquely fat and self-obsessed mother,who constantly insisted that the hospital switched babies onher.   Charlotte's is the narrative voice of the novel. Mr.Galati had to stage her hostage-taking and cross-countrykidnapping, along with lots of disturbing flashbacks to thebad old days with Charlotte's mother, father and husband,while simultaneously presenting her calm and reflectivecommentary. His inspired answer was to split the characterbetween two actresses. It works, largely due to theconvincing and complementary performances of Joan Allen asMrs. Emory, the kidnap victim, and Molly Regan as Charlotte,the sardonic observer.   The two actresses are both somewhat lanky and angular, buttheir power to convince us that they are aspects of the samecharacter goes beyond physical similarities. They projectsimilar qualities of fond abstraction. They share an abilityto remain cautious and frightened of life while cerebrallysavoring its memorable moments. Ms. Allen is especially goodand funny as she finds herself caught in a series of bizarretriangles with her mother and father, then with her motherand husband, and finally with Jake the bank robber and hisgritty little girlfriend. Mr. Galati's inspiration as adaptorand director is especially evident during the play's finalscenes, when Ms. Allen walks away from her kidnapper andhelps Ms. Regan on with her robe and into the action. At thismoment, the two women switch. Ms. Regan steps out of hernarrative role and returns to Charlotte's husband. No longerdetached, Charlotte appears to be home for good.   Jake is only an amateur bank robber. His usual line ofwork is driving in demolition derbies, where he is anindifferent competitor. He has turned to bank robbery as amore reliable way to raise money for the rescue of hisjailbait girlfriend, Mindy, from a home for wayward girls,where she has been banished by her mother because she ispregnant with Jake's child.   Kevin Anderson plays Jake, a role miles apart from hisportrayal of Julia Roberts's nice guy boyfriend in &quot;SleepingWith the Enemy.&quot; Mr. Anderson is suitably threatening here.We fear that he may at any time use his gun on Mrs. Emory orsome store clerk who refuses to surrender the Doritos. But wealso like him. Mr. Anderson's Jake is less (and more) thanpure evil. Like Charlotte, Jake is struggling withrelationships. He desperately fights getting tied down bymiddle-class life, but feels compelled to help his pregnantgirlfriend get out from under. Jake's punishment is to bemothered by his hostage and henpecked by his girlfriend.Anderson's performance gets all of this just about right.   There is some slight danger that Sally Murphy will betyped as a pregnant waif, having played the pregnant Rose ofSharon in Steppenwolf's &quot;Grapes of Wrath,&quot; and now Mindy in&quot;Earthly Possessions.&quot; Ms. Murphy gives us the sweetsimplicity of the Southern country girl, but also therelentless determination of the earth mother entirely free ofthe doubts about life that plague Jake and Mrs. Emory. Bothare under her thumb once they liberate her from the home forpregnant girls.   Although she is also splendid in her role, let's hope thatRondi Reed is not typecast as a result. As Charlotte'sgargantuan mother, Ms. Reed has been costumed and made-up tolook like a 300-pounder. Awesome as her physical presence is,Ms. Reed sensitively conveys how nobody could emotionallyembrace her even if she were slender as a nymph.   The theme is that you can't escape your earthlypossessions -- not your parentage, not your boring anddistracted husband, not even your ugly and oppressivebelongings. Kevin Rigdon's set symbolizes this with a hideouspile of furniture, pictures and the other props ofmiddle-class life. Anybody with sense would want to escapefrom it.   The road is another important physical feature of thisstory. Jake and his hostage travel in a series of stolencars, munching on Doritos and drinking in roadside taverns.Mr. Rigdon can't actually take us on the road, but he expandsthe envelope of the stage with hundreds of photos of theactors in realistic settings projected on screens designed byJohn Boesche. The photos come and go so fast that theyachieve a movie-like effect. At first it's disconcerting tolook above the actors to another level of action. But as theplay unfolds, the audience settles in and finds theprojections no more distracting than supertitles at theopera. They are especially apt here because Charlotte is asecond-generation photographer, who took over her father'sstudio after his death.   What's best about Anne Tyler's work is that itrelentlessly focuses on what's most troubling and yetinevitable in relationships among family members -- theirphysical closeness, their emotional isolationbut does so witha tone of wry fun and ultimate acceptance. Mr. Galati and theSteppenwolf company have captured much of Ms. Tyler's best inthis production. The production continues through Sept. 8.</TEXT></DOC>