<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911007-0143</DOCNO><DOCID>911007-0143.</DOCID><HL>   A Spy's World:   The Personal Odyssey   Of a CIA Man Suggests   Agency's Shifting Task   ---   Alan Fiers Did Casey's Work   In Cold War, But Ground   Beneath Him Was Moving   ---   A Midwestern Boy's Loyalties   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and David Rogers   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Alan Fiers, a one-time Woody Hayes lineman,was the consummate Cold War soldier, the American version ofle Carre's perfect spy.   A sense of duty learned in the smalltown Midwest of theEisenhower era called him from the Ohio gridiron first to theMarines and then to the Central Intelligence Agency in the1960s. Two decades later, smarting from Soviet triumphs, theminister's son came home from abroad to oversee a CIA-backedguerrilla war in Nicaragua that would help topple a Marxistregime -- and his own career.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;You know I'll do anything you ask me to do,&quot; Mr. Fierstold Director William Casey before being named chief of theCIA's Central America Task Force in 1984. Months later, Mr.Casey did ask, at a luncheon alone with Mr. Fiers in thedirector's office in CIA headquarters.   &quot;Alan, you know, the Soviet Union is tremendouslyoverextended and they're vulnerable,&quot; Mr. Fiers recalls Mr.Casey saying. If America challenges the Soviets at every turnand ultimately defeats them in one place, &quot;that will shatterthe mythology . . . and it will all start to unravel.   &quot;Nicaragua,&quot; Mr. Casey said, &quot;is that place.&quot;   Ousting the Sandinista government in Managua became Mr.Fiers's singleminded mission. But little else about the yearsahead would be so clear. From Saudi Arabia to Istanbul, Mr.Fiers had reveled in the labyrinth of Middle East politics.Now, at home, he was a stranger ensnared, the CIA's ownhonorable schoolboy, whose Cold War ardor drew him into theIran-Contra scandal of secret arms sales and profits divertedto finance a guerrilla war.   As a result, Mr. Fiers's CIA days are over. He pleadedguilty in July to two misdemeanor charges of withholdinginformation from Congress. And, much to his chagrin, theIran-Contra prosecutions are continuing.   As the Cold War ends with the collapse of communism in theSoviet Union, the story of Mr. Fiers's continuing personalwar is a reminder of the lingering costs of that struggle athome. His account, spelled out in the only extensiveinterview he has given, is often one-sided and open todispute by witnesses to the same events. In many cases, it isimpossible to know for sure what he did or didn't know aboutthe covert activities of Lt. Col. Oliver North and otherfigures in the Iran-Contra case.   But his words and emotions are significant nonethelessbecause of what they reveal about the mind-set of the CIA inthe 1980s. That is a subject of intense attention these daysbecause, in many ways, the current Senate debate on thenomination of Robert Gates to head the CIA turns on thequestion of how the agency did its business during the Caseyera.   In fact, the similarities between the careers of Mr. Fiersand Mr. Gates are uncanny. Both are from the Midwest, Mr.Fiers from Ohio and Mr. Gates from Kansas. Both pursuedmaster's degrees at Indiana University at the same time inthe mid-1960s, then joined the CIA roughly a year apart. Atthe agency their paths diverged, with Mr. Gates going intothe analytical side of the house, and Mr. Fiers into covertoperations. But both were spotted by Mr. Casey in the early1980s as rising stars, and drawn by him into the ranks of theagency's upper management. Perhaps most significant,acquaintances say their relationships with the late directorhad a father-son intensity, a quality found too in Mr.Casey's ties with Col. North.   More than any other foreign policy issue in the 1980s, theconflict in Nicaragua split American government. The WhiteHouse made end runs around Congress. Speakers of the Houseopposed the war in the most personal terms, and lawmakersplunged into their own diplomacy, meeting with the verySandinistas Mr. Fiers saw as &quot;the enemy.&quot;   Caught in the middle, he fell back on his own code as aclandestine operator. But, he now recognizes, years in thecovert service had isolated him from his countrymen. Astask-force chief, he plotted the movements of a guerrillaarmy in mountains thousands of miles away. But at home, onlyhis wife and parents knew he wasn't really the StateDepartment diplomat he had claimed to be for two decades. Byhis own account, he was cut off, unable to lean over abackyard fence and chat with a neighbor about the path he hadset for himself.   The same isolation bound Mr. Fiers that much closer to acadre of fellow officers, and now he is a witness for theirprosecution. He hoped that by pleading guilty to themisdemeanor charges he would help end the overall criminalinvestigations of the Iran-Contra affair. But much to hisregret, an early confidant, Clair George, former head of theCIA's operations branch, now faces perjury charges based inlarge part on Mr. Fiers's testimony.   Mr. Fiers's lawyer, Stanley Arkin of Chadbourne andamp; Parke inNew York, says Mr. Fiers's guilty plea &quot;was an accommodationto the system that allowed him to tell his story and get onwith his life.&quot;   The Sandinistas' defeat in free elections last year, showsthe Reagan administration's strategy was a &quot;total, completesuccess,&quot; Mr. Fiers argues. But his own war can't end untilAmerica's political fight over Nicaragua -- seen, he says, inthe continued Iran-Contra prosecutions -- ends as well. &quot;Withthe consensus gone and a game of bare-knuckle politics goingon {in the U.S. debate}, both sides would and did go outsidethe bounds of propriety to gain advantage,&quot; he says. &quot;I thinkwe need some reconciliation, some understanding.&quot;   Now 52 years old and out of the CIA, Mr. Fiers has a safeharbor at W.R. Grace andamp; Co., led by J. Peter Grace, an oldally of Mr. Casey and the Contras themselves. Mr. Fiers isGrace's director of government relations. To this day,though, as he tells his story Mr. Fiers seems to personifythose younger Americans who were drawn into the CIA in the1960s by the fight against communism and, by the 1980s, wereprimed to fight for Ronald Reagan's vision of a resurgentAmerica.   Mr. Fiers, unlike Col. North, escaped largely unscathed byhis generation's war in Vietnam. But when a Mercedes-Benzdelivery truck loaded with explosives blew up in front of theU.S. Embassy in Beirut in April 1983, Mr. Fiers suffered apersonal tragedy that was a watershed in his life. It toppedoff the passions that led him into the swirl of Iran-Contraevents. A handful of his CIA Middle East colleagues died inthe blast, including Robert Ames, a widely respected analystand Mr. Fiers's tutor on the Mideast. A second, youngercompatriot whose name remains secret also died.   &quot;I lost two very, very, close friends,&quot; says Mr. Fiers.   The second friend was an agent who looked up to Mr. Fiersand shared his hunger for the U.S. to reassert itself abroad.He and Mr. Fiers &quot;had a very graphic conversation in Londonin early 1981 one night, and we talked about the importanceof getting out and being on the offensive,&quot; Mr. Fiersrecalls. &quot;And he said, `Alan, you've got to hang in therebecause we're counting on you. . . . You're one of ourleaders. You've got to hang in there.'&quot; It was to be aprophetic comment.   Mr. Fiers's journey to the thickets of Iran-Contra beganin the small town of Newark, Ohio. He saw the world the waymost Ohio boys did. &quot;Every young Ohio boy grows up with adream, particularly in the '40s and early '50s: If you weregood enough, you wanted to be a Buckeye football player,&quot; hesays.   A muscular, athletic youth, Mr. Fiers caught the eye ofthe legendary Woody Hayes, the irascible Ohio State footballcoach who was in the process of becoming an American iconthat symbolized tough discipline, fierce competitiveness, andunquestioning loyalty to authority. The future spy was atackle, playing both offense and defense, and even at just195 pounds he won a starting position his senior year.   Playing football for Woody Hayes was another keyexperience for Mr. Fiers. And he delights in saying that hewas drawn to Mr. Casey in part because the director soresembled his gridiron mentor. &quot;I have worked for two peoplethat are like peas in a pod,&quot; Mr. Fiers says. &quot;They are thesame people in different incarnations, Woody Hayes and BillCasey. These were guys of approximately the same age, bornand lived through the Depression. . . .&quot;   Mr. Fiers chose to join the military after a summer spentsweeping floors in an office building and listening everysunset to &quot;Taps&quot; from a military base just across the river.In his Marine hitch he saw Europe and got a glimpse of theDominican Republic, where he was part of a force that helpedquash a leftist revolutionary movement in 1965.   He discovered that he liked playing in the big game ofglobal politics, and sensed he could continue in the CIA. Sohe went to graduate school and sought out a visiting agencyrecruiter. He was accepted into the operations directorate --the shadowy part of the CIA that manages agents and runscovert operations -- and was sent to Turkey in the late1960s, then Pakistan in the mid-1970s. Back at headquarters,he held a senior Middle East management job, then was sent toSaudi Arabia as the CIA's station chief just as the Carteradministration was leaving office and Mr. Casey and theReagan administration were taking over.   He speaks now of the &quot;paranoid&quot; mindset acquired fromimmersion in the subtleties of Middle East politics, and thecaution of always being watched. &quot;The only way to describe itis you're on stage 24 hours a day,&quot; he says of the world ofthe agent overseas. &quot;Your every action, your every thought,is filtered through a mechanism -- and the more hostile theenvironment, the higher the filter.&quot;   Like many CIA officers, Mr. Fiers quietly fumed throughthe 1970s over what he perceived as a series of Americanhumiliations: Vietnam, Afghanistan, Angola, Iran, Nicaragua.When a Soviet-backed regime seized power in Afghanistan in1978, his teen-aged daughter was in Kabul. &quot;The thing thatreally drove her crazy was sitting in the compound lookingover the walls into a house of Russians next door andwatching them dance and sing and celebrating what washappening,&quot; he says.   He slowly concluded that America's foes were prevailing inthe struggle for world dominance. That fear was crystallizedin the Soviet Union's declaration of the Brezhnev Doctrine,which held that Moscow wouldn't allow a Communist takeover inany country to be reversed.   &quot;I was sort of thinking, `My God, this is just notright,'&quot; Mr. Fiers says. &quot;`We have to challenge them. We haveto challenge the Brezhnev Doctrine. We have to get out and beactively aggressive.'&quot;   Bill Casey provided the opportunity. The director hadgotten to know Mr. Fiers because of his work in Saudi Arabia,and now picked him to run Central American operations. In themonths that followed, Mr. Casey often would bypass the chainof command and seek out Mr. Fiers at home or in private talksin his office. Mr. Fiers's voice still betrays a wide-eyed,tightly wound enthusiasm for the period.   He recalls walking into the Oval Office to brief PresidentReagan about Central America, and hearing the tail end of aconversation between the president and Mr. Casey about U.S.hostages in Lebanon. &quot;Bill,&quot; Mr. Reagan was saying, &quot;somedaywe're going to fix it so Americans can be proud to walk inthe world like we were when we were young men.&quot;   As the CIA's Central American operations increasinglyfocused on Nicaragua, Mr. Fiers threw himself into 80-hourweeks. &quot;I did not think we could afford to lose,&quot; he says. Heand his colleagues, he says, sought to mount &quot;a realoffensive in Nicaragua. We were out to unseat the Sandinistagovernment in the context of delivering a defeat to Sovietexpansionism.&quot; The specific goal, he insists, wasn't a Contramilitary victory but the infliction of so much military andeconomic pain that the Sandinistas would be forced into aregional peace process and free elections.   He admits now to a naivete about his own country'spolitical tenor in the 1980s. When intelligence interceptsmonitoring Nicaraguan communications began picking upcontacts between the Sandinistas and members of Congress andtheir staffs, Mr. Fiers flew into a rage.   &quot;I grew up in a world where domestic politics stopped atthe water's edge,&quot; he says. &quot;We knew as a country who wewere, what we were, and there was a foreign policy that wasbasically born in a consensus and executed forthrightly.&quot; Nowhe saw people from Capitol Hill contacting his enemydirectly. His attitude toward Congress hardened -- and thecourse was set that would lead to his fateful decision towithhold information from Congress.   Mr. Fiers also says he didn't grasp fully what washappening alongside him in the Reagan administration.Military aid to the Contras was restored by Congress in thefall of 1986, but for the first two years of his tenure heoperated under laws that severely restricted the CIA's role.The National Security Council staff became a crude proxy forthe CIA in secretly aiding the Contras, and a curtaindescended behind which he could only see shadows.   He wasn't aware, he says, that the Saudi government hadbecome the chief source of Contra funding. Similarly, Mr.Fiers said he was unaware that David Walker, a former Britishspecial services officer he had known in the Mideast, wasmeeting with Col. North, who later testified that he hadarranged for Mr. Walker to &quot;provide operational support&quot; foractivities in Nicaragua. The CIA tracked arms shipments andcalculated the value of the money and supplies flowing to theinsurgents. But he says it wasn't until February 1986, in atalk with an operative at a Virginia watering hole known asCharley's Place, that he says he &quot;pierced the veil&quot; andlearned details of the air supply operation being mounted byCol. North.   Mr. Fiers's first brush with the National Security Councilaide, weeks after becoming task-force chief, is telling. Whenhe raised questions about Col. North, Mr. Casey stepped in,summoning Col. North to CIA headquarters, where the Marineofficer solemnly pledged he was doing nothing in CentralAmerica, Mr. Fiers says. The carefully staged meeting was a&quot;charade,&quot; Mr. George confided afterwards. It was designed tosignal to Mr. Fiers that he shouldn't look too deeply intothe North operations. In fact, soon after, Mr. Caseysurreptitiously warned the White House that Col. North wasbeing indiscreet in sharing information with the agency.   Mr. Fiers now admits that he in turn twice withheldinformation from Congress about what he had learned of thediversion of Iranian arms proceeds to the Contras and thecovert network run from the White House to supply theinsurgents.   The secrecy surrounding the twin operations began tounravel in 1986, as the airlift to the Contras stepped up.Soon, Attorney General Edwin Meese was telling the nation ofthe first clues that profits had been diverted from the armssales to Iran. Col. North was fired from the NSC and, inDecember, Mr. Casey was rushed to the hospital aftersuffering a seizure at CIA headquarters. He was dying ofcancer.   As the scandal broke, Mr. Fiers felt a sword over hishead. &quot;I had people, for legal purposes and for politicalpurposes, who wanted to prosecute me,&quot; he says. &quot;I had peopleon the Hill who wanted to see me prosecuted, the same peopledealing with the Sandinistas, for their political purposes.&quot;   Yet he says he hunkered down and tried to see the warthrough. In the fall of 1988, Congress again cut off militaryfunding for the war. Six months later Mr. Fiers retired. Anassociate remembers him breaking into tears at a farewellparty when he spoke of the Contras' cause.   Explaining why he hung on, he echoes both theunquestioning sense of mission taught by Woody Hayes and thelong-ago words of his friend killed in Beirut. &quot;Casey isgone. Oliver North's out of play,&quot; he says of that time. &quot;Andyet I said to myself, `We cannot lose. Alan, you're theperson that's got to survive as long as he can to run thisprogram so it has the maximum chance of success.' So that'swhat I tried to do.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>