<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900822-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>900822-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Keeping the Bomb From Iraq   ----   By Richard Perle</HL><DATE>08/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   MDEST LATAM EUROP FORGN</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)CONGRESS (CNG)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   Nine years ago Israeli aircraft destroyed the Baghdadfacility from which Saddam Hussein expected to obtain theplutonium for a nuclear weapon. The breathtaking accuracy ofthe Israeli air force was admired privately in defenseministries around the world. But most governments denouncedthe Israeli action.   Had Israel not sent its planes against the Osirak reactor,our world would be a different and far more dangerous onetoday. Saddam could have marched into Kuwait with the &quot;tryand stop me&quot; swagger that would come from nuclear weaponsadded to his already formidable arsenal of nerve gas andhostages. Nuclear weapons, once thought of as the &quot;greatequalizer,&quot; must now be seen differently. They are one thingin the hands of governments animated by rational policies toprotect national interests and a normal regard for humanlife. They are quite another in the hands of a brutalmegalomaniac like Saddam who wouldn't blink at the massdestruction of his &quot;enemies.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   So nine years later we -- this time it's our turn -- hadbetter be prepared to do it again. The destruction of Iraq'snascent nuclear capability together with its capacity tobuild chemical weapons should be the first priority ofAmerican policy in the current crisis. The restoration ofKuwaiti sovereignty and the total withdrawal of Iraqi forcesfrom Kuwait are important. But stopping Saddam from obtainingnuclear weapons is more important still. If this crisis endswith Iraq's nascent nuclear capabilities and chemical-weaponsproduction facilities and stockpiles intact, the Westernworld will have made a mistake of historic proportions.   It took the U.S. four days to decide that Iraq's brutalinvasion of Kuwait was unacceptable. How long would it havetaken the American president to respond -- and who would havejoined us -- if Saddam had nuclear weapons? Would the U.S.have sent 100,000 troops within range of Iraqi nuclearmissiles? With nuclear weapons Saddam would rule the Gulf andcontrol the world's supply of oil.   In the years since Israel acted to enforce the nuclearnon-proliferation treaty in the only way Saddam respects,Iraq, with help from America's allies, has rebuilt itsnuclear facilities, burrowing deep underground and deployingmassive air defenses to protect them. Meanwhile, Iraq istrying to obtain the ballistic missile technology that wouldenable a nuclear weapon to be delivered over great distances.One would think that there would be a concerted effort byIraq's potential victims to thwart these nuclear missileambitions.   Yet less than a month ago, at the last minute and over thestrenuous objections of the Commerce Department (which hadpreviously approved the deal), the U.S. stopped the shipmentto Iraq of a $15 million sophisticated metallurgical furnacesaid to be for the manufacture of titanium alloy prostheticdevices. The furnace was actually intended to advanceSaddam's nuclear and ballistic missile programs.   Ariane, the French-led European space consortium, is nowassisting Brazil in the development of a ballistic missile&quot;for civilian space purposes.&quot; Brazil, in turn, has beensupplying Saddam with missiles derived from earlierEuropean-supported &quot;civilian&quot; programs. The U.S. is on theverge of authorizing the sale to a Brazilian company involvedin missile development of a largely unsafeguardedsupercomputer. It will almost certainly be put at the serviceof its missile development program. (At the same time, wehave, for more than two years, refused licenses for Israeliuniversities to purchase supercomputers that they are willingto place under any set of restrictive safeguards the U.S.desires.)   Even the chemical weapons with which Saddam now threatensto destroy Israel, American forces in the Gulf or anyone elsewho stands in his way are derived, in large part, fromWestern suppliers of technology and precursor chemicals. TheWest Germans' lax regime of export controls and deliberatelyanemic enforcement has been most egregious. But they are notalone.   If American troops come under attack from Iraqi chemicalweapons in 1990 (or Iraqi nuclear weapons later), myopicWestern greed, nurtured by policy confusion and bureaucraticincompetence, will bear much of the blame.   When the current crisis is over, it should be a priorityAmerican policy to strengthen significantly controls over theexport of sensitive technology to Iraq and to insist that ourallies do the same. But even a strictly enforced,comprehensive export control regime would be unlikely to stopIraq's nuclear and chemical programs at this late stage intheir development. That is why an air attack on thefacilities is an essential first step to putting the Iraqigenie back in the bottle. The cork of export controls shouldfollow.   If we are to destroy Iraq's nuclear and chemical weaponspotential through military action and export controls, weneed to organize our allies accordingly.   The NATO allies (with the Soviet Union, Iraq's principalsuppliers of military equipment and technology) have longinsisted that the Gulf is outside NATO's &quot;area&quot; and thus notsubject to coordinated NATO policies or actions. As the direthreat to the European economies of war and turbulence in theGulf has long been obvious, the U.S. has long encouraged NATOto think about, and plan for, contingencies in the Gulf likethe war and occupation now under way.   Until the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the American effort tobroaden NATO's horizon had largely failed. Even as Iraqioccupation forces round up hostages and Saddam instigates aholy war against Western interests, West German ForeignMinister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, whose country is dependenton Middle East oil, cowers behind an interpretation of theGerman constitution that would preclude Germany joining itsallies in the Gulf. And the French, whose cynical alliancewith Iraq has helped to make Saddam a military power, wereopenly critical of the American blockade until joining itthis week. (President Francois Mitterrand said yesterday thatFrance would send ground forces to the United Arab Emiratesin response to the Persian Gulf crisis.)   Britain, however, has behaved admirably in the currentcrisis. So have some others. Turkey gets half its oil throughthe Iraqi pipeline it closed in support of the U.N. sanctionsand it trades extensively with Iraq. Although it has a greatdeal to lose, Turkey has courageously stood with the U.S.,doing more for the security of the European Community thanmany of the community's own members.   The silver lining in the cloud of Saddam's invasion ofKuwait may be a long-overdue realization on the part of someNATO allies that they have important interests outsidecentral Europe whose protection may require the exertion ofmilitary power. Defense Secretary Richard Cheney has beenarguing this theme persuasively within NATO councils. He cannow do so with the credibility that comes from demonstratedprescience.   The cohesion of the advanced industrial powers isessential to any effective administration of export controls.This can be obtained only through a combination of argumentand, where necessary, the sort of pressure that the world'slargest market and principal supplier of technology can apply-- when it has a mind to. What has been lacking is clarityand will on the part of the U.S. American ambivalence hasbeen evident in the continuing differences between thedepartments of Commerce and Defense and the action of theCongress in pressuring a pliable and divided administrationto decimate controls on the export of sensitive technologiesto countries where they will be used for military purposes.In this situation it is hardly surprising that venal Germanand craven French exporters have elicited commercial envy atthe Commerce Department and met acquiescence at the StateDepartment.   For the more immediate task, the destruction of Iraq'spresent -- as opposed to its future -- weapons programs, thesupport of America's allies, while desirable, is notessential. The U.S. has the air power to do the job alone.While some logistic support, like the use of European basesfrom which to stage air strikes, would be helpful, we shouldnot be deterred by reluctance on the part of countries that,having been part of the problem, now wish to escape becomingpart of the solution.   As for diplomatic support, it would be nice if we couldget it -- but not if we have to pay for it by ending thecurrent crisis with a face-saving tactical retreat by Saddamthat would enable him to fight another day. The opinion ofHans-Dietrich Genscher is a fly speck alongside the Westerninterests that are at stake in toppling Saddam by destroyinghis military potential and, in so doing, making it plain thatwe will not allow nuclear weapons to fall into the hands ofinternational thugs.   Saddam will not be the last menace to Western interests,and he is certainly not the most formidable. The mostformidable threat to our well-being would be a Saddam inpossession of true weapons of mass destruction and preparedto use them to extort power and wealth from those unable todefend against them or deter their use. In any contest inwhich one side is bound by the norms of civilized behaviorand the other is not, history is, alas, on the side of thebarbarians. This is a lesson to remember before we cancel theB-2 bomber and thereby give up the capability to destroytargets safely anywhere in the world without requiringforeign bases.   An attack on Iraq's nuclear and chemical facilities willnot be cost-free. But in the long run, sparing them willprove even more costly. President Bush deserves to know thathe will have bipartisan support for a policy that recognizesthis.   We have a narrow choice: Fly now or pay later.   ---   Mr. Perle, a resident fellow at the American EnterpriseInstitute in Washington, served as assistant secretary ofdefense in the Reagan administration.</TEXT></DOC>