<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920320-0007</DOCNO><DOCID>920320-0007.</DOCID><HL>   New Voice:   Surprising Illinois Vote   Lifts Women's Hopes,   Worries Incumbents   ---   Carol Moseley Braun Taps   Grass-Roots Anger Aimed   At Men Running Congress   ---   Help From Gloria Steinem   ----   By Jill Abramson and Alex Kotlowitz   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/20/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><RE>ILLINOIS (IL)MINNESOTA (MN)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   It was the evening of the Senate vote to confirm ClarenceThomas as an associate justice of the Supreme Court. CarolMoseley Braun, Cook County's recorder of deeds, and SusanGetzendanner, a former federal judge in Chicago, wereoutraged.   As Ms. Getzendanner tells the story, after appearingtogether on a local news program on which they expressedtheir opposition to Mr. Thomas's confirmation, the two womenagreed that one of them would challenge incumbent IllinoisSen. Alan Dixon in the primary. He was one of the fewNorthern Democrats to cast a vote for Mr. Thomas in the wakeof allegations of sexual harassment brought against him byOklahoma law professor Anita Hill, his former aide.</LP><TEXT>   A few weeks later, Ms. Braun and Ms. Getzendanner metagain at a Democratic function. Ms. Braun, who is 44 yearsold, said she intended to make the race. &quot;Terrific,&quot; Ms.Getzendanner replied. &quot;Then I'll run against Simon,&quot; shesaid, referring to Paul Simon, the other Illinois Democraticsenator. Although he opposed Mr. Thomas and doesn't facere-election until 1996, Sen. Simon has been criticized bysome opponents of Justice Thomas for an &quot;ineffectual&quot;performance on the Judiciary Committee during the hearings.   Polls at the time of the confirmation hearings found thatmost women ultimately sided with Mr. Thomas against Prof.Hill. Yet among some, the Hill-Thomas hearings have left aresidue of enormous anger. Ms. Braun's unexpected victoryover Sen. Dixon in Tuesday's primary is the first -- butperhaps not the last -- tangible political result of thatanger.   Even as the Democratic primary votes were piling upagainst Sen. Dixon, a genial politician widely known as &quot;Althe Pal,&quot; Illinois voters also were handing victories tofemale candidates in primaries for the state Legislature,judgeships and a number of other Chicago county and cityposts. In fact, in 26 Cook County judicial races in whichwomen ran, they won 20. The women candidates had agreed notto run against one another, according to a report in theChicago Sun-Times.   Elsewhere around the country, Ms. Braun's success has fedthe hopes of other women running for office this year. &quot;Thisis very good news,&quot; says William Carrick, a consultant toDianne Feinstein, the former San Francisco mayor who isseeking the Democratic nomination for a U.S. Senate seat inCalifornia.   &quot;It's extraordinary,&quot; says Jane Danowitz, the executivedirector of the Women's Campaign Fund in Washington, whichwas one of several women's political organizations thatcontributed money and other support to Ms. Braun. &quot;Even wedidn't think the Hill-Thomas hearings would have such a longafterlife.&quot;   Although Ms. Danowitz's organization gave Ms. Braun $2,000last fall and just sent off another check for $5,000, otherwomen's organizations kept their wallets shut or gave onlytoken contributions because they viewed Ms. Braun's candidacyas quixotic. &quot;This is the kind of race that makes me thinkI've been in Washington too long,&quot; Ms. Danowitz confesses.   Ms. Braun didn't simply tap into the anger over theHill-Thomas case. She broadened her appeal beyond genderlines by portraying the Senate as an elitist club that, shesays, &quot;is no longer representative of the people.&quot; Thus, shealso was able to tap the sentiments of voters whoseanti-Washington mood has been stoked by the Housecheck-bouncing scandal.   For much of the campaign, Ms. Braun was all but ignored astwo better-financed men who were running -- Sen. Dixon andattorney Alfred Hofeld -- traded fusillades. &quot;She stuck to apositive message and let the two white males chew each otherup,&quot; says Harriett Woods, president of the National Women'sPolitical Caucus, which supported Ms. Braun. Ms. Braun won38% of the primary vote to 35% for Sen. Dixon, with Mr.Hofeld far behind.   Ms. Getzendanner, who has long known Ms. Braun through aprofessional women's organization called the Chicago Network,says the campaign began gaining momentum several weeks agowhen the feminist writer Gloria Steinem played host to areception for Ms. Braun. For the first time, serious moneywas raised.   Ms. Steinem returned to Chicago last weekend to work forMs. Braun, whose campaign had been plagued by organizationalproblems and lack of money. It wasn't until the last week ofthe campaign that she had sufficient funds to run televisionads. By then, although polls still showed her trailing, &quot;ourhearts were really beating,&quot; says Ms. Getzendanner.   Her victory reflected a coalition of inner-city blacks andupper-income suburbanites. And her presence on the fallballot may prove good news for the Democratic presidentialnominee, assuring a big November turnout of black and womenvoters in an important state.   Ms. Braun's victory touched a nerve among Illinois voters.As she thanked voters yesterday at a Chicago commuter trainstation, many hugged her. When she entered a downtownsandwich shop, customers burst into applause.   Her candidacy particularly resonated for women. &quot;It's awoman's thing,&quot; says Brenda Stephenson, a resident of theRockwell Gardens public housing complex, who watched from herwindow as about 10 women celebrated below, yelling: &quot;She won.She won. We did it. We did it.&quot;   Says April Plous, a 44-year-old mother of two on Chicago'sNorth Side: &quot;I'm tired of having white, rich males runningthe show in this country.&quot; When she voted for Ms. Braun, sheadds, she thought of her two young daughters &quot;and howwonderful it would be for them to have a role model. A thrillwent through me.&quot; Ms. Plous, who hasn't been active inpolitics since her college days, says she plans to volunteerfor Ms. Braun in the fall campaign.   If she can beat Republican attorney Rich Williamson thisfall, Ms. Braun would become the first black woman -- and thefirst black Democrat since Reconstruction -- to serve in theSenate, a bastion of white males that currently includes buttwo women.   Her chances of winning in the fall will depend in part onher ability to build a strong organization throughoutIllinois and to compete financially with Mr. Williamson, whowill begin his campaign with $1 million in backing from thenational GOP. Also, Democratic and Republican strategistsstress, she must continue to broaden her message.   &quot;She has clearly learned something from the problems thefeminist groups have had,&quot; says GOP pollster Linda Divall,who worked for two unsuccessful female Senate candidates twoyears ago. &quot;She can't come across as too angry and strident.&quot;   Ms. Braun has already started to play down the connectionbetween her candidacy and the anger some women feel over theHill-Thomas hearings. And her personal warmth may keep herfrom falling into stridency. She grew up in a middle-classfamily on Chicago's South Side; her father worked as a policeofficer and her mother as a hospital technician. She says shecame to truly appreciate the philosophy of nonviolence at theage of 16 as she marched at the side of Martin Luther King inan open-housing demonstration in Gage Park, an all-whiteneighborhood. &quot;We have to connect as people and not allowhatred to divide us,&quot; she says.   Ms. Braun, divorced with one child, has a law degree fromthe University of Chicago. She was elected a staterepresentative in 1978, shortly after leaving her job as aU.S. attorney. Both during the campaign and in theLegislature, friends were struck by her ability to bringdissimilar people together. Barbara Flynn Currie, who enteredthe Illinois House at the same time, still expressesamazement that Ms. Braun managed to persuade fellowlegislators to increase welfare benefits, an ordinarilyunpopular measure.   While in the Legislature, she worked closely with HaroldWashington, Chicago's first black mayor. She also served asassistant majority leader, and ultimately was electedrecorder of deeds.   Just now, some of the groups that ignored Ms. Braun'sSenate candidacy are rushing to embrace her. Emily's List, agroup that raises money for female Democratic candidates(Emily is an acronym for Early Money Is Like Yeast) gave Ms.Braun a late, $5,000 contribution and is endorsing her in thefall election. (Emily's list includes Geraldine Ferraro inher campaign for the U.S. Senate in New York, Ms. Feinsteinand Rep. Barbara Boxer, who is seeking California's otherSenate seat.) Emily's List members contributed $1.5 millionto 14 candidates in 1990 and, in large measure because ofangry fallout from the Hill-Thomas hearings, has even moremoney to spread around this year.   Tomorrow, Don Foley, director of the Democratic SenatorialCampaign Committee, meets with Ms. Braun's campaign financechairman. Although the Democratic Party won't be able toprovide the resources that the Republicans will pump into Mr.Williamson's campaign, Ms. Braun can now rely on the partystructure to help her build an organization; Chicago's mayorRichard Daley and what remains of the old Cook CountyDemocractic machine quickly fell into line behind her afterthe primary.   Mr. Foley concedes that many Democratic incumbents arejittery about their own prospects in the fall, and that theirnervousness was heightened by Ms. Braun's upset. On the otherhand, there are eight Democratic women running for the Senatewhom Mr. Foley and other party strategists view as crediblechallengers in the fall. In some states, these candidates arechallenging Republican incumbents who are also suffering fromwhat some senators privately refer to as post-AnitaHill-stress-syndrome.   &quot;Arlen Specter should be shaking in his boots,&quot; says Ms.Danowitz, referring to the Pennsylvania Republican whoseprosecutorial zeal during the Hill-Thomas hearings drew muchfire. Sen. Specter is facing a primary challenge from ananti-abortion candidate, and abortion-rights Republicanactivists who have been a vital part of the senator'sconstituency say they have had trouble mobilizing theirtroops to support Mr. Specter because of lingering anger overthe hearings. Another GOP incumbent who may hear women'sangry roar is Iowa's Charles Grassley, a Judiciary Committeemember who backed Justice Thomas. In both cases, women aregiven good chances of capturing the Democratic nominations.   In any event, women's political groups say they arealready mobilizing for beyond 1992. In Minnesota, a group ofDemocratic women organized a campaign called MinnesotaMillion after the Hill-Thomas hearings. Their goal is toraise $1 million to recruit a Democratic woman to seek in1994 the seat currently held by GOP Sen. Dave Durenberger.They've raised $150,000 so far and co-founder Nina Rothchildsays that in the wake of Ms. Braun's victory on Tuesday,&quot;we're smiling.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>