<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900405-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>900405-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Progress in Work:   Ventures in Hungary   Test Theory That West   Can Uplift East Bloc   ---   Levi Strauss Jeans Factory   Offers Efficient Contrast   To Sluggish State Plant   ---   A `Unique' Chance to Change   ----   By Philip Revzin   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   KISKUNHALAS, Hungary -- A thin brick wall dividing a bigfactory building still separates East from West in thislight-industrial town near Hungary's border with Yugoslavia.   On one side of the building, two-thirds of state-ownedTexcoop's obsolete knitting machines sit idle for lack oforders. The rest churn out frumpy 100%-acrylic sweaters forthe Soviet Union. The plant, greasy and gloomy, has lostmoney ever since it opened.</LP><TEXT>   On the other side of the building, a freshly scrubbed,brightly lit Levi Strauss factory hums to piped-in jazz.Dozens of women hunch over new American sewing machines andswiftly affix pockets, sew up inseams and attach zippers.Little red pennants adorn the machines of those who sew 110%of their targets; yellow ones indicate 120%. Nearly everybodyhas a pennant. The women, all of whom worked for Texcoopuntil last year, now earn more than twice as much money.   The plant was profitable from Day One. Levi earned backits total investment in less than a year.   Eastern Europe still has far more factories like Texcoop'sthan like Levi's, but every day more ventures bringingWestern management, cash and free-market fervor are beingplanned. Not only will they make jeans, light bulbs andbicycles, but, economists say, the competition they createwill eventually force state companies to either shape up,sell out or close.   &quot;These investments are the future of these companies andthe future of Hungary,&quot; asserts George Varga, a GeneralElectric Co. executive who recently took charge of TungsramCo., a Hungarian light-bulb maker now controlled by GE.   The test of this theory is furthest along in Hungary, thefirst East bloc country to allow joint ventures on realisticterms with the West, the first to allow its people to ownprivate property, the first to establish an embryonic stockexchange. Free elections, to be completed Sunday, will giveHungary a legitimate, if fragmented, government dedicated tothe free market, and the country even belongs to theInternational Monetary Fund now. &quot;The betting is that Hungarywill write the book on how to make the transition&quot; from acentrally planned system, says Brian O'Connor, an IBMexecutive acting as an adviser to the U.S. Embassy inBudapest.   Hungary's main assets are its relative prosperity, itslong ties to the West through Austria, its prewar memory ofcompetitive pricing and its surviving remnants of a vibrantcapitalist society.   Although wages are low, food is plentiful; the lines inBudapest aren't at grocery stores, but at McDonald's, at thenearby Adidas sporting-goods shop and at Levi's downtownjeans store. Joint ventures with the West have been legalhere since 1972, though changes in the law didn't make themattractive until 1988. Politics also began opening up early;Hungary's decision to scrap its barbed-wire border withAustria last year led indirectly to the crumbling of theBerlin Wall.   But Hungary has major liabilities, too. Among them are a$20 billion foreign debt, an unstable political structure(nearly 50 parties ran in the elections, and none will get amajority) and inflation of 22% a year and rising. UnlikePoland, the other East Europe country that's out front ineconomic reform, Hungary hasn't any well-establishedopposition force capable of implementing a tough austerityprogram. No political party has the standing or the courageto advocate scrapping of the state system. So a step-by-stepapproach, however unsatisfactory, will continue.   &quot;People haven't yet seen tangible economic results,&quot; saysZsigmond Jarai, Hungary's deputy finance minister. &quot;There's apervasive pessimism, which we must change to optimism. Idon't really understand it; for the first time, we'recompletely free to make decisions, and we have realpossibilities.&quot;   Some of those possibilities are unnerving, after 45 yearsof a closed system that, however flawed, gave everybody atleast the semblance of a job. More than 90% of Hungary'seconomy is state-owned, and, officials estimate, as many as30% of the employees in state industries are superfluous.Large-scale privatizing could cause massive unemployment.Freeing more of the subsidized prices would make inflationeven worse. A rush of foreign investment, with a big dose ofimported machinery, could batter Hungary's balance ofpayments and spur further price increases.   Ferenc Bartha, the president of the National Bank ofHungary, sees just such a rush, with $350 million of foreigninvestment this year and $500 million to $600 million nextyear. Though Hungary can absorb such investment only withdifficulty, he sees &quot;a unique historical opportunity forHungary to transform our economy. We'd be foolish to missit.&quot;   Nonetheless, many Hungarians liken selling off statecompanies to selling off the family silver, even though theestimated $1 billion in foreign investment here so far isless than 2% of Hungary's total assets. &quot;It'd be bad to sellout the whole country to foreign capital because there's ashort-term crisis,&quot; says Judit Vasarhelyi, who helps run theSoros Foundation at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.   For instance, the state, which nationalized her uncle'sporcelain factory in 1945, recently sold it to a U.S.company. &quot;What does reprivatization mean?&quot; she asks. &quot;If it'snational property, shouldn't I have a say in it?&quot; ManyHungarians were also angered at the sale of a state hotelgroup to Swedish interests despite apparently higher bids;the deal is under review. Fresh controversy erupted this weekwhen Axel Springer Verlag AG was given control of fourHungarian newspapers by their managements; the West Germancompany apparently paid nothing for them.   Last year, there were 900 joint-venture deals, up from onein 1981, and officials expect more than 2,000 to be signedthis year. So far, the biggest have involved the U.S.: GEpaid $150 million for 50.1% of Tungsram. General Motors Corp.says it will invest up to $300 million in a joint venture tomake engines and perhaps vehicles here. Guardian Industriesis spending $110 million in a joint venture to convert anobsolete glass plant.   Schwinn Bicycle Co. is making bikes in a joint venture ina small part of the mammoth Csepel heavy-industry complexjust south of downtown Budapest. Schwinn-Csepel's 450employees must wear a badge adorned with American andHungarian flags; they follow different work rules and earn25% more than the tens of thousands of state employees allaround them.   The attractions for foreign investors: Wages are less thana third of those in the West. Buying more than a 20% equitystake in a joint venture can exempt the Western company fromtaxes for up to five years. Hungarian exports now getpreferential status in both the U.S. and European Community,and Hungary is a short truck haul from Austria on the westand Romania on the east. GE will sell its light bulbs hereand in Western Europe. Ralston-Purina Co. will make animalfeed destined for Romania as well as Hungary.   &quot;The rush {to invest} is motivated by greed and fear,&quot;says Michel David-Weill, senior partner of Lazard Freres andamp;Co., which advises the Hungarian government. Greed becauseEast bloc companies may turn into low-cost producers ofexportable goods, and fear because if they don't buy thesecompanies, the companies might make the goods themselves andbecome formidable competitors.   What Western companies offer Hungary in technology andmanagement skill will help it develop a free market. Schwinnbrought in sophisticated painting machines. GE willcomputerize Tungsram's hand-kept accounts and may introducehalogen-lighting technology. It will also introduceefficiency. Tungsram last year employed 18,000 people to makeand sell $300 million worth of light bulbs; GE's 18,000 U.S.lighting division employees produced six times as much insales.   A closer look on both sides of the factory wall inKiskunhalas affords a glimpse into Hungary's, and EasternEurope's, future.   Texcoop, the state-owned factory, was in trouble rightfrom the start. The idea of putting a mammoth textile plantin the middle of farm land came not from market demand butfrom a powerful Communist boss who saw political hay in 1,200new jobs. The target, 2.5 million pullover sweaters a year,has never been met; in its best year, 1979, Texcoop made 1.7million.   &quot;At the start, we were told how much to produce, given somuch yarn, sent all this stuff to Russia, and nobody expectedus to make a profit,&quot; Mrs. Gyorgy Olah, the plant director,says more in sorrow than in anger as she shows a visitoraround.   She stops by an idle knitting machine. When the plantopened in 1975, she says, the machines were new, but the workforce inexperienced. By the time the people learned to usethe machines, the equipment was already obsolete. Now it'shopelessly so. The 15-year-old East German machines aren'tcomputer-controlled and can't easily be adapted to makedifferent styles. All they do is churn out white acrylicsweaters for the Soviets and plain green polo shirts forFrench discounters.   Like most Hungarian state companies, Texcoop wastop-heavy. It has a threestory building that housed theinitial 400-person administrative staff -- 33% of the workforce. Many of these offices were occupied by Communist Partyofficials who didn't know a bobbin from a blowtorch. Most ofthem are gone, and the building is mostly deserted.   Texcoop got squeezed, too, by the unrealistic,now-collapsing East bloc trading system. Even thoughHungarian costs were rising 20% a year, Romania could and didrefuse to pay more for the sweaters because Romanianinflation was officially zero. The Hungarian government neverinvested in new machines because of Texcoop's losses. Mrs.Olah, hoping to get new equipment, listed Texcoop in thegovernment's book of state companies seeking foreign partners-- with no luck.   More promising are four separate negotiations with Italianand German companies about leasing portions of the factoryfloor. Already, Levi Strauss rents 40% of the plant floor for25 million forints ($400,000) a year. Selling more of theplant space would squeeze Texcoop almost out of business, butMrs. Olah sees no other choice.   Production is down to 600,000 sweaters a year and probablywill fall further. Employment is down to 400 and could dropanother 25%. Boxes of Soviet-bound sweaters are piling up inthe hallways because Hungary, tired of being paid in uselessrubles, has temporarily limited its Soviet sales.   &quot;I'm afraid we don't have much to be proud of,&quot; Mrs. Olahsays.   On the other side of the wall, General Manager AndrasPinter and Frank Ross, operations director for Levi StraussGeneva, which handles Eastern Europe and Africa for theparent company, bubble with pride. They show off photos ofthe rebuilding of their section of the plant. They got thekey in March of 1988 and made the first jeans that September.   Levi recruited 200 Texcoop workers. In return for a bigpay raise, it asked that they work only for Levi and not holddown two or three other jobs to make ends meet. Levi's wagesare still low by world standards; a line worker makes about$250 a month, a manager about $500 a month.   Today, the workers produce a pair of blue jeans every 10.8minutes. They were supposed to make 800,000 pair last year;instead, they made 1.2 million -- and doubled the profittarget. Levi's absentee rate is 6%; Texcoop's is near theHungarian average of 25%. Levi's employee turnover in itsfirst year was 28% -- low for a start-up operation, managerssay.   &quot;The only real difference between us and Texcoop,&quot; saysMr. Ross, a stocky, genial Scotsman, &quot;is organization.&quot;   Levi gets by with 12 administrators, all of whom havepersonal computers. Instead of a Communist official keepingan eye on the plant, Levi has a personnel officer. Plantmanagers post daily production results: Sewing Machine 11 met108% of its goal, Machine 12 did 106%. Four people were sick,five on vacation. The Geneva headquarters gets daily computerprintouts. Such controls ensure that huge rolls of importeddenim arrive as needed.   The cloth is cut on computer-controlled machines, sortedand given to the eager workers. The women say this is themain difference between Levi and Texcoop. &quot;There is alwaysmaterial for us to work on,&quot; says one, hunched over a sewingmachine bearing a yellow, 120%-of-production pennant.&quot;There's no waiting around.&quot;   Not if the women are to produce a pair of jeans every 10.8minutes. Mr. Ross says this compares favorably with Levi'sother 30 plants world-wide and will come down a few secondswhen a new automatic pocket-sewing machine arrives.   Mr. Ross says Levi's only problem was to persuadeHungarian managers to follow its procedures. &quot;They wanted tohelp us create the product,&quot; he says. &quot;I told them we'vealready created it; they just needed to operate everythingproperly.&quot;   Mr. Ross contends that the quality equals or tops that ofU.S.-made jeans. Levi prices its jeans much higher in Europethan in the U.S. and makes more profit here. In Europe, itsimage is high-fashion, the American dream. That dream costs aHungarian 3,500 forints -- $55, or about two weeks' salary --for a pair of 501s in Levi's downtown shop. Levi says itsells jeans here as fast as it can make them.   &quot;For Hungary, the real gain isn't 200 jobs or a lot ofblue jeans,&quot; Mr. Pinter says. &quot;It's the model. Hungarians runthis plant. We can do this.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>