<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900828-0025</DOCNO><DOCID>900828-0025.</DOCID><HL>   Delayed Takeoff:   Strong as a Loner,   USAir Loses Its Magic   After 2 Acquisitions   ---   It Forces Its Own Methods   Onto Piedmont and PSA,   Drops Ideas That Worked   ---   No More Smiles on Nosecones   ----   By Asra Q. Nomani and Judith Valente   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   U LABOR</CO><IN>AIRLINES (AIR)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)</GV><LP>   ARLINGTON, Va. -- With a slew of monopoly routes and afortress hub in Pittsburgh, USAir appeared to have a licenseto make money in the 1980s. It didn't do much marketing. Itdidn't buy jumbo jets. It didn't offer first class service.It wouldn't even give customers an extra bag of peanuts.   While other carriers were mired in red ink, USAir earned aprofit in every year except one following deregulation.</LP><TEXT>   So confident were the company's executives that theyundertook one of the biggest airline combinations in historyin 1987, acquiring both Pacific Southwest Airlines andPiedmont Aviation Inc. The two mergers made USAir thenation's sixth largest airline, and left it with dominantmarket shares in Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Baltimore, SanDiego, Charlotte, N.C., and Dayton, Ohio.   The mergers, however, also meant that USAir no longer hadthings quite so soft. Forced out into the rough-and-tumblearena of national competition, it suddenly had to worry awhole lot about the the industry's really tough players.   Moreover, in absorbing two successful carriers into itssystem, USAir adopted what it called a &quot;Mirror Image&quot;strategy of making them do everything exactly its way. Inthis, USAir gave up some of the very elements that made thetarget airlines successful.   On the West Coast, USAir has been getting clobbered in afive-way battle with AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, UALCorp.'s United Airlines, Delta Air Lines and low-costSouthwest Airlines. It has had to retreat in a number of WestCoast markets, and many of its Western routes are nowunprofitable. In Philadelphia, USAir is having trouble withlittle Midway Airlines and Eastern Airlines. To compete, ithas had to cut fares to below profitable levels. (Overall,though, the airline says that it is still maintaining itsmarket share.)   Late last week, USAir announced plans to furlough 3,600 ofits employees, including 500 managers. The layoffs, whichrepresent about 7% of its work force, are among the largestever in the industry. USAir also said it was scaling back itscapacity growth projections to a maximum of 2% next year froma previously projected 6%. Its stock -- already hurt by thedisclosure of a $113 million deficit in the first six months-- has plunged from a high of $54.75 last summer toyesterday's $16.25 close on the New York Stock Exchange.   USAir &quot;ran into problems when it began to venture outbeyond its area of natural advantage; now it is really quiteexposed,&quot; says Alfred Kahn, former chairman of the old CivilAeronautics Board and a pioneer of deregulation. Faced withintense competition from sophisticated rivals, the airline&quot;strikes me as being a rather clumsy giant,&quot; he adds.   Matters could grow even worse in coming months. That'sbecause USAir is more vulnerable than other carriers torising fuel prices. Its short-hop route system burns up morefuel because its jets spend less time at cruise altitude.Half of its 400 jets are more than 10 years old, and theseplanes are much less fuel-efficient.   The carrier recently mothballed six of its oldest Boeing727s and says it may ground as many as 49 older 727s and 737sin the next 16 months. It also has postponed taking deliveryof 12 new aircraft. A maintenance official says the airlinemay try to sell some of its older airplanes. If so, it willdo so in a weak resale market.   USAir also has almost completely missed out on thehigh-growth international market where traffic has risen ahealthy 16.9% so far this year, compared to 3% domestically.While other carriers have been adding overseas flights asquickly as they can get government approval, USAir hasservice only to London and Frankfurt. So it is especiallyvulnerable to a U.S. recession.   Against this backdrop, pressure is mounting on Edwin I.Colodny, USAir's reserved, bespectacled chairman, to improvematters. Mr. Colodny -- who said yesterday that he expects toretire next year after reaching 65 in June -- is quick toacknowledge that USAir has had its problems. &quot;There's no wayfor me to say that our management didn't make a singlemistake,&quot; he says, citing failure to pursue one foreign routemore aggressively. But he also blames the pressures theentire industry has been under, the heavy discounting in somemarkets, and the weakening U.S. economy.   &quot;All of these things have come together,&quot; he says. &quot;Growthhas just disappeared.&quot; Hence, the cutbacks: &quot;It's prudent forus to trim back when we don't see the market growing. I can'tpromise that 1991 would be profitable. Unless something inour economy changes dramatically, I can't see thathappening.&quot;   USAir has plenty of problems besides the economy.Government regulators, for example. Justice Departmenttrust-busters are pressing it for information about itsPittsburgh operations as part of an investigation intowhether USAir is blocking other airlines from startingservice there. USAir denies any wrongdoing.   The Federal Aviation Administration also is pressing Mr.Colodny to revise pilot training and crew staffing practicesafter USAir Flight 5050 skidded off the runway at New York'sLaGuardia Airport a year ago, killing two passengers. Theflight had paired a new captain with a newly hired co-pilot.USAir says it has addressed all of the FAA's concerns.   Whether Mr. Colodny's cautious management style is suitedto quick turnarounds may be another question. Given tomicro-managing, the publicity-shy ex-lawyer even chooses thepictures for the covers of flight schedules. He insists thatsenior managers sign off on department expenditures of over$1,000.   When USAir decided to go to two classes of service on allroutes last year, it moved very cautiously, offering only asingle row of first class seats on many flights. And whileUSAir jumped into the merger game in a big way, Mr. Colodnywas one of the last airline chief executives to pursue amajor acquisition. &quot;Basically, he was forced into it,&quot; saysan industry official, because other carriers had alreadygobbled up their competition.   Some in the industry believe that the company's years ofinsulation from major competition gave USAir executives aninflated opinion of their operating style. This wasparticularly damaging when USAir bought PSA and Piedmont.Rather than learning from the two carriers, it appears, USAirsimply imposed its own way of doing business.   Both PSA and Piedmont had already shown theirprofitability and customer appeal. Piedmont, headquartered insleepy Winston-Salem, N.C., had attracted a loyal followingwith its Southern hospitality and outstanding service. PSAhad wooed West Coast fliers with a playful style that allowedflight attendants to begin safety briefings with lines like,&quot;In case you haven't been in an automobile since 1962, thisis a seat belt.&quot;   Piedmont had what many in the industry believed was a moresophisticated ticket pricing system, which balanced full-fareand discount tickets more profitably. USAir scrapped thePiedmont system and still uses only its own. &quot;The revenuedifferential was astounding&quot; -- and lower -- on many flights,says one former Piedmont executive.   Mr. Colodny says making practices uniform was necessary torunning the big airline.   His most immediate problem is USAir's unusually high laborcosts, and they too are related to the merger. Labor costshave climbed to 4.13 cents per available seat mile from 3.57cents before the merger. Meanwhile, the carrier's yield, orrevenue from ticket sales, dropped to 16.55 cents peravailable seat mile in the first half of this year from 17.29cents in the like period last year.   USAir's labor costs are high because the airline, anxiousto insure labor peace, gave PSA and Piedmont workers heftywage hikes after the merger. The move cost USAir anadditional $100 million annually, at least, according toformer Piedmont executives. Some customer service agents whoearned about $14,000 at Piedmont now earn at least $20,000 atUSAir.   With mechanics and flight attendants in contractnegotiations, Mr. Colodny has a chance of tackling theproblem soon. USAir may have to revert to using Piedmont'smore flexible work rules. At Piedmont, customer serviceagents earning about $6.75 an hour also worked on the tarmac,directing aircraft in and out of their gates. At USAir, amechanic earning a minimum of $18 an hour performs this job.USAir had to hire an additional 400 mechanics to service thesame number of Piedmont flights because of this rule.   Mr. Colodny may also have to ask USAir employees forgreater flexibility. At Piedmont, many employees werecrosstrained so that gate agents could load bags whennecessary. Moreover, USAir flight attendants, on average,work two to three fewer days a month than Piedmont's did, formuch higher wages.   USAir's labor costs are high even when compared with therest of the industry. At United, entry-level aircraftcleaners earn $6.83 an hour; the job pays $10.94 an hour atUSAir. Getting the unions on board promises to be a bigchallenge, but Mr. Colodny is optimistic. &quot;We expect toachieve some changes,&quot; he said. &quot;We certainly hope to improveour labor costs.&quot;   Industry analysts say USAir will also have to become moresensitive to marketing trends and customer preferences. WhenUSAir cut the old Piedmont practice of serving passengerswhole cans of soda, instead of just a cupful, Piedmontfrequent fliers put their foot down. Cost-cutting was onething, but this was downright stingy, they wrote to theCharlotte Observer. Chastened, USAir started handing out thecans again.   Passengers on Piedmont had also come to love the basketsof granola bars, cookies and crackers handed around in firstclass and the snacks served on flights of less than twohours. When USAir cut that admittedly minor service,complaints again flowed in. Back came the baskets, but minusthe expensive cookies.   USAir's experience with PSA also taught it that hewing toa not-invented-here philosophy can cost you in the end. PSAused to hand out cold snacks -- a quick and easy service --on its short-haul California routes. USAir changed those tohot meals. But, encumbered by trays and the need to heatmeals, flight attendants couldn't keep up with the short-haulschedule. Several flights wound up circling airports whilethe crew frantically tried to collect trays and stow awaycarts.   So USAir is back to cold snacks on those flights. Itstill, however, hasn't reinstituted PSA's practice of lettingpassengers buy tickets on board or in coupon books. And gonenow are the smiling faces PSA had painted on the nose of itsplanes. George Shortley, PSA's former chief financialofficer, says that was a big marketing mistake. &quot;That was oneof the most recognized trademarks in California,&quot; he says.   Mr. Colodny says USAir had to take the smile off becauseit wanted all the planes to look alike. &quot;It's very difficultto have a smile on everywhere,&quot; he says.   USAir has also been wrestling with its on-time performanceand its baggage service. It chalked up one of the worstrecords in the industry most of last year and part of thisyear. Part of the problem stemmed from having to integrateemployees of all three carriers -- a daunting task, as othermerged airlines have also discovered. USAir now operates 17bases from which crews are drawn -- over twice as many asindustry leader United.   The complexity of that structure was quickly apparent. Inthe early months of the merger, it wasn't unusual for pilotsto show up for a flight, only to find they were scheduled ona plane they weren't certified to fly.   USAir says it has worked out its crew scheduling problems.Its on-time performance has also improved. It was fifth bestin the industry in June, the last month for which statisticsare available. However, in some cases, USAir simply addedminutes to the scheduled arrival time. The flight that usedto be scheduled to leave New York's LaGuardia at 6:10 p.m.and reach Charlotte at 7:58 p.m., for example, is nowscheduled to leave at 6:15 but arrive at 8:15. USAir says itrevised schedules to make them &quot;more realistic.&quot;   In the end, USAir, now that it has joined the big leagues,is wrestling with many of the same problems plaguing othermajor airlines: how to keep service good and meet customerdemands while holding costs down. But in Mr. Colodny's mind,critics who say the company just isn't used to competing arewrong: USAir has had to fight for market share in the past.And while he says he's disappointed by the company's recentperformance, he suggests that some of the criticism of latehasn't been all that fair. &quot;It's easy to criticize whenyou're not making money,&quot; he says.   After 33 years with the company, Mr. Colodny now facessome of his biggest tests -- in his last year. Hisannouncement that he plans to retire in 1991 (a firm datehasn't been set) lays to rest widespread speculation that hemight stay on. But whether he will be able to see thebeginning of a turnaround at USAir by then is uncertain. Inan interview, even Mr. Colodny seems doubtful. &quot;It would bebetter to have a happy ending&quot; to his career, he says.</TEXT></DOC>