<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910722-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>910722-0070.</DOCID><HL>   Quick Change:   A 1990 Reorganization   At Hewlett-Packard   Already Is Paying Off   ---   HP Cuts Bureaucracy, Costs,   Undoing Past Blunders,   2 Striking New Computers   ---   Staffers Fret Over `Excessing'   ----   By Stephen Kreider Yoder   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AAPL CPQ DEC HWP IBM MIPS MOT MSFT SUNW</CO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)ILLINOIS (IL)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   PALO ALTO, Calif. -- The aging matriarch of Silicon Valleyhas gotten a face lift, and apparently a new lease on life.   Just last year, Hewlett-Packard Co. seemed to be doingnothing right. It lost share in critical computer marketsafter delaying new machines. Orders fell in older-linebusinesses such as medical equipment, and a bloated workforce ate into already-thinning profit margins. HP's earningsfell in each quarter, its stock slid to an eight-year nadirand morale hit new lows.</LP><TEXT>   Says executive vice president Lewis Platt: &quot;People rangedfrom being angry to demoralized.&quot;   HP, once the quintessential Silicon Valley success story,was suffering the classic symptoms of corporate gigantism:slow decision making, sparring fiefdoms and an uncontrolledcost structure. In the fast-moving Valley, HP increasinglyresembled a dinosaur watching fleet-footed mammals steal itsnest eggs.   But in a startlingly short time, HP has begun ametamorphosis. In a series of changes culminating in a majorreorganization last October, its chief executive officer,John Young, has eliminated excessive layers of management andput product development under strong leaders who have cutthrough red tape. He has lumped computer-product groupstogether according to the way they are sold, and reshuffledthe sales force to solve some acute marketing problems. HPhas gotten tougher about employee costs and is touting itselfhead-to-head with arch rivals in its advertising.   &quot;We didn't want to be caught in the big-company mentalitywhere you can't get anything done . . . like companies Ican't mention that have blue products,&quot; says Mr. Young. &quot;If Ihad my life to live over again I would have done it earlier,maybe as much as two years.&quot;   The early returns: Since March, HP has fired off somehighly impressive new computers, including a checkbook-sizedpersonal computer and a workstation that set new speedstandards. Profits are up, and Friday HP stock closed at $56-- more than double last November.   HP's progress may provide an object lesson for other largecompanies suffering from lethargy. While some factors doggingHP's computer business were unique to the company, it facedmuch the same bureaucracy and sloth -- like habits nowseemingly hobbling such companies as International BusinessMachines Corp. and Digital Equipment Corp.   HP's revival also comes as a crucial battle is shaping upamong makers of personal computers and workstations. Theprize: dominance of the huge, growing desktop market. Withfast new workstations launched in March, HP poses a newthreat to IBM, DEC and Sun Microsystems Inc. HP is now&quot;better positioned than IBM or DEC to capitalize on the keygrowth trends in computing in the 1990s,&quot; writes securitiesanalyst Robert Herwick of Hambrecht andamp; Quist.   HP's lead may be short-lived as rivals raise the ante withfaster machines. Its critics counter that the company lacksthe market share in PCs and workstations that it would needto woo large numbers of new users. &quot;I don't worry about HP,&quot;says Sun's president, Scott McNealy. &quot;I worry about IBM andMicrosoft.&quot;   Indeed, HP's biggest challenge in computers is likely tocome, several years hence, from potentially powerfulalliances that include IBM and Microsoft Corp. A recenttechnical alliance among IBM, Apple Computer Inc. andMotorola Inc. could siphon off HP customers, as could analliance that includes Microsoft, Compaq Computer Corp., MipsComputer Systems Inc., DEC and others. And internally, HP isstill threatened by eroding profit margins as its revenueincreasingly comes from commodity-type products such as laserprinters sold by discount dealers.   The malaise in HP's computer operations, and the company'sturnaround, hark back to a tiny one-car garage in a modestPalo Alto neighborhood where David Packard and WilliamHewlett in 1939 built HP's first gadget, a device called anoscillator. Disney Studios soon bought one to help make moviesound tracks, and sales took off. As HP grew and prospered,its founders split off new product divisions as independent,entrepreneurial bodies. The idea was to avoid creating amonolithic giant, and instead duplicate the founders' successover and over.   This worked wonderfully in HP's old line of measurementequipment, which didn't require much coordination betweendivisions. Computers were different. By the late 1970s,several HP divisions had independently created new computers,what one executive calls &quot;a hodgepodge of computer productsthat were really not related well to each other.&quot; Computersrequired a complex melding of disparate technologies,components such as chips, disk drives and software.   So in the early 1980s, HP took two critical steps: Itdecided to make its computers conform to common standards,and in 1984 it tried to place its disparate computeroperations in a single unit.   The first move proved astute. By some accounts, HP now isthe world's biggest seller of systems based on Unix, anindustry software standard. But the second move proved along-term liability. Putting all computers into oneorganization helped the company switch to a singlearchitecture, but the organization became mired in its owncomplex decision-making process involving numerous meetingsamong the many groups whose components went into a computer.   The result was gridlock, as the company tried to buildcomputers by consensus instead of running computer-designteams as entrepreneurial units with strong leaders. Newmachines were regularly delayed in order to accommodate allopinions.   The 1988 launch of the Model 950, an importantminicomputer, was more than a year late becauseoperating-software decisions dragged on, says PeterRosenbladt, an executive involved in the program. &quot;There wasalways reason for another level of review, and we just becamemired in our own administrative process.&quot;   Likewise, HP lagged in PCs. Its models were late,high-priced &quot;me-too&quot; copies of IBM's PC. HP's share of theworld PC market was a dismal 1.2% in 1990 sales, according toDataquest Inc.   Its 1989 acquisition of Apollo Computer Inc. added newburdens. Melding the two concerns went at a snail's pace.   But the big blow came when Motorola delayed amicroprocessor that HP planned to use for a new generation ofworkstations in 1990. That led to what Mr. Platt estimateswas $750 million in lost business. Its workstation-marketshare, which hit 25% in 1989 after the Apollo acquisition,fell to 23% of the $8.6 billion business last year, accordingto International Data Corp., a market-research firm. Makingmatters worse, some old-line sectors such as medicalequipment and calculators had slow revenue growth in 1990.   HP's sales setup added to the bureaucratic morass. In its1984 reorganization, HP had combined several sales forcesinto a single group answering to the executive committee, notto the people designing and making the products. So even thesimplest decision was sent up the management chain, sometimesall the way to Mr. Young. To start a rebate program lastyear, a group manager in the laser-printer operation neededeight signatures, including those of two executive vicepresidents.   Even if a division had a hot product, it couldn't count onthe sales force to push it. The printer group struggled lastyear to persuade sales to exploit one of the fastest-growingretail channels, supermarket-style &quot;superstores.&quot; RaymondSmelek, who runs HPs disk-drive works, was so irked by theEuropean sales force's failure to sell drives to Europeancompanies that he considered closing the business.   Moreover, HP failed to cut sales costs as revenueincreasingly came from lower-margin big-volume outlets. HPspent 52.4% of revenue to sell and service equipment in the1990 first quarter, up from 49.9% a year earlier.   HP reached a low last year, when earnings fell 11% to $739million from $829 million in 1989. The malaise wasn'tlife-threatening. HP hasn't had losses, and many of itsold-line businesses, free of the bureaucracy snarling thecomputer group, brought in steady if slow-growing profits.Last year's sales were $13.2 billion, up 138% from 1980 and20 times 1971 sales.   Mr. Young concedes that by 1988, it was clear that HP'scomputer operations had developed &quot;a flawed organizationmechanism.&quot; That year, he tried to correct the flaws with areorganization he now calls &quot;a half-step that didn't get thejob done.&quot; By mid-1990, HP's fortunes and morale had sunk solow that Mr. Packard, the retired co-founder, went into theoffice to look for solutions.   But the solution -- last October's reorganization -- camefrom Mr. Young. He had already tested some of its concepts.In early 1990, he authorized a secret program to build aworkstation using technology known as Risc(reduced-instruction-set computing), of which HP was an earlypioneer. The project, code-named Snakes, was to build amachine that started at about $12,000 but was several timesfaster than machines from Sun, IBM and others that weregobbling market share.   Mr. Young put a single manager, Dennis Georg, over it withnear-dictatorial power. Mr. Georg moved a team of engineersinto separate quarters. Unlike past workstation efforts,decisions were made at low levels. Defying HP's consensustradition, a poster on Mr. Georg's office wall reads: &quot;Thisis not a Democracy.&quot;   In March, after a year of development, HP unveiled itsSeries 700 workstations, wowing computer-industry executivesand analysts. HP &quot;has enough of a lead that it may take theother guys a year or two to catch up,&quot; says Joseph Costello,president of Cadence Design Systems Inc., which sellssoftware for Sun, HP and others.   The second salvo came with a palm-top PC, the 95LX. The$699 device contains Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet software and canreceive data via satellite networks. The gadget got kudosfrom industry dons such as Jean-Louis Gassee, Apple's formerchief product planner, who says the machine could create amajor new market and help HP &quot;reassert itself in the PCworld.&quot; Orders exploded, forcing HP to build a new factoryline.   Meanwhile, as part of the reorganization, Mr. Young splitthe single sales group into many pieces that answer directlyto the product groups. And HP has reduced duplication. Untillast year, it made PCs at four sites; now it makes them atone. Before the reorganization, laser printers were shippedthrough hundreds of distribution centers around the world;now there are seven. Last year some 13 groups in HP workedindependently on software to make circuit designing easier;this year there is just one group. And that laser-printerrebate program that required eight signatures would now onlyrequire two.   A victim of HP's makeover is its image -- inside and out-- as a benevolent giant. Once satisfied with meekadvertising in trade journals, HP launched a barrage of printads for its new workstations in magazines such as U.S. News andamp;World Report, chiding Sun with the message &quot;What happened tothe old Sparc?&quot; referring to Sun Microsystems's Sparcstationcomputers.   HP's turnaround has had its human costs. Last year, 3,000jobs were cut. HP says it has never fired anyone for economicreasons. It does, however, &quot;excess&quot; some people. An&quot;excessed&quot; employee must find a job within HP in threemonths, after which he or she is assigned one, sometimes at alower position or in a remote location.   &quot;It used to be you could count on the company to lookafter your best interests,&quot; says an HP marketing staffer.&quot;Now there's just dread of the E-word.&quot;   There are hazards for the new HP. Mr. Young must make surethe company doesn't fall into what HP executives say is ahistorical pattern -- failing to guard markets it haspioneered. The company must turn out new versions of itspalm-top machine before companies such as Japan's Sharp Corp.can turn out knockoffs. To maintain workstation momentum, itmust soon market a RISC workstation with a lower price tag --about $5,000 -- in order to compete with Sun, says analystVicki Brown of International Data Corp. &quot;They're hamstrungbecause they don't have one now,&quot; she says.   Now that Mr. Young has begun to turn HP around, a bigquestion is who succeeds him. He's 59, and many think he mayretire within two years. Among prospects, many bets are onRichard Hackborn, 54, who is credited with establishing anddefending HP's dominant 59% share of the laser printermarket. Refusing moves to the Palo Alto headquarters, Mr.Hackborn works out of Boise, Idaho, where he now oversees allmass-market products as an executive vice president, andmaintains a maverick image.   Another candidate is Mr. Platt, 50, the executive vicepresident who orchestrated the Apollo merger, which wasultimately a success. He now heads the HP division makingworkstations and minicomputers. If HP can keep its lead inworkstation performance and continue to trim costs, Mr. Plattwill earn much of the credit for bringing HP's computerbusiness out of its languor.   HP dealers are certainly delighted with Mr. Platt'sorganization. Last fall, Don Purkey, a workstation dealer inSan Jose, Calif., added Mips machines to his lineup when HPdidn't deliver competitive machines. Then the Series 700workstations, from Mr. Platt's organization, arrived. Mr.Purkey says he sold more HP machines in the next eight weeksthan in the prior 18 months. HP &quot;is a company that seems tohave come out of its lethargy,&quot; he says.</TEXT></DOC>