<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900604-0179</DOCNO><DOCID>900604-0179.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Federal, State Judges Plan to Hold   Joint Trial to Settle Asbestos Cases   ----   By Wade Lambert and Martha Brannigan   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   XON SC RD MOB UCL TX CHV TWX TAXES LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   In a highly unusual move, a federal judge and a statejudge said they will hold a joint trial -- with the twojudges presiding over two juries sitting in one courtroom --if efforts to settle 571 asbestos cases fail.   Lawyers working on the cases said they know of noprecedent for simultaneous federal and state trials. U.S.District Judge Jack Weinstein and New York state JusticeHelen Freedman provided few details as to how such a planwould be carried out. Earlier this year, the judges appointedlawyer Kenneth Feinberg to oversee efforts to settle thefederal and state cases.</LP><TEXT>   The judges set a Sept. 18 trial date for cases that aren'tsettled. The 571 cases involve workers at the Brooklyn, N.Y.,Navy Yard who were exposed to asbestos, which can causerespiratory ailments and cancer. More than 40 former asbestosmakers are named as defendants.   &quot;This is unprecedented,&quot; said Mr. Feinberg, a partner atKaye Scholer Fierman Hays andamp; Handler. &quot;It is another attemptby the court to find another way to manage the trials ofthese asbestos cases.&quot;   The judges appeared to be using the threat of a massivedual trial as leverage in encouraging the parties to settle.&quot;We want you to concentrate on getting the information youneed and settling these cases,&quot; Judge Weinstein told defenselawyers at a hearing Friday.   Mr. Feinberg said he is still optimistic that the casescan be settled during the next few weeks. Settlementproposals have been made to all the defendants, but only halfa dozen have responded, he told the judges. He said he willspend the next few weeks trying to negotiate a totalsettlement offer that can be presented to the plaintiffs'attorneys.   Defense attorneys say the possibility of a massive trialcould encourage a settlement. &quot;It certainly is a hammer,&quot;said Gita Rothschild, co-lead counsel to the defendants inthe Brooklyn Navy Yard cases. She said the combination of somany different cases makes it difficult to get a fair trial.&quot;If you are going to try 571 cases fully on each one's meritsyou'd be there now until the cows come home,&quot; she said. &quot;Ihave no reason to doubt that Judge Weinstein means what hesays about having a trial, but there's got to be somerealistic structure established.&quot;   Perry Weitz, co-lead counsel for the asbestos victims,said he expects some of the cases to go to trial. &quot;JudgeWeinstein is not a man to be toyed with,&quot; he said. &quot;Like anyjudge, he is using the trial as a tool (to push for asettlement). But he will not postpone it. He will try thesecases.&quot;   ---   A SALES TAX on newspapers was ordered by the FloridaSupreme Court.   Florida's high-court ruled that a state sales-tax law thatlevies a 6% tax on magazines but exempts newspapers isdiscriminatory and struck down the exemption on newspapers.   Magazine Publishers of America Inc., Time Warner Inc.,Hearst Corp. and others had claimed in a suit filed in LeonCounty Circuit Court that the sales-tax law violates theFirst Amendment and illegally differentiated betweennewspapers and magazines.   The magazine interests were hoping to have the tax onmagazines scrapped, but the suit backfired. The high courtsaid instead that the proper solution was simply to taxnewspapers as well. The state's high court rejected themagazine publishers' argument that the tax violates freedomof the press guarantees.   The Florida Supreme Court decision reversed the LeonCounty Circuit Court's ruling that held that the sales tax onmagazines was indeed a first amendment violation and struckdown the tax.   William Hyde, a lawyer for the Florida Press Association,which intervened in the interest of newspapers, said theassociation will ask the court to reconsider its unanimousdecision.   He said newspaper interests may appeal to the U.S. SupremeCourt.   ---   A JUDGE REFUSED to step down from an oil-company antitrustcase.   The federal judge in Los Angeles had been accused ofconflicts of interest by lawyers for the city of Long Beachand the state of California in an antitrust suit they filedagainst six oil companies.   U.S. District Judge William L. Gray proclaimed hisimpartiality in the case, which he has presided over sincethe state and city filed their suit against the companies inJune 1975.   The plaintiffs allege that the concerns conspired to payartificially low prices to the state and city for oilproduced from state-owned tidelands. The defendants areChevron Corp., Texaco Inc., Unocal Corp., Mobil Corp., RoyalDutch/Shell Group's Shell Oil Co. unit and Exxon Corp.   In 1984 and 1985 Judge Gray issued a series of summaryjudgments, effectively throwing the case out. But last yearthe Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals reversed hisfindings, reviving the case.   After a 10-month investigation, the plaintiffs' attorneysdisclosed in their recent motion to disqualify the judge thatElizabeth Gray, the judge's wife, had signed a lease withTexaco to drill for oil on property she owns. The lawyerscharged that Mrs. Gray owns 10 shares of stock in Chevron.The inquiry was first disclosed in the Los Angeles DailyJournal, a legal trade publication.   The lawyers also claimed that since the case began, JudgeGray has attended several seminars in Florida sponsored bydefendants. Experts who lectured were working for theconcerns in connection with the pending case, the lawyershave said.   The motion was filed on behalf of state Attorney GeneralJohn Van de Kamp and Long Beach City Attorney John R.Calhoun.   In an interview last week Judge Gray said, &quot;Neither mywife nor I has had an equitable interest in any defendants,except for the Chevron stock which neither she nor I wasaware of until it was distributed from a family partnershipabout three months ago and she will be glad to divest herselfof it.&quot;   U.S. District Judge Robert M. Takasugi will decide whetherJudge Gray must step down.   ---   THREE LAWYERS were ordered to pay damages to their formerfirm.   The Philadelphia lawyers took client files from their lawfirm to start their own partnership and were ordered to paycompensatory damages to their former firm.   The case, one of a handful in the country, illustratesproblems that develop when lawyers break away from firms andlay claim to clients, even clients they represented. In thiscase, a Pennsylvania appellate court panel found the threelawyers interfered with the firm's contracts with the clientsand could be held liable to the firm for compensatorydamages.   Richard P. Myers, Alan I. Reich and Robert E. Paul workedas associates for Joseph D. Shein P.C., a law firmspecializing in personal-injury and asbestos cases. Theysigned stipulations that Mr. Shein would receive half thefees from the clients they brought to his firm.   But in October 1985, the three decided to form their ownpractice. After consulting a lawyer they moved 400 of thefirm's case files in a rental truck to new offices, begancalling clients and urged them switch their business to thenew firm.   Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas Judge Abraham J. Gafniimmediately ordered the files returned and blocked thelawyers from further contact with the clients. In asubsequent ruling, he found the three wrongfully interferedwith Mr. Shein's contracts and ordered each of the clientswho switched over to the new partnership to &quot;re-select theirattorney.&quot;   Approximately 290 stayed with the three lawyers, and that,in turn, prompted Mr. Shein to sue for damages. In May 1989,Judge Gafni awarded $10,000 in punitive damages for theremoving of the files, but refused to order damages tocompensate Mr. Shein for his lost clients. The judge reasonedthat the &quot;re-selection process&quot; he ordered expunged the threepartners of liability. Those clients who stayed with the newpartnership, the judge reasoned, left Mr. Shein voluntarily.   But the three-member appeal panel rejected that theory,saying the lawyer's conduct met the legal test of wrongfulinterference with a contract. The panel ordered Judge Gafnito access damages.   Philadelphia lawyer Judy F. Berkman, who represented thethree lawyers in the appeal, said the ruling raisesfundamental questions about a client's right to choose alawyer and plans to ask the full appeal court to reconsiderthe decision.   Mr. Shein's attorney, Thomas F. Johnson, declined comment.   ---   PUBLIC HAZARDS can't be concealed by a court order undernew Florida law.   The law, which was signed Friday and takes effect July 1,prohibits courts from sealing records that containinformation about a public hazard. The legislation -- thefirst comprehensive law of its type in the nation -- wasvigorously opposed by automobile manufacturers andpharmaceuticals companies, which are frequent targets ofproduct-liability suits.   The Association of Trial Lawyers of American called thelaw &quot;a tremendous victory for the public's right to know.&quot;Manufacturers have increasingly insisted that court recordsand information related to product-liability litigation bekept secret as part of settlement agreements.   Secrecy makes it far more difficult for the public toascertain that a hazard exists, the trial lawyers argued.   ---   Ann Hagedorn contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>