<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911004-0077</DOCNO><DOCID>911004-0077.</DOCID><HL>   Grinding It Out:   After a Flop in Robots,   Cincinnati Milacron Is   Back to Machine Tools   ---   It Cuts Costs, Raises Quality,   But Japanese Competition   Makes the Strategy Risky   ---   Serving Small Manufacturers   ----   By Dana Milbank   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CMZ CTCO GIDL</CO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FACTORY EQUIPMENT (FAC)INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY andamp; PRODUCTION, QUALITY CONTROL (ITC)STOCK AND BOND RATINGS (RTG)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)BOND andamp; STOCK RATINGS (RTG)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>MICHIGAN (MI)NORTH AMERICA (NME)OHIO (OH)UNITED STATES (US)WISCONSIN (WI)</RE><LP>   Workers in Cincinnati Milacron Inc.'s robotics plantgathered one bright morning a year ago to say goodbye to thefuture.   Executives from headquarters had flown down to theGreenwood, S.C., factory to announce what many of the 200workers waiting on the shop floor had suspected all along.Milacron, the last big American robot maker, was getting outof the business.</LP><TEXT>   A decade earlier, Milacron had touted robots and otherhigh-tech diversifications as its salvation at a time whenits traditional machine-tool business was fast losing groundto the Japanese. But Milacron soon found itself out of itsleague with the glitzy new robots, lasers and semiconductorwafers: Customers bolted, profits dried up and morale sagged.&quot;It didn't take a rocket scientist to know that we were introuble,&quot; says Floyd DeMoss, former robotics manufacturingmanager.   Hit by the same problems that are hurting U.S. automakers, consumer-electronics companies andconstruction-equipment giants, Milacron embarked on a boldbid to save itself. After years of drifting andsoul-searching, it decided that the answer to foreigncompetition might not lie in high-end niches. It abandonedits high-tech businesses and returned with new fervor to thebasic machine-tool business it had all but fled a decadeearlier. Now, it hopes to restore the qualities that made itsnuts-and-bolts business work in the first place: low costs,rapid product development and devotion to small customers.   &quot;We took our eye off the target,&quot; says Daniel J. Meyer,Milacron's chief executive officer. &quot;We just didn't payattention to being the world-class competitor we had been instandard products.&quot;   Now, Milacron has a clear vision -- but it also has a lotof catching up to do. Even though voluntary restraintagreements have been limiting imports, foreign-made machinetools have seized half the U.S. market, and foreign companiesare increasing production in the U.S. as well.   In reaction, some major American producers have foundstrategic niches where the Japanese and Taiwanese don'tcompete. Chief among these is the new industry leader,Giddings andamp; Lewis Inc., which switched away from the standardtools, such as lathes and other machines that cut and formmetal parts, that Milacron hopes to recapture. Giddings nowmakes large, integrated systems that haven't attracted muchforeign interest. &quot;We're not going into competition with theJapanese,&quot; vows Giddings Chairman William J. Fife Jr.   In effect, Milacron's return to standard machineryrepresents the last stand of the traditional American toolindustry, an industry it pioneered. If Milacron wins, it willserve as a model for beleaguered U.S. manufacturers; if itfails, another vital domestic industry could be lost.   Milacron says that it has slashed its manufacturing costsas much as 40%, and that now 20% of its standard machine-toollines can match foreign prices and quality. It has alsosigned on 30 distributors, many of whom dropped Japaneselines, to recapture orders from small job shops. To funnelcapital into standard tools, it halved its dividend lastmonth and announced a $90 million charge to move somemachine-tool production to more modern plants and sell assetsunrelated to its core businesses.   The risk is that Milacron, weighed down by debt andchronic losses, could be too out of shape to run the courseit has set. Yesterday, Moody's Investors Service joinedStandard andamp; Poor's in downgrading Milacron's debt; Sandamp;P cited adebt level of 55% to 60% of total capital and a bleakfinancial outlook due in part to Milacron's &quot;correctiveactions.&quot;   Says David Sutliff, an S.G. Warburg andamp; Co. analyst: &quot;I givethem credit for giving it the old college try, but I don'tthink it's too smart. They're going into the most competitivesector again, where the Japanese sell tools like cookies.&quot;   That's what made Milacron flee the business in the firstplace. In the capital-investment boom of the early 1980s, thecompany found it had all the business it could handlebuilding specialty machines for the defense, aerospace andauto industries. It let the Japanese provide cheaper toolsfor small machining shops. When the investment boom ended,Milacron couldn't match the price or quality of standardJapanese tools.   &quot;The board decided we were beating a dead horse withmachine tools, so the decision was made to more or lessabdicate the standard line,&quot; recalls Donald G. Shively,former executive vice president for operations.Indeed, that'swhy Mr. Shively, a machine-tool man, was passed over for thetop job in favor of Mr. Meyer, who pushed diversification.&quot;Don only knew machine tools,&quot; says James A.D. Geier, theprevious Milacron CEO.   While its machine tools withered, Milacron invested tensof millions of dollars to diversify into semiconductorwafers, lasers, specialty chemicals, robots and plasticsmachinery. Of all these, only plastics machinery, which isclosely related to machine tools, remains.   An examination of Milacron's affair with robots shows why.When the company began selling robots in 1977, its machineswere the envy of the industry. Competitors -- even theJapanese -- licensed Milacron's sophisticated systems.Pundits forecast that the domestic robot market would reach$4 billion a year by 1990. Wall Street relabeled thetoolmaker a robot company and sent its stock to a 30-yearhigh of $52 a share. By 1981, its robot revenue pushed toward$100 million, and the line occasionally made a profit.   But while Milacron celebrated, Japan, fearing a domesticlabor shortage, began subsidizing robots. Robot manufacturingexploded in Japan, and the then-high dollar allowed cheaprobots to spill over to the U.S. Milacron wasn't handicappedby technological glitches, unlike its American robot rivals,but it couldn't match Japanese production efficiency. Itsuffered from a rigid assembly line that led to duplicativeefforts and from thickly layered management. Customers wereamazed that Milacron couldn't employ robots in its own robotplant.   Then, in early 1982, Mr. Geier got a troubling phone callfrom a friend at General Motors Corp. GM, hoping to become abig robot maker itself, was talking with Japan's FujitsuFanuc Ltd. about a joint venture. Milacron soon lost some $50million a year in business from GM, its biggest customer.   Moreover, the American robot market was shriveling.Because U.S. employers didn't face a labor shortage, theywanted robots only for isolated tasks and had little need forMilacron's broad line of complex machines. It became clearthe U.S. market would reach only 10% of previous forecasts.By 1985, with Milacron's robot sales dropping and the lineleaking red ink, the company sought help. Messrs. Geier andMeyer sought a partnership with a Swedish-Swiss robot maker,Asea Brown Boveri AG, but the talks failed.   Faced with disasters in both robots and standard machinetools, Milacron was adrift by 1987. Mr. Meyer held a seriesof turbulent meetings with top executives. They eventuallyagreed on a new course: Milacron would leave the robotbusiness and devote itself to standard machine tools.&quot;Machine tools weren't the wrong business,&quot; says a changedMr. Meyer. &quot;They were the right business, but we were doingthem in the wrong way.&quot;   The company removed the lasers and robots from itsheadquarters building lobby, giving more prominence to an1884-vintage milling machine. It also returned to Asea BrownBoveri in April 1990 and this time sold its whole robot line.   And so Milacron rededicated itself to its old business --resolving to do it with shorter development and productioncycles, better quality, lower costs and more attention tocustomer needs. Milacron's rebirth partly reflected a lowerdollar and a market more promising for machine tools thanrobots. But more important, Mr. Geier says, &quot;We had moreconfidence in machine tools.&quot;   Already, Milacron says its &quot;Wolfpack&quot; engineering program(consisting of a rapid, concentrated attack on problems byteams of engineers, hourly workers and salesmen workingtogether) has revamped 20% of its products so that they arecompetitive with the Japanese. All the resulting productsclaim cost savings of 30% or more. Milacron reduces costs bymaking some tools with half as many parts, reducing warranty,labor and installation costs. It also uses more standard,off-the-shelf parts and buys 60% of them from outsidesuppliers, up from 40% before.   The company also has quadrupled the sales force and signedon 30 distributors to help service small accounts.Distributors like York-Penn, a Pennsylvania firm that droppedits Japanese line. &quot;Some of my compatriots think I'm nuts fortaking this risk,&quot; says York-Penn's president, Tom Cassidy.But he figures that Milacron's &quot;Made in USA&quot; label will giveit the edge if its prices are competitive. John McDonald,U.S. sales manager for Mori Seiki Co., a Japanese toolmaker,concurs. &quot;We see them as an increasing threat,&quot; he says.   Others, however, think the industry's wisest course is toavoid the Japanese. Giddings andamp; Lewis, which will overtakeMilacron and Litton Industries Inc. as the largest U.S.toolmaker when it completes its acquisition of Cross andamp;Trecker Corp. this fall, is successful partly because itdoesn't compete in standard machine tools. In the past fouryears, Giddings has gone from losses to big profits byfinding a highmargin niche business. It sells machine toolsin flexible, integrated manufacturing systems that cost up to$30 million.   Giddings vows to remove Cross andamp; Trecker's lines fromforeign competition by using its standard tools in Giddings'large systems. &quot;The Japanese move low-end machine tools bythe truckload,&quot; says Giddings' Mr. Fife. &quot;We're going to stayaway from truckload sales.&quot;   Milacron's new efforts, by contrast, target the $100,000tools. But many of its new machines aren't compatible witheach other, and customers can't link them in a multifunctionmanufacturing system like Giddings' custom-made lines.   Milacron, meantime, finds inspiration in itsplastics-machinery operations, which since 1987 have shrunkthe Japanese market share in the U.S. to 50% from 62%. ItsVista line cut prices 25%, winning the business of ToyotaMotor Corp.'s U.S. operations and regaining GM's.   And Milacron has clearly had some success with machinetools as well. At its &quot;incubator&quot; plant in Cincinnati, thecompany has already turned out more than 50 new Talons,computer-controlled turning centers that make bearings andother round parts. The plant looks like a how-to model formodern manufacturing. It uses just-in-time inventory, hasonly 16 vendors and makes a product with 60% fewer parts.Workers, who don't punch time clocks, sign their finishedproducts. Managers dress in work clothes just like the rankand file. The result: a product that costs 40% less to makeand outperforms earlier models.   But Milacron still has far to go.   C. William Murray, Milacron's division manager forstandard machine-tool products, says it may take five yearsbefore these advanced manufacturing notions travel beyondthis 19-worker plant and reach Milacron's 8,000 employees.And because Milacron hasn't increased its engineering staff,it may have trouble spreading the new gospel.   The company also faces resistance from some middlemanagers, who fear the changes will put them out of jobs orout on plant floors. Competitors report phone calls and pilesof resumes from Milacron managers seeking jobs. &quot;They've gotthe basic technology and capability, but they have had aproblem in that it's very difficult to change the culture anddirection of that kind of organization,&quot; says Richard C.Messinger, who was Milacron's chief technical officer beforeretiring this year.   Nor do Milacron's efforts prove a resurgence in Americanmanufacturing. Seven of Milacron's 27 &quot;Wolfpack&quot; projects aremade outside the U.S. and imported, and even many U.S.-madetools use almost 50% foreign parts. &quot;They're importing justlike the Japanese, and what they're importing are not goodmachines,&quot; says Jack Addy of Addy Morrand Machine Tools inDetroit, which was wooed by Milacron as a distributor butchose to stay with its Japanese line instead.   Money's another problem. Milacron posted losses of $24.3million after charges last year and of $10.4 million in the1991 first half. It spent only 4.1% of sales on research anddevelopment last year, and 3.6% of machine-tool sales oncapital expenditures; Giddings andamp; Lewis, by contrast, spent10% on Randamp;D and 8.2% on capital outlays. Milacron has alreadybacked off its promise to distributors to spend $250 millionon machine tools over five years.   Even if Milacron succeeds in its new tack, cheap Asiantools will keep profit margins low, especially if the currentU.S. restrictions on imports of foreign machinery aren'trenewed at year end. And with the machine-tool market likelyto contract as new materials and manufacturing methods areintroduced, some people wonder why Milacron wants so badly tore-enter the fray.   But Milacron is confident. &quot;We have a 107-year reputationin manufacturing, and the opportunity for success is stillthere, based on the history we have,&quot; Mr. Meyer says. &quot;We'renot going to lose.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>