<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900418-0055</DOCNO><DOCID>900418-0055.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Freeman Is Sentenced for Insider Trading   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   ACK LATAM</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The legal saga that began with his controversial 1987arrest on insider-trading charges concluded yesterday when afederal judge ordered Robert M. Freeman to serve four monthsin jail and pay $1 million in fines.   U.S. District Judge Pierre N. Leval told the former headof arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. that while he believesMr. Freeman is &quot;a very much chastened person,&quot; jail time wasnecessary because of the &quot;need for deterrence in themarketplace.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Looking tanned and fit in a navy blue suit, Mr. Freemansat emotionless between his two attorneys as the judgesentenced him to one year in prison, with the last eightmonths suspended. Mr. Freeman was also sentenced to two yearsprobation after his prison term and to a total of 300 hoursof community service.   Once one of the country's most powerful arbitragers, Mr.Freeman agreed in August to plead guilty to a felony countand resigned from Goldman Sachs, the firm he had worked atfor 19 years. Mr. Freeman admitted to using insideinformation received from Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. takeoverstrategist Martin Siegel in connection with the proposedtakeover of Beatrice Cos. by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co.   Mr. Freeman faced a possible sentence of as much as fiveyears in prison, and the government put his maximum fine at$1,860,000. He and his lawyers declined to comment on thesentence issued.   Many of Mr. Freeman's friends and the lawyers who crowdedthe packed courtroom to watch the proceeding said theybelieved Mr. Freeman's sentence to be stiff; some said theybelieved he wouldn't have to serve any time in prison.   Indeed, Robert Fiske and Paul Curran, Mr. Freeman'slawyers, argued that his crime wasn't one that warrants jailtime. They said in a sentencing memo last month, and againyesterday, that he should be treated with leniency because ofthe &quot;suffering that Mr. Freeman has undergone for three yearsas a direct consequence of the government's precipitous andhighly publicized arrest of him in February 1987.&quot;   But Assistant U.S. Attorney John McEnany, lead prosecutorin the case, recommended a prison sentence that &quot;reflects themagnitude of the crime and the absence of any excuse&quot; forcommitting it. Prison, he said, is the &quot;only sanction withany meaning to wealthy and powerful individuals and whichwill provide a deterrent.&quot; Judge Leval seemed to agree.   &quot;The trading of inside information has become a watchwordor standard practice of arbitrage,&quot; the judge told Mr.Freeman. &quot;Arbitragers think themselves authorized todisregard the law, and these practices seriously underminethe integrity of the marketplace. It is precisely because ofthose facts that the court cannot treat the matter as one ofsmall importance.&quot;   The government's case against the 48-year-old Mr. Freemanbegan with his February 1987 arrest on insider-tradingcharges. The subsequent indictment of Mr. Freeman and twoothers was dropped in May 1987, and prosecutors promisedanother, broader one. But the new indictment never came andprosecutors last year said they wouldn't charge the twoothers charged along with Mr. Freeman.   Both Mr. Freeman and Goldman had vigorously asserted thatMr. Freeman was innocent of any wrongdoing until his decisionto plead guilty in August. But Mr. Freeman is understood tohave agreed to plead after prosecutors confronted his lawyerswith the fact that another Goldman Sachs official wasprepared to testify against him.   Mr. Freeman's sentencing was delayed for months becausehis lawyers sought to block prosecutors from presenting tothe court allegations that he committed some 20 other crimesin addition to the one he pleaded to. Those other crimes, thegovernment said, should be considered in meting out hissentence. But Judge Leval said he wouldn't consider any otherallegations of wrongdoing in considering a sentence.   Mr. Freeman must still settle civil charges broughtagainst him by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Nowthat Mr. Freeman has been sentenced, a date will soon be setfor the sentencing of his accuser, Mr. Siegel.   Mr. Freeman's lawyers recommended that he serve his timein a minimum security prison on Pensacola, Fla. Mr. Freeman,whose primary residence is in Rye, N.Y., has a second homenear Pensacola, according to lawyers in the case.   ---   FIDELITY INVESTMENTS, in a reversal, supports Pennsylvaniatakeover bill.   With the Pennsylvania Legislature poised to pass thenation's toughest anti-takeover legislation this week, one ofthe measure's most vocal critics has switched sides -- andraised a lot of eyebrows.   Fidelity, a Boston mutual-fund group, had condemned thebill as harmful to shareholders because of provisionscontrolling rights of investors to mount proxy contests. Butthe bill is being strongly pushed by Armstrong WorldIndustries Inc., which is the target of a proxy contest and apossible takeover attempt by the Belzberg family of Canada.   A possible reason for the switch, opponents of the billsay, is that Fidelity is on a short list of applicants beingconsidered by Armstrong to manage its $180 millionemployee-thrift plan.   &quot;Obviously, the timing of these two developments concernsme,&quot; John C. Bogle, chairman of Vanguard Group, an investmentcompany, wrote Pennsylvania Gov. Robert P. Casey. Vanguard,which strongly opposes the anti-takeover measure, wasrecently dropped from consideration for Armstrong's account.   &quot;I trust that your office . . . will carefully review thismatter, to assure there were no improprieties in thissituation,&quot; Mr. Bogle wrote.   Armstrong, of Lancaster, Pa., issued a vigorous denial.&quot;In the strongest terms it is both preposterous and patentlyfalse for anyone to assert that either Armstrong or FidelityInvestments has offered or received a `deal,'&quot; John N.Jordin, Armstrong's vice-president for governmental affairs,wrote Pennsylvania State Sen. Noah H. Wenger, the originalsponsor of the bill whose district includes Armstrong'sheadquarters.   If the bill passes and is signed into law, as expected, itwill become the first in the nation to garnish profits ofshort-term shareholders who sell within 18 months after afailed attempt to control the company. Among othercontroversial provisions, the law would also restrict votingrights of large shareholders in proxy contests. Fidelityloudly opposed the bill but changed its mind after amendmentswere added stipulating that the restrictions wouldn't applyto shareholders who mount proxy fights with no intention oftaking over the company.   The bill has passed overwhelmingly in both chambers ofPennsylvania's General Assembly and Gov. Casey has indicatedhe plans to sign it into law once compromise measures areironed out.   &quot;We fought this very hard,&quot; said Robert C. Pozen,Fidelity's general counsel. &quot;And we also knew how to countvotes.&quot; Another provision in the bill would allow companydirectors to consider interests other than those ofshareholders when assessing takeover offers. That provisionremains the most objectionable to institutional investors.   &quot;We believe that given the political reality, we did aswell as we could,&quot; said Mr. Pozen. As for Vanguard'sinsinuations of a sellout? &quot;We believe that the letter isslanderous and libelous,&quot; said Mr. Pozen, &quot;and we areconsulting our lawyers.&quot;   ---   BANK ACCOUNTS ARE FROZEN in money-launderinginvestigation.   A federal judge in Atlanta froze 684 U.S. bank accountsthat allegedly once contained hundreds of millions of dollarsin illegal Colombian drug profits.   The unusual order by Judge William O'Kelley came at therequest of the Justice Department, which said it would takelegal actions to seize whatever money is left the accountsonce it confirms they have been controlled by drugtraffickers. Judge O'Kelley issued the order Monday, and theJustice Department announced the action yesterday inWashington.   The judge ordered banks holding the frozen accounts togive the government all relevant records so thatinvestigators can continue to trace illicit drug profits. Heordered that records on about 70 additional accounts beturned over as well. The Justice Department said the total of754 suspect accounts may have received illegal deposits ofnearly $400 million as of early 1989. The accounts are heldin 173 banks in 22 states and the District of Columbia, withthe biggest concentrations in New York and Miami, thedepartment added.   The department's actions are the latest phase in thegovernment's largest-ever money-laundering inquiry, known asOperation Polar Cap. Prosecutors didn't charge any of thebanks affected by the court order with wrongdoing. But whenpressed on the issue, Peter Djinis, a lead prosecutor on thecase, declined to rule out actions against U.S. banks andsaid the investigation would continue.   The suspect accounts allegedly received illegal proceedsfrom the operations of the world's biggest cocainetraffickers, including Colombians Pablo Escobar-Gaviria andJorge Ochoa-Vasquez, leading members of the so-calledMedellin cartel.   A &quot;certain small percentage&quot; of the targeted accounts mayturn out to be controlled by legitimate businesses andindividuals, and therefore won't be seized, said WilmerParker, another lead prosecutor on the case.   As a result of Operation Polar Cap, 127 people have beencriminally charged, the Justice Department said. More arrestsare expected.</TEXT></DOC>