<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900523-0167</DOCNO><DOCID>900523-0167.</DOCID><HL>   Better Than the Clean Air bill   ----   By S. Fred Singer</HL><DATE>05/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   Today the House is scheduled to begin voting oncontentious Clean Air legislation that addresses -- withoutmuch concern for costs and benefits -- acid rain fromelectric power plants, air toxics from industrial sources,and the urban smog problems ascribed mainly to automobiles.Yet there is little point in heroic and expensive efforts tobuild super-efficient and super-clean cars and mandate exoticfuels, unless we also reduce urban congestion.   A car that's stuck in rush-hour traffic gets zero milesper gallon and the pollution per mile goes through the roofno matter how well the car was designed or what the EPA teststickers say.</LP><TEXT>   Market-based economic policies that charge forexternalities -- such as pollution and congestion -- withpollution fees, road tolls and other user fees are usuallymore effective than the command-control laws and regulationsnow being fashioned by Congress. A fee system is certainlyless costly, and does not use up scarce resources of energy,materials, and capital and labor.   One of the goals of the Clean Air Act is to force asuper-clean car on every car buyer -- no matter where helives -- in the mistaken belief that this will solve the smogproblem in such places as Los Angeles. Yet adding super-cleancars to the fleet can do little to improve air quality aslong as older, polluting cars remain on the road and as longas there is no adequate monitoring of individual cars.   The cost to the nation will be enormous; the White Housesays it is willing to live with $20 billion a year. Don'tbelieve it] A little amendment, introduced at the last minuteby Democratic Sen. Tom Daschle of South Dakota -- andco-sponsored by Minority Leader Bob Dole -- would forcerefineries to produce a custom-designed gasoline with a largepercentage of -- you guessed it -- ethanol made from corn.The current best estimate is that this gift to farmers anddistillers would add 20 cents to the price of each gallon ofgas -- more than twice the nine-cent federal gas tax -- andthus increase the cost of the Clean Air Act to as much as $40billion per year, or about $400 per household.   Sadly, not one penny of this new gas tax would go to buildbetter highways or repair collapsing bridges. On thecontrary: The Highway Trust Fund would lose more than $1billion a year because ethanol is exempted from the federalgas tax -- on the quaint theory that if your car burnsethanol it won't wear out the interstate highway system.Ethanol, of course, is too expensive to compete withgasoline, and therefore has to be subsidized in this sneaky,roundabout way.   But that's not all. While ethanol produces less carbonmonoxide, it will raise smog-forming emissions. If theDaschle-Dole amendment survives the House (where it wasintroduced by New Mexico Democrat Bill Richardson), it willalso raise the price of corn and of meat, for sure, anddeliver a double-whammy to America's poor.   Of course, what really matters is what comes out at theend of the tailpipe. There must be a better way than toregulate the fuel -- and there is. It's called a pollutionfee, and it's set by the amount of emission from eachindividual car. Thanks to new optical technology this can nowbe done by remote sensing; as each car goes by the checkingdevice, a reading is taken, the license number is recorded,and the fee is calculated and billed.   With the scheme automated, the fee can be varied toachieve the desired policy goal, including congestioncontrol. Each community or region is free to decide on thebest fee schedule. For example, the fee can be raised duringrush hours in urban areas that have smog problems and loweredat night or even during days when meteorological conditionswould dissipate pollutants. By reducing the fee to zero inrural areas we can effectively encourage a transfer of theoldest, heavily polluting cars -- perhaps to Sen. Daschle'shome state -- and thus improve urban air quality withoutwasting any resources.   For a pollution fee, unlike a new motor fuel, doesn'tpresent a real cost to society. It is instead a transfer ofmoney that requires no expenditure of physical resources. Itgoes without saying that pollution fees can then fund localtransportation infrastructure, now being paid for with othertax dollars or with bonds.   Another mistaken policy idea is that super-efficient carsnecessarily save energy. CAFE (corporate average fuelefficiency) standards were originally introduced as aconservation measure following the 1973 oil panic. Thecurrent standard of 27.5 miles per gallon for the passengerautomobile fleet is well above the efficiencies of 20 yearsago. But the fat has been cut out, and further improvementsare likely to be very costly. Aerodynamics and lightweightmaterials may be at their limits; further downsizing doesn'tjibe with what consumers demand, and will further decreasesafety, increasing injuries and deaths in collisions.   Increasing CAFE is likely to be counterproductive also fortwo reasons:   -- Raising the capital cost of new cars will inducedrivers to hold on to their old, less efficient, morepolluting cars.   -- Lowering the incremental cost of driving the additionalmile will induce more driving, less car-pooling, less use ofmass transit, and, of course, more congestion.   To cut down vehicle-miles traveled (VMTs) requires morethan just CAFE. It would take a stiff gasoline tax toovercome the reduced cost of driving additional miles in ahigher-efficiency car. Fewer VMTs mean less oil use, lesspollution, and, of course, less congestion -- which in turnreduces pollution and oil use even further.   A motor-fuel fee is not as flexible as road tolls inreducing congestion, but it is a lot easier to collect. Itcan best be levied at the state and local levels and act as auser fee to finance the construction and upkeep of state andlocal roads now paid for by other state and local taxes.Contrary to accepted wisdom, a gasoline tax has been shownnot to be regressive -- unlike the costs that are imposed onlow-income consumers by the Clean Air Act. But politiciansdon't want to take the heat and much prefer to put the monkeyon Detroit's back -- even if such a policy is ineffective andcostly. Tens of billions of dollars per year will go down thedrain, or up in smoke -- take your choice of metaphor.   Granted that the ideal way to control congestion (andthereby reduce pollution and oil use) is through the use ofhighway tolls. Here, too, technology is advancing. Automatedtoll booths that recognize cars as they whiz by, and billthem automatically, are already operating on an experimentalbasis in several states. But there are less high-tech methodsthat seem to work well in other congested places, such asSingapore.   To further control congestion -- hand in hand with roadtolls -- requires realistic fees for the use of curb space incity streets. Parking charges that are commensurate withcommercial parking, and can be varied with time of day, wouldavoid the traffic problem created when people circle theblock time after time looking for an empty 25-cent parkingspot.   It's hard to overstate the importance of reducing trafficcongestion, which is estimated to cause economic losses tothe nation of $50 billion to $100 billion per year. Butinstead of using essentially cost-free policies that don'tuse up scarce resources -- like congestion tolls andpollution fees -- we seem to be stuck with blunt and costlyinstruments that are not likely to be effective in doing whatthey are supposed to do -- like the new Clean Air Act andCAFE.   So to all those cheering for the Clean Air Act and higherCAFE standards I can only say: Great] They'll raise the costof gasoline, cars, electricity and food. And some 200,000people will be thrown out of work -- coal miners, autoworkers, and employees in small businesses that cannot copewith the regulations. (Democratic Sen. Alan Dixon of Illinoiseven quotes a figure of 3.7 million &quot;at risk.&quot;) But nevermind] We'll get federal money to retrain these people. Thecountry will surely need more lawyers and lots ofenvironmental consultants who can figure out what the CleanAir regulations mean.   For the sake of our politicians, let's just hope thatpeople won't notice when prices go up and living standards godown. At least they won't know which party to blame. Afterall, the Clean Air Act was crafted in a bipartisancompromise.   ---   Mr. Singer, professor of environmental sciences at theUniversity of Virginia, served in the EPA, as adviser to theEnergy Department, and as chief scientist of theTransportation Department.</TEXT></DOC>