<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900926-0130</DOCNO><DOCID>900926-0130.</DOCID><HL>   Treasury's Malign Neglect of the Dollar   ----   By Lawrence Kudlow</HL><DATE>09/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BANKS (BNK)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><LP>   As the IMF and World Bank convene their annual meetings inWashington, it is important to recognize that the outlook forU.S. financial markets largely hinges on the fate of thedollar. This is why the U.S. Treasury Department's policy ofmalign neglect of the dollar is so disturbing. The Treasuryhas accepted a silent devaluation of the dollar of nearly 10%on a trade-weighted basis during the spring and summerquarters. Over the past 15 months the dollar's value hasdropped 16%. If this ominous trend continues, the worldfinancial system and its underlying economies are likely tosuffer enormously, with consequences far more lasting thanthe Middle East's temporary oil price shock.   Recent history shows clearly that a sinking dollar raisesinflation fears, drives up interest rates, undermineseconomic growth and destabilizes financial markets. Recallthe October 1987 stock market crash following that summer'sbreakdown of international currency cooperation. Recall alsothe October 1989 mini-crash, following the G-7's decision amonth earlier to engage in dollar-bashing.</LP><TEXT>   Foreign investors have grown weary of the enlargedcurrency risk associated with the purchase of U.S. financialinstruments, including commercial bank liabilities. That isone reason that foreign capital inflows have virtually driedup. Recent Commerce Department data show that on balance netforeign purchases of securities registered an outflow ofcapital at an $18 billion annual rate so far this year,compared with a $48 billion inflow in 1989.   Domestic investors, who instinctively pull back on thenews of foreign withdrawal, also regard weakness in thedollar as a market signal of rising expectations of futureinflation. Such expectations are the bane of financialassets. And these concerns are not without merit.   A comparison of internationally traded goods shows thatthe year-to-year change in producer prices in the U.S. is5.1%, while Germany registered 1.5% over the past 12 monthsand Japan's rate was 1.1%. Purchasing power parity modelssuggest a proper dollar valuation of between 150 to 170 yenand 1.80 and 2.00 marks. So long as the dollar remains belowthese levels, it is reasonable to assume that the U.S. willcontinue to inflate more rapidly than its major competitors.In the event, this reduces the expected future value of U.S.financial assets and causes the dollar to depreciate againstother currencies.   Regrettably, the U.S. Treasury seems pleased with thesteady erosion of the dollar's purchasing power. TreasuryUnder Secretary David Mulford recently reconfirmed his easymoney philosophy by saying that the decline in the dollar hasbeen &quot;orderly&quot; and is of no concern to the Treasury. Mr.Mulford believes that a lower dollar will help reduce theU.S. trade deficit. Every time this head-in-the-sand policyis articulated, it puts downward pressure on theinternational demand for dollars.   All this leaves the Federal Reserve as the last bastion toprotect the dollar. What the central bank must now do is tomake public its clear commitment to domestic price stabilityby protecting the dollar. In recent testimony before theJoint Economic Committee, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan hintedof this, but the point must be made with greater clarity. Inthe best of all worlds, this strategy should be pursued withthe cooperation of the other G-7 central banks.   Operationally, the Fed must also make it clear that itwill use financial and commodity market price indicators toguide the management of money creation and the federal fundsrate. Mr. Greenspan also hinted at this in his JEC testimony,when he told Congress that the Fed would be inclined to easeif the bond market reacted positively to a budget deal. Thisimplies the use of a market price rule as a standard ofmonetary value, but here too the policy would be far morecredible if the point were made with greater clarity.   Since mid-June, the weekly average market price of goldhas moved from $346 to $400. The first $20 of this upwardmove occurred before the rise of oil prices. Since then,Treasury bond yields have jumped 74 basis points, from 8.42%to 9.16%, while the yield curve has widened from a spread ofonly 12 basis points in mid-June to 126 basis pointsrecently. While the dollar has steadily weakened, the DowJones average has plummeted from 2924 in the week ending June15th to its current level of around 2450, a drop of roughly460 points. At the same time, monetary base growth hasaccelerated to an annual rate of 8%-12% in the past threemonths.   Under these circumstances, a clear Fed commitment to amarket price rule strategy warrants a minor tightening tomake money relatively scarce, not an easing. Not a majortightening move, but an increase of perhaps 25 to 50 basispoints in the federal funds rate to signal a clear commitmentto protect the dollar and reinforce the goal of domesticprice stability.   Markets would react immediately by selling gold and buyingdollars. With massive dollar short positions reported, aclear message from the Fed would quickly push the dollar uptoward purchasing power parity. Long-term rates would fall asinvestors began to fear inflation less.   While it may appear counter-intuitive, timely Fed actionwould actually stimulate the economy. Here's the logic. Theweakest part of the U.S. economy is housing and real estate.Nearly 64% of Americans own their own homes, and it is thevalue of those homes -- not the value of the stock market (inwhich only 20% of Americans have direct ownership) -- thataffects family spending decisions. The slump in real estateand home prices, whose value has dropped nearly $1 trillionin the past two years, has therefore badly damaged consumerconfidence, which has plummeted 30% over the past 13 months.   This, in turn, has caused a major cutback in consumerspending. Real consumer purchases have declined in seven ofthe past 12 months. There are of course many other factorsaffecting confidence, such as federal, state and local taxthreats, regulatory policies, concerns over the financialsystem, the Middle East situation and so forth. But the realestate-housing slump hurts consumer confidence most.   High-tax fiscal policies also play a major role indetermining currency values, though not one in a thousandmarket gurus seem to understand this. Rising tax burdenslower the future path of profits, employment, new businessformation and economic growth. As such, these supply-sideeffects reduce the marginal utility of money and the demandfor dollars. By making goods scarce, high tax policies renderthe existing stock of money more inflationary.   The dollar has suffered from market fears that punitivetax increases will weaken the future rate of return on U.S.assets. Threats of a security transfer tax, a higher marginaltax rate on personal income or a stiff surcharge on personalincome taxes all erode economic incentives, efficiency andproductivity. What's more, schemes to eliminate the mortgageinterest deduction and the state and local deduction arebeing proposed at exactly the wrong moment. While there isconsiderable merit in eliminating inefficient tax subsidies,these are future tax reform items that should be offset by adrop in the personal income tax rate.   If hard money actions were accompanied by a reduction inthe capital gains tax rate, a greater rate-of-return and alower investment hurdle rate would boost the value of allU.S. assets, including real estate, stocks and bonds, andrevive risk-taking, entrepreneurship and sagging animalspirits throughout the economy. Policymakers should also movetoward a reduction in the Social Security tax rate to raiseafter tax take-home pay and work incentives for middle andlower middle-income families. In addition, officials shouldrecognize that reduced business spending and profitability ispartly a function of excessive corporate tax rates andunnecessarily long capital cost recovery periods.   This is the surest path to budget deficit reduction in the1990's: a comprehensive program that (i) strictly limits thereal growth of federal spending through an enforceable budgetfreeze; (ii) restores economic growth and replenishes revenueflows with a series of tax rate reductions for capital,families and businesses (off-set by the elimination of majortax subsidies); and (iii) substantially lowers interest ratesand federal debt-service costs by announcing and maintaininga market price rule to insure domestic price stability.   ---   Mr. Kudlow is the chief economist of Bear, Stearns in NewYork.</TEXT></DOC>