<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910829-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>910829-0005.</DOCID><HL>   The Vodka Putsch:   How Not to Mount   A Coup: The Lessons   From the Kremlin   ---   Booze, Lies and Distrust Led   The Plotters Into a Drama   With Tragicomic Scenes   ---   Jockeying for Fancy Offices   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- On the afternoon of Wednesday, Aug. 21, GennadyYanayev sat slumped in shirt sleeves in his Kremlin office,his tie pulled loose and his jacket flung over a chair. Theformer Komsomol youth leader, known for his bawdy jokes aboutwomen and vodka, had reigned for two days as acting presidentof the Soviet Union.   Mikhail Gorbachev was locked in his Crimean dacha. Tankswere still in the streets of Moscow. State-run media werestill broadcasting official communiques from the junta. Butone of Mr. Yanayev's co-conspirators, Defense Minister DmitriYazov, had just reversed his order to deploy troops. He andVladimir Kryuchkov, head of the KGB, were flying to theCrimea to beg Mr. Gorbachev's forgiveness.</LP><TEXT>   At 4 p.m., two Gorbachev loyalists swept past a bodyguardand burst in to confront Mr. Yanayev. They had been holed upin a room down the corridor since the very start of the coup.   &quot;Has everyone been arrested?&quot; Mr. Yanayev asked weakly,his face twitching with anxiety over the fate of his fellowplotters.   &quot;Yes,&quot; lied Gorbachev aide Veniamin Yarin, a formersteelworker who is built like a prizefighter.   Mr. Yanayev suddenly realized it was all over. His excusescame pouring out: He'd been threatened with jail if he didn'tgo along with the conspirators, he said, and he had joinedthe so-called State Committee for the State of Emergency onlyto avert bloodshed.   But Mr. Yarin cut him short. &quot;I'm not authorized to hold adiscussion,&quot; he said. He ordered Mr. Yanayev not to leave hisoffice.   Mr. Yanayev reached for a big bottle of vodka. Thenanother. When Mr. Yarin returned at seven the next morning,the acting president was unconscious and empty bottles werestrewn on the floor next to him. Mr. Yarin had to shake himseveral times to wake him. &quot;He didn't even recognize me,&quot; Mr.Yarin recalls. Two hours later, Mr. Yanayev, dressed andsobering up, was taken into custody.   Thus ended a three-day coup of tragicomic ineptitude,fueled in large part by fear and alcohol. Clearly, a majorfactor was the opposition of the Russian people, led by theirpresident, Boris Yeltsin, as well as the refusal of certainarmy and KGB units to obey orders. But the collapse of thePutsch owed much to the actions of the conspiratorsthemselves, some of whom got cold feet early in the game.   Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov started backsliding withinhours of the Monday morning announcement of the takeover. Mr.Yazov had early doubts and later acted upon them. Mr. Yanayevhimself admitted within hours of deposing Mr. Gorbachev thatthe seizure of power was illegal. Of the five other membersof the emergency committee, two who hadn't held governmentposts seemed preoccupied with gaining the prestige of anoffice in the Kremlin. The only man who was publicly jubilantabout the coup and who continued to insist that it wasmorally and politically right was Interior Minister BorisPugo, who shot himself dead when it fell apart.   It was a sign of their incompetence that the coup leadersnever managed to take full control of the Kremlin itself.They allowed a handful of Gorbachev partisans to mount aspirited resistance from an office just two doors from Mr.Yanayev's. Indeed, the plotters, with good reason, were sonervous about the loyalty of the Kremlin guards that theyheld most of their meetings outside the Kremlin in a nearbyhotel owned by the Communist Party.   &quot;This coup destroyed itself,&quot; says Valentin Karasev, a39-year-old Gorbachev adviser whose Kremlin office became thefocus of resistance. This story was pieced together fromlengthy interviews with Mr. Karasev, Mr. Yarin and two otherGorbachev loyalists who spent most of the three days in theKremlin, as well as from conversations with a half-dozenothers who were in contact with the coup ringleaders lastweek.   These people, like nearly everyone else in Moscow, areflaunting their anti-coup stand, and the testimony of theringleaders -- 12 men were charged yesterday with the capitaloffense of high treason -- should add to the picture of howit all went so wrong. Mr. Yanayev and his co-conspiratorswere, for obvious reasons, unavailable to comment. But theGorbachev loyalists in the Kremlin provide the most directaccount so far of the plotters in action.   For Mr. Yanayev, who had been Mr. Gorbachev's handpickedvice president, the coup ended as it began, in an alcoholichaze. On the afternoon of Sunday, Aug. 18, he was at Mr.Pavlov's dacha just outside Moscow, celebrating the return toMoscow of one of Mr. Pavlov's sons.   But the party was spoiled by a phone call from the KGB,according to Vladimir Shcherbakov, the then deputy primeminister, who spoke at length to Mr. Pavlov on Aug. 20. TheKGB's message: A terrible emergency had to be discussed rightaway in a meeting of the National Security Council and otherKremlin leaders.   Mr. Yanayev and Mr. Pavlov sped to the Kremlin. &quot;We werethe two little fools,&quot; Mr. Pavlov later told Mr. Shcherbakov,admitting that heavy drinking at the party had left them theworse for wear.   Details of the Kremlin meeting are still unclear. But Mr.Pavlov's version, recounted the next evening to the Cabinetof Ministers and repeated in greater detail to Mr.Shcherbakov, suggests that some members of the eight-manemergency committee, whose seven survivors now risk the deathpenalty, were tricked or intimidated into signing thestatement that announced Mr. Gorbachev was &quot;ill&quot; and imposeda state of emergency. While that account is undoubtedlyself-serving on Mr. Pavlov's part, it provides the onlydetails to date of what happened.   The meeting was attended by all eight of the men whobecame the emergency committee, as well as by Valery Boldin,Mr. Gorbachev's chief of staff; Yuri Plekhanov, the head ofthe KGB's Ninth Directorate, which is charged with protectingall Soviet leaders; Oleg Shenin, a secretary of the CommunistParty Central Committee. They all have been arrested. Twoothers who attended the meeting have been dismissed fromtheir jobs for not opposing the coup-Foreign MinisterAlexander Bessmertnykh and Anatoly Lukyanov, chairman of theSoviet National Parliament.   Messrs. Boldin, Shenin and Plekhanov had just returnedfrom Mr. Gorbachev's dacha in the Crimean town of Foros,where they had failed to persuade him to declare a state ofemergency.   &quot;A catastrophe is taking place,&quot; Mr. Kryuchkov told thegroup. The KGB had information, he said, that an armeduprising was about to be staged. Although he apparentlydidn't say who exactly was behind the threat, he insistedthat participants were, as he spoke, surrounding strategicpoints in the capital, including the television headquarters,railway stations and two hotels where members of parliamentlived.   Mr. Kryuchkov said that lists had been found containingthe names of government officials, including most of the menpresent, who were to be executed along with their families.   Mr. Plekhanov said he had received independent reports tothe same effect. Moreover, Mr. Gorbachev was seriously ill,the group was told by Mr. Boldin, the president's chief ofstaff. He and the others who had just returned from Forossaid that they had seen Mr. Gorbachev only briefly beforebeing shooed away by his doctor. &quot;It's either a heart attack,a stroke or something,&quot; Mr. Boldin supposedly said.   The emergency committee was quickly formed, and by six thenext morning the news was relayed on national TV, radio andby the Tass news agency that Mr. Gorbachev had been&quot;temporarily&quot; replaced and that a state of emergency had beendeclared. Within a few hours, tanks were in the streets ofMoscow.   From then on, for the ringleaders, things went downhillfast.   Most of the immediate public opposition was whipped up byMr. Yeltsin and his aides, who huddled in his &quot;White House,&quot;the marble-faced Russian Parliament building, with a crowd ofsupporters growing outside. Crucially, a small group ofGorbachev loyalists managed to get to work in the Kremlinalmost at once and stayed put throughout the coup.   They grouped around Mr. Karasev, whom Mr. Gorbachev hadappointed as a personal counselor in March. His three-roomoffice, suite 41, is on the first floor of an oblong yellowbuilding that houses most top officials, including Mr.Gorbachev. Next door was the office of Mr. Pavlov, and nextto that Mr. Yanayev. Mr. Boldin, the president's chief ofstaff, worked on the other side of the corridor.   For the first day and a half, a group of armed guardsdivided the long corridor in two, guarding Mr. Yanayev'soffice. But as the coup started to fizzle, the guardsgradually withdrew until all that was left was a singlebodyguard. The only weapon in suite 41 was a small can ofAmerican mace bought on the black market.   &quot;We had dual power along one corridor,&quot; recalls Mr. Yarin,the aide who eventually confronted Mr. Yanayev.   Through most of the three days, other conspirators,including Interior Minister Pugo and KGB chief Kryuchkov,remained in the ministries they headed. But two members ofthe eight-man emergency committee who didn't have an officialgovernment function moved quickly, each commandeering anoffice in the Kremlin building. Vassily Starodubtsev, head ofa reactionary agricultural lobby, took suite 15, whileAlexander Tizyakov, the manager of a Sverdlovsk-based rocketfactory and head of an association of military-industrialplants, took suite 17.   The trappings were obviously important to both men: Almostat once, workers started to move in their furniture and otherbelongings. &quot;They got an office in hours. Normally it takesweeks,&quot; says Mr. Karasev.   He was already in his quarters early Monday when Mr. Yarinarrived, having heard news of the coup. They were soon joinedby a third key opposition figure, 39-year-old Yuri Golik, whoheads the parliament's key legislation committee.   All three were surprised that they had been able to getinto the building so easily: the guard had looked at theirdocuments, as usual, and let them pass. Mr. Golik was evenreceived by Mr. Yanayev.   Their conversation was brief but revealing:   &quot;It's a Putsch?&quot; asked Mr. Golik.   &quot;It's a Putsch,&quot; Mr. Yanayev replied.   One of the Gorbachev loyalists' first calls went to thechairman of the parliament's presidium, Anatoly Lukyanov, aman who is widely accused of having helped plot the coup. Heoffered no help; he refused to see anyone, although he didtell one deputy, Vladimir Volkov, who phoned from Sverdlovsk,that he couldn't convene an emergency session of parliamentfor at least a week.   Leaving Messrs. Karasev and Yarin to continue trying tomake contact with Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Golik headed off to seeother leaders of the coup. He was one of the very fewnon-conspirators who managed to do that while the Putsch wasin progress.   At the ministry of internal affairs, he had a briefconversation with Mr. Pugo around 10 a.m., barely six hoursafter the coup had officially begun. The minister was &quot;veryhappy,&quot; Mr. Golik recalls.   &quot;Everything is going as it should,&quot; Mr. Pugo said.   &quot;Where is the president, and why is there no officialbulletin on his health?&quot; Mr. Golik wanted to know.   &quot;The president is sick,&quot; Mr. Pugo replied, dismissing himjovially. &quot;Details will be made known later.&quot;   But not everyone in the ministry, it seems, shared Mr.Pugo's enthusiasm, even in those early hours. On his way out,Mr. Golik stopped to talk to Deputy Minister Ivan Shilov, anold acquaintance. After some gentle arm-twisting, Mr. Shilovpromised to try to keep the ministry troops in check. &quot;I'mnot the minister, though,&quot; Mr. Shilov said.   Next stop was the KGB, where Mr. Kryuchkov reluctantly sawhim, but said he was too busy to talk. He struck Mr. Golik asless enthusiastic than Mr. Pugo, but perhaps more dangerous.   &quot;I want to talk to Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev,&quot; thelegislator demanded. &quot;I know you can contact him.&quot;   &quot;It's not possible,&quot; Mr. Kryuchkov replied tersely,ushering Mr. Golik out of the office. &quot;You understand he isnot very well and mustn't be disturbed.&quot;   Even at this early stage, the eight-man committee wasstarting to crack. At 6 p.m., Mr. Pavlov turned up at asession of his Cabinet of Ministers. For someone usually cooland cynical, particularly with colleagues, Mr. Pavlov seemedstrangely agitated, stuttering and repeating himself. ViktorGerashchenko, the head of the state bank, and Mr.Shcherbakov, the deputy prime minister, immediately concludedthat he had either been drinking heavily or taking drugs.   Mr. Pavlov told his story of the previous night to thecabinet. Then he was driven back to his dacha, resurfacing atthe end of the week when he was arrested. Tuesday, Tass putout a brief bulletin saying that Mr. Pavlov had been takenill &quot;with high blood pressure.&quot; Several cabinet colleaguessay that appears to have been his clumsy way of trying toback out of the coup.   The cabinet meeting was also the last public appearance byanother of the eight, Mr. Tizyakov, the factory manager. Hetalked about the supposed &quot;death list&quot; and warned his newcolleagues that they were probably on it. He then tried toorder an immediate Kremlin meeting of factory directors fromaround the nation to plan ways to raise industrialproduction. &quot;He tried to present himself as the boss,&quot;remembers Mr. Gerashchenko, the central bank chairman, whowas present. It didn't work. The directors' meeting was nevercalled. The cabinet did, however, issue a statementsupporting the coup, which led Mr. Gorbachev to dismiss thecabinet once he was back in charge.   By Tuesday morning, the coup was all but over. Leaders ofthe Ukraine and Kazakhstan pitched in to support the standtaken by Mr. Yeltsin, and the army and the KGB rebellionspread.   In Kremlin suite 41, the resistance was gaining ground.Among other things, Gen. Nikolai Golushko, head of theUkrainian KGB, told Mr. Golik by phone that he didn't supportthe coup. The only people who did were KGB officers,apparently brought in from Moscow, who were blockading Mr.Gorbachev's dacha, he said.   Mr. Karasev started planning a news conference by severalprominent Gorbachev aides who had remained loyal, includingYevgeny Primakov, a foreign affairs adviser, Vadim Bakatin, aformer interior minister who has now been put in charge ofthe KGB, and Vadim Medvedev, an economist. The newsconference was eventually held Wednesday afternoon.   Mr. Lukyanov, the gruff-voiced parliament chairman who isalleged to have played a Machiavellian behind-the-scenes rolein the coup, also started to talk after 24 hours of silence.He told Mr. Karasev around noon Tuesday that he had beentrying without success to make contact with Mr. Gorbachev,with whom he had attended law school in the 1950s. &quot;I didn'thave anything to do with the Putsch,&quot; he insisted.   The Cabinet of Ministers started to refuse to obey orders.Tuesday night, Mr. Yeltsin has disclosed, the crack &quot;Alpha&quot;unit of the KGB refused orders several times to attack theRussian Parliament. Three civilians had been killed in aclash with army troops near the American embassy, but afeared bloodbath never took place.   Early the next morning, the defense ministry's highestbody, the Collegium, met for about an hour at the GeneralStaff building in the center of Moscow. As usual, the headsof all branches of the armed forces and all deputy ministerswere represented. Mr. Yazov himself presided. He was verytense.   Just two days earlier, he had confidently signed an orderplacing all armed forces on alert. Now he was a broken man.&quot;We must think about what to do,&quot; he said, indicating that henow wanted to reverse the coup.   The Collegium acted quickly, according to Gen. YuriYashin, a deputy defense minister who took part in themeeting. It unanimously voted to withdraw all forces fromMoscow, lift a curfew that had been imposed the previousnight, and ask parliament to examine whether the committeehad been acting legally. Mr. Yazov voted along with all theothers in favor of all these moves, but abstained on one lastproposal -- that he resign his position.   The coup was essentially over. Inside the Kremlin, Mr.Karasev heard that Messrs. Yazov and Kryuchkov were on theirway to the airport and immediately told Mr. Yeltsin. Mr.Yeltsin then announced the news to the Russian Parliament,and ordered that the two men be stopped.   Over the next six hectic hours, Mr. Gorbachev was freedand the first of the arrests were made. Mr. Karasev calledTass and Soviet TV, ordering them to alter their programming.At 5 p.m., Russian TV, blacked out at the beginning of theweek, was back on the air, broadcasting the session of theRussian Parliament.   After Mr. Yanayev was told not to leave his office,attention turned to bringing Mr. Gorbachev safely back toMoscow.   In all the commotion, two of the ringleaders slippedquietly out of the Kremlin without being apprehended: Mr.Boldin, the chief of staff, and Mr. Starodubtsev, the farmmanager.   They must have known that they soon would be arrested.Still, Mr. Starodubtsev couldn't resist taking with him asmall token of his brief fling at power and prestige. When hewas arrested, he was still carrying the key to his newKremlin office.</TEXT></DOC>