<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900807-0025</DOCNO><DOCID>900807-0025.</DOCID><HL>   The Mideast Conflict -- Naval Maneuver:   U.S., Allies Set Stage   For Possible Blockade   Of Iraq's Oil Outlets   ---   But Hussein Could Retaliate;   Joint Chiefs Fear Fleet   Might Prove Vulnerable   ---   Is Food an Effective Weapon?   ----   By John J. Fialka and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/07/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP FORGN</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The U.S. and its allies, having gotten apledge from much of the world to stop buying Iraqi oil, noware laying the groundwork for a naval blockade to enforce theembargo.   After the United Nations Security Council voted 13-0 toimpose a sweeping ban on trade with Iraq, a sober PresidentBush declared: &quot;These sanctions will be enforced, no matterwhat it takes.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   In a brief exchange with reporters, he pointedly refusedto rule out a blockade, and British Prime Minister MargaretThatcher, after a White House meeting, said Britain would bewilling to consider a blockade if the embargo provesineffective. The U.N. charter specifically provides formilitary steps, including a naval blockade, to enforceSecurity Council resolutions.   The resolution, passed to punish Iraq for its invasion ofKuwait, also gives nations such as Japan the internationalpolitical cover they were seeking before firmly committingthemselves to cut off Iraqi oil purchases.   Under one plan being considered by the U.S. and some ofits allies, the blockade would be manned by an internationalfleet under U.N. auspices. The ships would stop tankerscarrying Iraqi or Kuwaiti oil out of the Persian Gulf or fromports in Turkey and Saudi Arabia, where pipelines carryingIraqi oil terminate.   President Bush plans to dispatch Secretary of State JamesBaker later this week to Turkey in an effort to gain supportfor the embargo and a possible blockade. Turkish PrimeMinister Turgut Ozal yesterday strongly implied in aninterview with ABC-TV that he would be willing to cut off thepipeline, presumably making a blockade of his portunnecessary.   Iraqi strongman Saddam Hussein, in a two-hour meeting withthe top U.S. diplomat in Baghdad, warned the U.S. &quot;againstany act that might endanger the region's peace and security,&quot;citing Iraq's &quot;high and unlimited readiness to sacrifice,&quot;the Iraqi news agency said. A U.S. official characterized themeeting as &quot;a mixed bag&quot; of conciliatory-sounding commentsand tough talk.   Despite yesterday's developments, the possibility of anaval blockade of Iraq is generating controversy anddisagreement within the Bush administration. The Joint Chiefsof Staff are cool to the plan, according to a source close toGen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the joint chiefs. Somemilitary analysts said that maintaining one for a long periodof time would be logistically difficult and would leaveAmerican ships exposed to attacks from Iraqi aircraft andseaborne Exocet missiles.   And some administration officials say they hope a blockadewon't be necessary, citing the broad international support sofar for a voluntary embargo.   As plans moved forward to cut off Mr. Hussein's oilexports, his prime source of income, some U.S. officials saidthey believe that cutting off food exports to Iraq may alsoprove an effective means of putting pressure on Mr. Hussein.The U.S. and Europe provide most of Iraq's importedfoodstuffs, and they have cut off such shipments.   Iraq's allies don't produce enough food for their ownpeople, so should such a food embargo hold up, U.S. estimatesindicate that Iraqi citizens could begin experiencingshortages of basic food commodities, such as bread and rice,as early as October. &quot;It looks like October-November would bea difficult time; there will start being some pressures,&quot;said John Parker, an analyst for the U.S. AgricultureDepartment. And judging from their apparent lack ofpreparation for a possible cut-off of imports, he added, &quot;Idon't think they realized how dependent they were.&quot;   U.S. officials also continue to see the possibility thatIraq will move beyond Kuwait to invade oil-rich Saudi Arabia,which would likely result in an all-out war involvingAmerican forces.   American officials said Iraqi troops occupying Kuwait hadconsolidated their positions close to the Saudi border,moving in equipment that would be needed to support aninvasion, and White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater flatlydeclared that Iraq now poses a &quot;threat&quot; to Saudi Arabia.   Defense Secretary Richard Cheney yesterday held hastilyscheduled talks with officials in Saudi Arabia seeking theright to send U.S. planes to the kingdom. Iraqi forces herdedhundreds of foreign nationals, including 28 Americans, out oftheir hotels in Kuwait and onto buses for an unknowndestination, raising the specter that he may be accumulatingpotential hostages.   Although it ships some of its oil from its own portthrough the Strait of Hormuz at the mouth of the PersianGulf, Iraq normally exports most of its approximately 2.8million barrels of oil each day through the pipelines thatpass through Saudi Arabia and Turkey. While the U.S. wouldlike both those countries to simply shut the pipelines down,both countries have reasons not to do so.   Turkey gets half of its own oil from the pipeline. SaudiArabia, meanwhile, has a non-aggression pact and an agreementwith Iraq that would make it an act of war to cut thepipeline. The Saudis are convinced that such a step wouldgive Mr. Hussein a strong pretext for either invading or forattacking their oil fields.   Thus, assuming the pipelines remain open, a blockade wouldprobably have to include the Saudi Red Sea port of Yanbu andthe Turkish Gulf of Iskenderun in the eastern Mediterranean.Such an offshore naval blockade would let the two countriestell Iraq that the matter is out of their control.   Within the Bush administration, some officials are arguingfor a blockade on the grounds that the naval forces needed tocarry it out are already moving into place, and that it wouldprobably work without actual use of force. Few tankercaptains, these officials say, would dare run a blockade ofwarships far more substantial than the small boats Iran usedin its so-called tanker war in the Persian Gulf in 1987.   The U.S. has one carrier task force of 13 ships on stationnear the Gulf of Oman at the mouth of the Persian Gulf andanother eight ships operating inside the Gulf, soon to bejoined by two British frigates and one French. A second taskforce of 13 ships is positioned in the Eastern Mediterranean,led by the carrier Eisenhower.   A third task force of 10 ships headed by the carrierSaratoga and the battleship Wisconsin, which has beenconverted into a cruise-missile carrier, is heading for theMediterranean from East Coast seaports today, and includes aMarine landing force. Pentagon spokesmen say its deploymentis a normal replacement for the Eisenhower group. In previouscrises in the Gulf, though, the U.S. has doubled up its navalunits, holding ships beyond their normal rotation.   There were also reports yesterday that the U.S. was movingB-52 bombers to Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean and to Oman,putting them within striking range of Iraq. A Pentagonspokesman refused to confirm or deny the reports.   On his trip to Turkey later this week, Secretary Bakerwill be carrying intelligence information designed to provethat Iraq is prepared to move further against its Arabneighbors. And he will pledge to Turkish leaders that, ifthey aid the U.S.-led oil cutoff, the U.S. will stand by themagainst any Iraqi retaliation.   Under one scenario being considered, any tankers carryingIraqi oil out of the blockaded areas would be stopped by themultinational force and impounded; the oil would be auctionedoff and the money held in a kind of escrow account. Such anaction, if it were carried out, is believed to be sufficientto effectively shut down further Iraqi exports.   During the Iran-Iraq war, the U.S. and Western alliescooperated in the escorting of Kuwaiti tankers through thePersian Gulf, and the experience &quot;would be very helpful&quot; in ablockade now, says Frank Gaffney, a former Pentagon officialwho now heads the Center for Security Policy, a defense thinktank. &quot;We have considerable experience doing multilateralescorting.&quot;   Yet other analysts point out difficulties and risks --problems that give rise to the reluctance of Americanmilitary officials to undertake a blockade. &quot;It's a loteasier on paper than in the real world,&quot; says a seniorPentagon official. The Joint Chiefs haven't ruled out theidea, he says, &quot;but it's clearly not among our highestpriorities.&quot;   Ships forming a blockade would have to be prepared to useforce on tankers, and even fire on them if necessary. Thatcould push into a political clash with the countries whoseflags the tankers are flying.   Another problem would be distinguishing between tankerscarrying Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil and those with oil from othercountries -- Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, andIran, for example, which make use of the same waterways.Moreover, the Saudis ship their oil through parts of the samepipeline system the Iraqis use.   Iraq's Mr. Hussein, sensing that a blockade was beingcarried out with the tacit cooperation of Saudi Arabia andTurkey, might choose to retaliate against those countries.Though Iraq has a weak navy, it has modern aircraft andmissiles that could seriously threaten Saudi oilinstallations. (On the other hand, U.S. analysts say almostall of Iraq's oil installations are now at risk from U.S.carrier-based aircraft, which are believed to be within rangeand carry laser-guided bombs that could inflict a great dealof damage.)   Other analysts worry that the nations engaged in ablockade could be vulnerable to terrorist attacks from Iraqor its sympathizers.   A central player in U.S. military planning in the daysahead will be Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander in chiefof the U.S. Central Command, who was part of the team thataccompanied Defense Secretary Cheney to Saudi Arabia. Whilethe team's primary mission reportedly was to seek approvalfor U.S. use of Saudi airfields and military bases, theofficials were also to explore the blockade issue with Saudileaders.   Gen. Schwarzkopf, 55, would become the overall commanderif Army and Air Forces were sent to join the U.S. navalforces operating in the Persian Gulf area. A former topplanner for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Schwarzkopf isconsidered an expert on the 10 years of planning that theU.S. has developed for war scenarios in that volatile region.   Those plans, which started during the Carter years underthe auspices of the Rapid Deployment Force, now focus on theCentral Command, a separate headquarters structure normallybased at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Fla. Generallycomprising fewer than 700 people, it could grow to over300,000 men and women in a crisis, depending on the militaryoptions selected by the president.   At least some analysts believe it will take more than anaval blockade to gain the attention of Iraq's dictator.&quot;What he really responds to is brute force,&quot; says KennethKatzman, a defense consultant who until last summer worked atthe Central Intelligence Agency on secret profiles of foreignleaders, including Saddam Hussein. &quot;Economic sanctions arelong-term, and it's hard for him to grasp their effects.&quot;   Mr. Katzman says &quot;the best thing we can do is bomb hisairfields,&quot; which he thinks would cause Mr. Hussein &quot;to foldup quickly. . . . Right now he's feeling invincible, flushwith victory.&quot;   Yet other U.S. analysts see real economic vulnerabilitywithin Iraq, particularly in Mr. Hussein's ability to feedhis people in the months ahead.   Iraq imports about 70% of the roughly five million tons ofwheat it consumes a year. At the last count by the U.S., asof June 30, the Iraqis had only a two months' supply of wheatin stock. Rice is also in short supply.   The Iraqi poultry industry, a model of efficiency in theMiddle East, is especially imperiled by the boycott. Thechicken-producing industry uses about 850,000 tons of corn ayear, most of which comes from the U.S. But U.S. estimatesfor this month show that Iraq has a backlog of only 22,000tons.   &quot;Their poultry industry will run into trouble real soon,&quot;says Mr. Parker, the agriculture department analyst. &quot;That'sbeen the leading success story of their agriculturalproduction.&quot;   Shortages also are likely in other staple food products.Iraq imports about 90% of its cheese, much of it from Europe.Most of its meat, sugar and cooking oil also comes fromabroad.   ---   Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and Andy Pasztor contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>