<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910725-0100</DOCNO><DOCID>910725-0100.</DOCID><HL>   The California GOP's Uncivil War   ----   By Tim W. Ferguson</HL><DATE>07/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   This week the political aftermath of California's greattax increase of 1991 appears to be one of guerrilla warfare.The combatants are all Republicans.   Just as the GOP emerges from its registration gains ofrecent years as an equal player with the Democrats in thepartisan wars of the megastate, it is as deep as ever intointernal combat. The battle is between a governing partyestablishment and a movement of fiscal and/or socialconservatives.</LP><TEXT>   Gov. Pete Wilson's uncontested selection in the Republicanprimary a year ago may have led some to think the strife waswaning, but his embrace -- indeed, offer -- of a $7.6 billiontax boost to address California's spending problem set theguns to blazing again.   Mr. Wilson emerged from the fiscal clash in thelegislature last week with basically the budget he proposed,and as the dominant force in party politics. That is why theconservative campaign against him can only be called aguerrilla struggle. But it remains bloody.   That was evident on Tuesday, in special elections to filltwo state Assembly vacancies. In the Sacramento area, B.T.Collins, a colorful political hermaphrodite (and short-timeWall Streeter) recruited by Mr. Wilson and blessed withRepublican National Committee bucks, won 47% to 38% over a&quot;pro-family&quot; activist in a race with no Democrat on theballot. But in Orange County, which remains aconservative-Republican hot-bed, the Wilson-establishmentcandidate was beaten 44% to 37%.   Taxes were a touchstone issue -- as they are statewide,after a big jump in the sales levy and assorted otherincreases including a higher personal-income tax on topearners. This last element partly reverses the 1980s taxreform and is something Mr. Wilson, as candidate andgovernor, said he would not do.   The governor's camp maintains he had to seek the revenueto avoid a standoff with the Democratic-controlledLegislature that would have imperiled the state's top creditrating. The income-tax boost, it is said, was forced on Mr.Wilson by the business lobby when it bucked plans to targetutility usage instead.   Top legislative Democrats and their spending interests,including the state school superintendent, had long sought a&quot;tax the rich&quot; plan. They could get nowhere with Gov. GeorgeDeukmejian. From Pete Wilson, they got what the Laffer-Cantoeconomic consulting team calculates will be an additional1.7% hit on adjusted gross incomes exceeding $100,000, 2.4%on those over $150,000, and 3.5% on those over $200,000.Lesser incomes will bear a 1.1% added burden on each marginaldollar because of the tax changes, they figure.   From the outset, Gov. Wilson sought to deal with AssemblySpeaker Willie Brown and Senate President Pro Tem DavidRoberti, both left-liberal Democrats who had warred for yearswith Gov. Deukmejian. The &quot;Duke&quot; had been grudging on taxincreases, but his active blue pencil wasn't enough to checkthe spending juggernaut. A fiscal chasm opened in front ofthe new governor.   Mr. Wilson rejected entreaties by the right that he staredown the Democrats, by trying to freeze expenditures, borrowfrom fast-accumulating special funds and lineitem veto whatthe legislators insisted on giving him. He argued that suchadvice was unrealistic in the California context, where basicreforms required agreement.   He insists now that the effort succeeded, and Democratsnod. Many fiscal hawks say the governor got taken, withgenuine spending curbs amounting to much less than half thepackage, total outlays still growing at double the inflationrate, and his own budget chief acknowledging that furtherchanges will be needed to prevent another deficit breakoutwithin five years. In several respects, the Californiaexperience recalls the federal budget summitry of 1990.   As was the case with the Bush White House, Mr. Wilson satdown at a table with only three legs -- minus the input ofthe lower-house's GOP. The governor cut the AssemblyRepublican leadership out of the action because the core ofits caucus was adamantly anti-tax. The governor himselfcorraled sufficient GOP defectors to get the requiredtwo-thirds vote.   Within days of budget approval, the Assembly GOP bootedout its recalcitrant leaders. The governor denied a directrole, but clearly he had humiliated them. He said they'dundercut themselves by refusing to propose a spending plan inaccordance with their anti-tax posture. Indeed, the topAssembly Republicans had dodged the issue of school funding,which Mr. Wilson tried to tackle.   But that was because the party leaders actually had theirown pragmatic streak. They were a buffer between the caucuscore, derisively called the &quot;Cavemen,&quot; and theadministration. That layer is gone now, so the clubs andpitchforks may come into more direct use.   The Cavemen, meanwhile, risk further marginalization. Oneof them, Tom McClintock, lost a bid to become the new GOPleader to a farm-belt representative who backed all of theWilson tax increases. Even as the GOP ranks in theLegislature grow, as almost surely they will afterreapportionment, the philosophically committed among themstand to enjoy little leverage.   Barely five years ago, this group of conservatives waswinning enough seats to aspire to an Assembly majority by1991. But setbacks and political mood shifts left them on theouts. Now, with funding unavailable from the sufferingreal-estate development industry, a traditional source ofsupport, they and others on the California right have toadapt to an insurgent mode and take on a more populist cast.   Big business money for Republicans in the state is now atthe service of Pete Wilson. The governor may be in a positionto use redistricting to squeeze the Cavemen out and &quot;destroyhis right flank,&quot; as one of them puts it. (The governor'soffice sends mixed signals about his intent.) So there istrepidation in the legislative arm of the tax revolt.   Longtime tax fighter Lewis Uhler, however, is still inbattle garb. He thinks the rank-and-file are stirred up andsees an opening for initiative measures that build onProposition 13 (the remaining bulkhead of the tax revolt andthe ultimate target of the spending colossus).   Moreover, Mr. Uhler believes 1992 to be a special case forallocating resources to legislative seats, because so manywill be open. He thinks the overwhelming resources of theopposition -- both Gov. Wilson and the Democrats -- can beovercome by appealing to a simmering distrust of thepolitical process that manifests itself in such causes asterm limits for representatives, which voters approved in1990.   A different but perhaps complementary support base for theguerrilla effort is the New Right alliance of gun-controlfoes and religious conservatives. The gun groups continue torecord a few big notches on their political rifle, while themoral-issue forces have pulled off surprises in somelow-profile races in the state.   In next spring's senatorial primary, a hybrid of thesevarious conservative factions, U.S. Rep. William Dannemeyer,is a decided underdog against the governor's pick, JohnSeymour. The Dannemeyer case exposes a basic conflict withinthe right's camp. His blustery rhetoric, particularly thataimed at homosexuality, frightens away libertarian elementsof an already outnumbered band. At the same time, &quot;gayrights&quot; legislation is moving through the state legislaturewith the tacit approval of Gov. Wilson.   Ronald Reagan was the only man, it is often said, whocould hold the elements of conservatism together. Ironically,the man who is now anathema to so many on the right, PeteWilson, is trying to adopt Mr. Reagan's mantle.   Mr. Wilson seeks to dominate his party as Ronald Reagandid, but with a very different style, if not substance. He isa manipulative, control-oriented manager. He has little tastefor the purely symbolic in politics, and refused to takeissue with petty outrages in the Democrats' spending plan. Heis a builder, by his own lights, and isn't going to letbenighted internal opposition pose a barrier. In those ways,although he would cringe at the comparison, Pete Wilson ismore in the mold of Nelson Rockefeller than Ronald Reagan.   California has an ambitious, tenacious positivist for agovernor, one for whom the resources of the state are auseful tool and ideology a distraction. Some observers, suchas columnist Dan Walters of the Sacramento Bee, find hisappeal a sound one to a growing and diversifying Republicanelectorate.   This may prove true. Clearly Mr. Wilson has a knack forwinning elections. But sometimes the effect of such adominant governor, especially one who holds the partypursestrings, can be withered grass roots and an idea-lesspolitical culture. Certainly, this was the experience of NewYork under and after Mr. Rockefeller.   California's GOP foot soldiers are unlikely to go soquietly. The right is in retreat to the hills, but in oneform or another, effectively or not, it can be expected tofight another day. If the governing class doesn't makepartisan distinctions, neither will the revolutionaries.   ---   Mr. Ferguson, a member of the Journal's editorial board,is based in Los Angeles.</TEXT></DOC>