<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910626-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>910626-0084.</DOCID><HL>   Old Wounds:   Yugoslav Secessions   Underscore the Forces   Tearing Nation Apart   ---   Friends Turn on Each Other   As Refugees Flood Towns   And the Artillery Digs In   ---   A Test for the New Europe   ----   By Roger Thurow   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   SPLIT, Yugoslavia -- This is the agony of a disintegratingcountry:   In 1960, Amadeus Antonijevic left his parent's home inSerbia to take up a teaching job in Croatia. He traveled withlittle money and few possessions, but he carried plenty ofhistorical baggage, filled with years of enmity between Serbsand Croats.</LP><TEXT>   Upon arriving in this medieval city on the shores of theAdriatic, the young Serb named after Mozart began composinghis own harmony. He fell in love with a Croatian woman, and,over her parent's bitter objections to a Serb-Croat union,they married. Children came quickly, three in all, and theparents raised them as neither Serbs nor Croats. Mr.Antonijevic wanted them to grow up simply as Yugoslavs.   For the better part of three decades, his family reflectedthe promise of a united Yugoslavia. But today, with oldethnic emotions erupting anew, Mr. Antonijevic fears that hisfamily will fracture along with his country. &quot;The day mychildren have to choose whether they are Serbian or Croatian-- to choose between their father and mother -- is the day .. .&quot; He pauses, bracing for his next words. &quot;Is the day Iwill tell them to seek asylum in another land.&quot;   That day is at hand. Two of Yugoslavia's six republics,Croatia and Slovenia, declared their independence last night,in effect seceding from the federation. And in a craggy chunkof Croatia, a cabal of Serbian communities is plotting tosecede from that republic so they can align themselves withthe republic of Serbia.   There was no sign of violence last night, but the federalparliament called on the army to intervene -- and in the pastthe army has said it won't stand by while Yugoslaviadisintegrates. A maze of armed checkpoints already givesCroatia's mountainous midriff the feel of a war zone, asCroatian policemen, federal army soldiers and Serbianseparatists take turns poking their guns into passing cars.At some points, tanks and light artillery are dug in on theroadside, reinforcing the mistrust.   The country's politicians and generals, deeply dividedover the post-cold-war shape of Yugoslavia, may yet be ableto gerrymander the country into a looser confederation ofsovereign states, as Croatia and Slovenia have beendemanding. But the ethnic tensions uncorked by this disputeseem to be out of the bottle for good. Instead of integratinginto the new united Europe, Yugoslavia is sliding back intothe continent's dark divided past, when Serbs and Croatsfought their own nasty war within World War II. The hatefulwords of the time -- &quot;Chetnik&quot; to describe nationalist Serbs,&quot;Ustasha&quot; for nationalist Croatsare again on millions oflips.   These rumblings from history have moved this slice of theBalkans back to the center of European worry. Under thedictator Tito, who unified the country after the war,Yugoslavia occupied the strategic ground of a non-alignedCommunist nation on the fault line between East and West. Nowthe country is perilously positioned as the first, crucialchallenge to the peaceful preservation of Europe's &quot;neworder.&quot;   In recent weeks, officials from the European Community andthe U.S., worried about the chaos that the reshaping ofnational borders can ignite, have been converging onYugoslavia and pleading with the republics to hold thecountry together. Fearing that independence grabs here couldset a precedent for the Baltic republics in the Soviet Unionand disenchanted minorities elsewhere in Europe, the EC andthe U.S. have threatened to withhold billions in aid from theYugoslav central government and the republics if the countrybreaks up.   But a journey along the ridge of Croatian-Serbian tensionssuggests that all the world's money won't be able to putYugoslavia's 24 million people back together again.   Drnis and Knin, the two biggest towns in the region, areseparated by 15 miles and a half-dozen checkpoints. Both aredreary peasant centers, made drearier by 40 years ofcommunism. Most of Drnis's 5,000 residents are Croatian; mostof Knin's 12,000 are Serbian. Each is swelling with therefugees of the other as Croats flee Knin and Serbs clear outof Drnis.   Josip Odak, a Croat, is the mayor of Drnis. His oldfriend, Risto Matkovic, a Serb, is the new city manager ofKnin. They were once such good comrades that Mr. Odak didn'tcharge a penny when he laid and polished the parquet floor ofMr. Matkovic's new house in Drnis. Today, though, Mr.Matkovic has left his parquet behind and moved to Knin, wherehe readies for battle against his erstwhile Croatianneighbors.   &quot;If Croatia secedes, we will continue with what we'vestarted,&quot; Mr. Matkovic says.   Does that mean civil war? &quot;Only God knows,&quot; he says with adisconcerting grin.   Mr. Odak winces at the words of his friend and issues asad warning in return: &quot;If blood starts to flow, Serbs andCroats will cry the same tears.&quot;   At the Drnis Catholic Church, Father Ante Cavka, a Croat,fears his message of &quot;Love your neighbor&quot; is becoming asenseless cliche. &quot;Every Sunday, I preach `You shouldn'thate, you shouldn't fight,'&quot; he says. &quot;But I look in the eyesof the people and ask myself, `How long can this last?'&quot;   As he contemplates another sermon, the priest himselffills with anger. Should Serbian-commanded tanks roll intoDrnis to prevent Croatian independence, &quot;We would eat themwith our teeth,&quot; he vows. His rage rises. He talks eerily ofmartyrdom: Better to set himself on fire, he muses, than tocontinue living much longer in a non-independent Croatia.   A woman named Maria strides into the church's communitycenter. She stands proudly erect, tightly clutching her blackpurse. Soon, though, her lips begin to quiver and tearsappear in her eyes. She has come to beg for food. HerCroatian family fled Knin in May after their shop wasattacked by a Serbian gang.   Gathering up a bag of flour, she says she once had manySerbian friends in Knin. &quot;But when my son joined the Croatianarmy, they all started to hate me,&quot; she says. &quot;I can't livethere in peace anymore.&quot; She shakes her fist and turns away,crying.   The dividing line between cultures and worlds has cutthrough the territory of Yugoslavia for centuries. On a cliffnot far from Drnis stands a fortress from where Croats turnedback the Turkish empire, checking its advance into westernEurope. The victory meant the Austro-Hungarians ruledCroatia, while the Turks occupied Serbia. The Serbian andCroatian languages may sound similar, but Serbian is writtenin Cyrillic script and Croatian in the Latin alphabet. Serbsare mainly Eastern Orthodox, Croats mainly Catholic.   After World War I, they were put into one country,governed from the Serbian capital of Belgrade. This tenuousunion exploded in blood in World War II. In 1941, Croatiadeclared its sovereignty, joined an alliance with the Nazisand carried out brutal reprisals against Serbs and Jews.Serbs living in Croatia retaliated, as did Tito and his bandof partisans fighting to preserve the Yugoslav federation.Before the fighting ceased, hundreds of thousands ofYugoslavs had died. Croats and Serbs alike committedatrocities. The 4.5 million Croats and eight million Serbshave vowed never to forget.   Tito, through the strength of his personality, therepression of his Communist regime and the threat of Soviethegemony, managed to pull his countrymen together. For themost part, Serbs ran the bureaucracy and controlled the army.Slovenia and Croatia, the two wealthiest republics, suppliedthe money.   After Tito died in 1980, Yugoslavia started to unravelagain. Economic decline and triple-digit inflation fueledresentment among Croats and the two million Slovenes that aninefficient and Serb-dominated administration was swallowingtheir money. Then the decline of communism in Eastern Europeexacerbated the tension.   Several republics, including Slovenia and Croatia, electedgovernments that had broken with the Communist Party, whileSerbia chose to keep the Communists. When Croatia andSlovenia pushed for more autonomy, Serbia pushed to maintainthe federal state. Slovenia and Croatia stopped sending fundsto the central government. Serbia stopped importing goodsfrom Croatia and Slovenia. Croatia raised its own flag andtalked of booting Serbs from its police force andbureaucracy. The republic held a referendum; more than 90%voted for independence. The Serbs in Croatia (about 12% ofthe republic's population) held their own referendum; morethan 90% voted to secede from Croatia if Croatia secedes fromYugoslavia.   &quot;The Croatian flag and symbols of independence bring backmemories of World War II.&quot; says Mr. Matkovic in Knin.   The Serbs in Croatia set up the Serbian Autonomous Regionof Krajina and started blockading traffic from one part ofCroatia to the other. The economy collapsed. The roadcheckpoints became more menacing. The frantic flow ofrefugees began.   In the tiny village of Potkonje, just outside Knin, abouthalf of the 50 Croatian families ran away after Serbianmilitiamen rampaged through the town one night. All thatremain are elderly people, too old or stubborn to move.   &quot;The young people have all left. Even my children are tooafraid to come and visit me here,&quot; says an elderly Croatianwoman herding a single cow down a narrow dirt road. She movesbehind a tree, out of sight of a house occupied by a Serbianneighbor. She refuses to give her name or identify her house.&quot;It is best for us if we don't say anything,&quot; she says.&quot;There's no one to protect us.&quot;   It was similar pressure that drove Edith and Sveto Ajdukand their three young children from their home on theoutskirts of Knin. Tipped off by Serbian friends that theKrajina militia was on its way, the Croatian family fled tothe nearby forest, where they spent one night. The next daythey made their way to Drnis, where a Croatian widow tookthem in.   &quot;We couldn't stand it anymore,&quot; Mrs. Ajduk says. &quot;It wastoo dangerous for the children to play in the streets. At thefactory, Croats were afraid to talk to each other. Even inthe schools.&quot; She looks at her 10-year-old son Ivan, whodescribes having Serbian boys threaten him with a knife.&quot;They said I was Ustasha,&quot; he explains.   Would the Ajduks ever move back to their Serbian town? Theparents and children shake their heads no.   &quot;There are Serbs we could live with, but not at themoment,&quot; Mr. Adjuk says, puffing on a Croatian Filtercigarette. &quot;Today, when a Serb talks to a Croat he is also indanger. Some of our Serbian friends told us that theycouldn't be our friends anymore.&quot;   In Split, where Serbs are less than 20% of the population,Amadeus Antonijevic feels the pressure from both sides. He isone of the leaders of a movement of moderate Serbs trying topromote dialogue. But he isn't finding many people to talkto.   Meanwhile, as he walks the streets of the city he hascalled home for the past 30 years, he watches his back.</TEXT></DOC>