<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910610-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>910610-0089.</DOCID><HL>   Dubious Defense:   Law Forces Pentagon   To Purchase and Store   Metal It Doesn't Want   ---   Vendor of Depleted Uranium   Gets Congress to Add It   To Strategic Stockpile   ---   A Huge and Outdated Hoard   ----   By Bob Davis   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   NUCM</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)ALL NON-FERROUS METALS (NFR)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)COPPER, OTHER NON-FERROUS METALS (ONF)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)</IN><NS>NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>FAR EAST (FE)INDONESIA (IO)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)MALAYSIA (MY)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)THAILAND (TH)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Sometime this fall, the federal governmentwill quietly start spending $200 million to buy 36 millionpounds of depleted uranium, a radioactive metal, and stash itin warehouses around the country.   Whatever for?</LP><TEXT>   Depleted uranium is used to make armor-piercing bullets.But the Defense Department says it never asked that the metalbe stockpiled; in fact, in an effort to stop the purchases,it plans to release a currently classified report saying itdoesn't need the stuff.   The Energy Department, meanwhile, is so overloaded withthe raw material from which depleted-uranium metal is madethat it sometimes gives it away. The agency has enough tosupply ammunition needs for 100 years of wartime. &quot;It's crazy-- there's no shortage&quot; of depleted-uranium metal, saysThomas Cochran, a nuclear expert at the Natural ResourcesDefense Council.   So why is the government planning to stockpile it? Mainlybecause a small company in Concord, Mass., Nuclear MetalsInc., recruited powerful lawmakers, the Army's ammunitioncommand and the Energy Department's nuclear weapons complexto get the purchase written into law. The metal will be addedto the National Defense Stockpile, a $9.6 billion collectionof 91 materials that are supposed to be so scarce they needto be squirreled away in case of war.   The war chest is designed to prop up the U.S. militaryduring battle, but it has hardly ever been used that way. Itregularly props up suppliers instead. &quot;The stockpile iswhat's good, bad and sickening about Washington,&quot; says RobertDale Wilson, who headed the National Critical MaterialsCouncil under President Reagan. &quot;It can be used to bail outan undeserving company, or to save an industry that's reallyimportant.&quot;   Nuclear Metals Inc. is probably the only company in theworld to stake its future on the fate of depleted uranium,the material cast off when uranium is enriched to makenuclear-reactor fuel. Officials of the company make noapologies about using political pressure to fill what theycontend is a defense need. &quot;Our government responds topressure,&quot; says Nuclear Metals' chairman, George Matthews.&quot;Is that wrong? What's the other way to do things?&quot;   Indeed, in many ways, the story of the planneddepleted-uranium purchase is the tale of how the stockpilehas been built since its start in 1946. Some of thestockpiled materials have military value, such as cobalt, butothers are essentially obsolete, like the 90 million poundsof asbestos or the 32,000 pounds of opium. The opium wasacquired from India after World War II to make drugs to treatradiation sickness in case of nuclear war.   Nearly every purchase has a political and corporatesponsor. In 1952, North Dakota's congressional delegation andBulova Watch Co. persuaded the U.S. to build a factory inRolla, N.D., to make jewel bearings used in watches andinstruments. (Remember &quot;23-jewel&quot; watches?) The need for suchbearings fell drastically with the arrival of digitaltimepieces. But the plant, owned by the government andmanaged by Bulova (now part of Loews Corp.), keeps churningout jewels anyway.   Government contractors must buy any jewel bearings theyneed from the plant, says a report by the Pentagon'sinspector general, even though the plant charges at leastfive times more than commercial vendors. The stockpile thenbuys the plant's extra production. As a result, the U.S. nowhas 78 million jewel bearings in storage, an 84-year supply.The Pentagon inspector general recommends shutting the plant.But there are no other domestic suppliers, and the DefenseLogistics Agency, which runs the stockpile, defends thefactory as an &quot;industrial asset.&quot;   Then there's bauxite. In the early 1980s, the U.S. boughttwo million tons of it for the stockpile to prop up theJamaican economy. It built seven-story mesas of the stuff inTexas and elsewhere, now inhabited by rattlesnakes andirrigated so grass will grow on the mounds and they won'tblow away. After the U.S. smelting industry hit hard times,the stockpile awarded a $53 million contract to turn some ofthe bauxite into aluminum.   The stockpile is able to sell material, within limits. ButCongress can veto any proposed sales, which it often doeswhen lobbyists for minerals companies protest. The stockpilewould like to sell much of its silver and all of its tin. Butlegislators and mine owners from Idaho have been able toblock many proposed stockpile sales of silver. Malaysia,Thailand and Indonesia, working through the State Department,have strictly limited sales from the billion-dollar tinhoard.   Depleted uranium was never among the materials in thestrategic stockpile, but Nuclear Metals set out a few yearsago to change that. The company got its start as a spinoff ofa Massachusetts Institute of Technology metallurgy projectduring the World War II Manhattan Project. It turns depleteduranium hexafluoride crystals, the residue of nuclear-fuelproduction, into a metal that is denser than lead and as hardas steel. It shapes the metal into polished spears, aboutfour to 20 inches long, which become the heart oftank-killing ammunition.   The publicly traded company grew sixfold from 1977 to1983, reaching record annual sales of $58 million, asmilitary spending on depleted uranium surged. But ammoinventories filled up and competition rose, and the company'ssales dropped and then stagnated at around $45 million ayear. Then it came up with the idea of getting the NationalDefense Stockpile to buy depleted uranium metal, perhaps $20million worth of it a year. And it started enlisting support.   Energy Department officials were enthusiastic. RonHultgren, a uranium enrichment manager at Oak Ridge, Tenn.,says the agency backed the plan in hopes of unloading some ofits own monumental load of depleted-uranium crystals, whichNuclear Metals turns into metal. The department has some 705million pounds of the crystals, a stash that grows 15 millionpounds a year as more fuel is processed. It is happy to giveit away or sell it for a few pennies a pound.   That bounty, though, represented a problem for NuclearMetals' stockpile plans. If the U.S. government has a nearlylimitless supply of depleted-uranium crystals, why should itstockpile depleted-uranium metal? The stockpile is reservedby law for materials &quot;not found or produced in the UnitedStates in sufficient quantities&quot; to meet an emergency.   Nuclear Metals turned to the Army Materiel Command, themilitary's ammunition buyer, for a rationale. Army officialssay that in January 1989 the agency just happened to havestarted a study in which it touted the value ofdepleted-uranium metal for ammunition and determined therecould be a shortage during a long war because the U.S. haslimited facilities to convert the crystals into metal. As aresult, last July the Army agency recommended that thestockpile buy about 35 million pounds of depleted-uraniummetal.   But from the beginning, this assessment got twistedpolitically. For the 125-page Army report also calculatesthat in an emergency, the Army could build new uraniumconversion facilities to create metal from the surpluscrystals -- for one-fourth the cost of stockpiling the metalnow.   New facilities, however, would have to come out of Armybudgets, unlike stockpile purchases. They also wouldn'tbenefit metal makers looking to make sales. Stockpiling &quot;waseasier to rationalize,&quot; says John Mytryshyn, who overseesammunition production for the Materiel Command. &quot;The moneywas small enough, and it didn't come out of Army programs.&quot;   Nuclear Metals jumped on the report to sign up lawmakers.It had already hired a lobbyist, Edward Kinghorn, who hadlearned the intricacies of stockpile politics as an aide toGOP Sen. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina. Mr. Kinghorn andNuclear Metals executives used the Army report to win supportby key lawmakers from both parties for a quiet effort to getthe purchase written into law before the Pentagon coulddecide whether it wanted depleted uranium. Nuclear Metalsofficials contributed $25,875 to congressional campaigns in1989 and 1990. And to broaden its lobbying base, the firmsaid it would split the order with the only other U.S.producer of depleted-uranium metal, Aerojet OrdnanceTennessee, a subsidiary of GenCorp Inc. Aerojet also lobbiedwith legislators.   Last June, Sen. Thurmond wrote to the undersecretary ofthe Army backing the plan to have the defense stockpile buydepleted uranium, which, he noted, was made by a NuclearMetals subsidiary in his state. The other South Carolinasenator, Democrat Ernest Hollings, along with Democratic Sen.James Sasser of Tennessee, led the effort to get the planwritten into law. Aides to all three senators defend theirstances as consistent with constituent service and U.S.defense needs.   Last fall Congress passed a defense appropriations billthat required the Pentagon to buy 36 million pounds ofdepleted-uranium metal, worth about $200 million, from U.S.companies over 10 years. There had been no public debate onthe provision, which was tucked away in the back of the largebill.   Nuclear Metals was thrilled; stockpile officials werestunned. &quot;We didn't have an idea of where {the requirement}came from,&quot; says Kenneth Foster, deputy director of thePentagon office that oversees stockpile policy. &quot;It was likethey were telling us to buy shoelaces; it just appeared.&quot; Mr.Foster says he learned of the provision when his secretaryread through the appropriations bills and underlined anythingthat mentioned the stockpile.   Nuclear Metals hopes the recent Gulf War will bolstersupport for its plans. Depleted-uranium metal was used intank and A-10 aircraft ammunition and in tank armor. But ithas a flaw that worries some: It can burn or flake, waftingclouds of uranium particles that are hazardous to breathe oringest. The Army had to bury three tanks in alow-level-radiation dump after their depleted-uraniumammunition caught fire during training exercises in Germanyand Saudi Arabia. It also plans to bury some Iraqi equipmenthit by U.S. depleted-uranium shells. &quot;We don't want someoneaccusing us 20 years later of causing some problems&quot; throughcontamination, says a spokesman.   Meanwhile, investigators hired by the Pentagon believethat the Army Materiel Command report on potential shortageswas based on wrong assumptions. For example, it estimated theU.S. would need twice as much A-10 aircraft ammunition permonth as the U.S. actually used in the Gulf War, even thoughthe U.S. used the A-10s heavily. According to a classifiedreport prepared for the Pentagon by the Institute for DefenseAnalysis, the U.S. would need only about one-fifth as muchdepleted uranium in a war as the Materiels Command estimated.That would eliminate the need for stockpiling.   This summer, the Pentagon expects to release anunclassified version of its latest depleted-uranium report.If that fails to repeal the law requiring the U.S. to load upon depleted uranium, stockpile managers are preparing to buytheir first batch in the fall. Nuclear Metals already islining up lawmakers to press for the purchase. Says RobertQuinn, the company's vice president of sales: &quot;We endlesslypromote the value of depleted uranium in our society.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>