<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910411-0130</DOCNO><DOCID>910411-0130.</DOCID><HL>   If Mexico Prospers, So Will We   ----   By Rudiger Dornbusch</HL><DATE>04/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)STEEL MANUFACTURERS (STL)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>MEXICO (MX)</RE><LP>   Organized labor and a broad coalition of groups concernedwith wildlife, child abuse and toxic substances, as well asthe Democratic National Committee and even the MethodistChurch have mounted a hysterical campaign against theproposed free trade agreement with Mexico. They are fightingtooth and nail to kill the renewal of fast track authoritythat allows the administration to negotiate trade agreementsthat then go to the Congress for an &quot;up or down&quot; vote,without amendments. The hysteria has even engulfed the NewYork Times, which in a recent editorial was willing to throwMexico overboard just to rescue the Uruguay Round.   The frenzy should be denounced as misinformed or evendishonest. Free trade with Mexico is in the nationalinterest, and far too important to be sunk by protectionismor prejudice.</LP><TEXT>   Labor and the Democrats wrap themselves three times overin the cloak of workers' interests, and even throw in a doseof international solidarity. Tom Donahue, secretary-treasurerof the AFL-CIO told a Senate committee on Feb. 6: &quot;Theenactment of a free trade agreement with Mexico, as proposedby President Bush, would be an economic and social disasterfor U.S. workers and their communities, and do little to helpthe vast majority of Mexican workers.&quot; The DemocraticNational Committee came out against fast track in aresolution stating: &quot;. . . an unrestricted U.S.-Mexico freetrade agreement would be a disaster for workers in bothcountries. It would destroy jobs in the United States, whileperpetuating exploitation of workers and inflictingwidespread damage on the environment in Mexico. Thebeneficiaries would be multinational corporations and largebanks . . .&quot;   As always when it comes to trade, organized labor and itsfellow travelers have it wrong. If you are concerned aboutgood jobs at good wages, freer trade with Mexico will deliverjust that: more good jobs for Americans as Mexico prospersand becomes a major market for American goods in the waySpain did for the European Community. If you are interestedin better living standards in Mexico, freer trade willdeliver that too: Mexicans would become more confident astheir country is integrated into a North Americaninstitutional setting that makes slipping back into populismand chaos very unlikely. And if you are interested inpolitical opening in Mexico, ask yourself whether there is abetter way than free trade and economic integration to swampMexico with the democratic American way?   Opponents of free trade with Mexico are right to raise theissues of environmental standards and workers' rights. Theyare wrong to derail the negotiation.   Of course, Mexican labor costs are low, between $2 and $3a day. But the experience of economic integration ofcountries of very different income levels in Europe makesclear that industry just does not run off to the low-wageregion. Portugal and Spain have done well from free tradewith the rest of Europe, but surely they have not put Germanyout of business. Too many other considerations other thanwages go into location decisions.   Nor is the U.S. going to be swamped by Mexican exports.Although Mexican labor costs are low, these labor costs alsoreflect a low level of productivity, and, in areas such astextiles, low quality. Even today Britain and Spain cannotoutcompete Germany (although British workers earn half theGerman wage and Spanish workers even less) because ofquality.   Anyway, the U.S. is already a wide open economy.Competition from abroad is not a threat but a completereality. Mexico already enjoys a privileged position in theU.S. market, both as a result of the general system ofpreferential treatment for poor and, more important, as aconsequence of the maquila program, which exempts Mexicanre-exports from U.S. duties. Further trade liberalizationwould affect only a few sectors, without much of an impact onaggregate employment or output.   Mexico, however, still has significant protection in keyareas where the U.S. can expect to score export growth. Theaverage tariff is still 12.5%, with maximum rates of 20%.Major areas of trade -- including electronic equipment,automotive products, steel and textiles -- remain subject todamaging quota restrictions. (U.S. textiles in fact are a keyexample of an industry that has already demonstrated itsability to compete effectively in Mexico. In 1989 and 1990the U.S. ran a bilateral trade surplus with Mexico intextiles and apparel.)   Free trade with Mexico will produce new good jobs in theU.S. The jobs that will be lost are bad jobs or jobs that, inany event, have been under threat from world competition. Allthis might be unconvincing if it were not for one strikingfact: In the past five years, as a result of Mexican recoveryand trade opening, the U.S. bilateral nonoil trade balanceswung by nearly $5 billion and now records a large surplus.Every $1 million of net exports creates an extra 30 jobs.Thus, trade with Mexico in the past five years created almost150,000 jobs that would not be there otherwise.   Free trade won't be a one-way street. In some industries(apparel, cheap glass, parts) there would be an increase inimports. Accordingly there will be some adjustment problemthat Congress and the administration must explicitly address.Over time the market might solve the adjustment problem, butnot in a way that is socially acceptable. For this reason, afree trade agreement with Mexico needs two specialprovisions: first, a substantial phase-in period -- say 10years for industries adversely affected; second, a majorcommitment of resources to retraining and skill building ofdisplaced workers. We should not protect workers by keepingthem in poor jobs, but rather by upgrading their skills.American workers lack skills, not jobs.   Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) in a letter to PresidentBush qualified his support for a U.S.-Mexico free tradeagreement: &quot;As one who cares deeply about the effects oftrade policies on working Americans, my concern is that ourtrade negotiators keep uppermost in their minds the impact ofthis Agreement on American jobs, American companies, Americanexports.&quot; That is the right spirit and any agreement oncenegotiated should then undergo tough congressional scrutiny.   Democracy, workers' rights, safety and environmentalstandards are obvious issues on the political agenda ofmodern, open economies. A free trade agreement would supportmodernization in Mexico and thus nurture these objectives. Itwill also help raise wage levels in Mexico, back to their1980 level and beyond. By contrast, trade restriction heremust mean even more poverty there; and with more poverty,there will be fewer rights and more political radicalism,neither of which is in the American interest. If Americansare honestly concerned about the environment, the standard ofliving in Mexico and about democratization, they cannotescape the recognition that a thriving, open market economywill raise living standards, foster individual freedom,decentralize political power and allow people to organizearound local issues.   If Mexico prospers, it will be in a far better position totake up costly but urgent measure on safety standards at thework place and in the environment. And the case is evenstronger and more immediate for political opening. With afree trade agreement in the oven, the Mexican administrationsimply cannot afford to rig this year's congressionalelections.   Economic integration brings with it tensions: The centeris rich and the periphery is poor. &quot;Social dumping&quot; resultswhen production is relocated in areas with low wages and poorstandards and it is rightly fought by unions at the center.But in pushing for an upgrading of wages and standards at theperiphery, the center must resist the temptation to overdo agood thing and kill off any economic prospects in the lessadvanced regions. East Germany offers a spectacular lesson.With unification, West German unions immediately pushed forEast German wage parity by 1994. The result has been massunemployment and a collapse in the East German economy wherequality, productivity and possibilities are far, far belowfrom those in the West.   In Mexico's case, too, overly ambitious demands for payand standards would simply translate into unemployment. Thatis not to say that progress should not be sought. But thesuccessful strategy involves a broad pattern: responsibleNorth American trade union politics, cross-border partypolitics and pressure on multinationals to practice commonstandards for pay, safety and the environment in their NorthAmerican operations.   At this stage it would be very expensive to turn back. InMexico, the idea of trade opening has become a cornerstone ofthe economic modernization strategy. The U.S. has everyinterest in Mexico's demonstration that with sensiblepolicies all of Latin America can return to prosperity.   ---   Mr. Dornbusch is a professor of economics at theMassachusetts Institute of Technology.</TEXT></DOC>