<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900503-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>900503-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Tobacco Critics See a Subtle Sell to Kids   ----   By Michael J. McCarthy   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   RJR MO J.SEL ERTS</CO><IN>TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   Is the tobacco industry marketing to kids?   Cigarette makers vehemently deny it, but that's one of thehottest questions being raised by anti-smoking groups. Theycite these recent cases:</LP><TEXT>   -- A recent memo from an RJR Nabisco Inc. division managerdiscussing plans to promote cigarettes with premiums,typically free gifts, told sales representatives to pinpointcertain stores -- including those &quot;in close proximity . . .to high schools.&quot;   -- A new Winston Cup newsletter, published for fans of thecigarette-sponsored car races, has a &quot;Kids' Korner&quot; with apuzzle and a contest. The child who writes the funniestcaption for a photo of kids driving mini-race cars past aWinston Cup banner wins a Winston Cup sweatshirt.   -- An ad for free Camel T-shirts in Sports Illustratedmagazine has led some teen-agers to call a toll-free numberand say they're older than the offer's limit of 21. After theshirts arrive, they are mailed coupons for free packs ofCamel.   In these instances, RJR says any appeal to children was amistake, unintended or not its doing. And the tobaccoindustry says its advertising is for adult eyes only. Still,cigarette brands are showing up in a growing number of thestaples of modern youth, such as video games and giveawaysfor rock-music compact disks. Critics say tobacco companieshave a powerful economic motive for targeting youths:Research shows that 90% of people who smoke started beforethey were 21.   What's more, tobacco critics fear that the increasing useof what they see as youth-oriented promotions is taking hold.A widely followed University of Michigan survey shows theprevalence of smoking among high school seniors has been flatin recent years, but the Gallup Youth Survey, an independentstudy of children's behavior, shows that the percentage of13- to 15-year-olds who smoke jumped to 11% last year from 7%in 1988.   &quot;Children have to replenish the market for tobaccocompanies,&quot; says Rep. Tom Luken (D., Ohio), who has heldseveral hearings on cigarette marketing to win support for abill to severely restrict tobacco ads. &quot;You'd have to beblind, deaf and insensitive to deny that they are trying toappeal to young people.&quot;   The tobacco industry denies that it's focusing anymarketing efforts on children. The Tobacco Institute, theindustry trade association, says it has rules to shieldchildren from promotions. Under the self-imposed measures,cigarette companies can't advertise in publications readprimarily by young people. They can't use models in ads whoare -- or even appear to be -- under age 25. They can't offerfree samples to people under 21. And they can't offer sampleswithin two blocks of schools, college campuses orplaygrounds.   An RJR spokeswoman says the memo dealing with high schoolswas simply a &quot;mistake.&quot; The memo, issued in January by adivision manager in Sarasota, Fla., was corrected within 48hours, she says, to explain that the manager clearly violatedcompany policy in targeting secondary-school children. Sheadds that the manager was disciplined, but wouldn'telaborate.   Critics of the tobacco industry acknowledge the absence ofa &quot;smoking gun&quot; in the apparent connection between thetobacco industry and children. For instance, RJR, which makesWinston cigarettes, says it never saw or approved a copy ofthe Winston Cup newsletter. Sunbelt Video Inc. of Charlotte,N.C., which produces a Winston Cup TV show, says it publishedthe newsletter for the show's race fans, including children.   But critics say the subtleness of the marketing is whatmakes it such a problem. Cigarette companies &quot;are veryclever. They aren't sponsoring cartoon shows on Saturdaymorning or going to kindergarten classes and giving away freecigarettes,&quot; says Joe B. Tye, president of Stop TeenageAddiction to Tobacco. &quot;You have to look at a lot ofcircumstantial evidence.&quot;   One piece of evidence surfaced last summer in testimony bya former Winston model before a congressional subcommittee.David Goerlitz, a model who appeared in Winston ads duringthe 1980s, said the ads were designed &quot;to appeal to childrenand teen-agers.&quot; Mr. Goerlitz said RJR marketing expertsinterviewed teen-agers in shopping malls, showing thempictures of him and other &quot;Winston men&quot; to choose the mosteffective photos for the ads -- a charge RJR denies.   More recently, the subcommittee's attention has turned towhether cigarette names appearing in video-arcade games arean advertising ploy. Doctors Ought to Care, an anti-smokinggroup, recently asked the Federal Trade Commission toinvestigate certain games. In one, Super Monaco GP, Marlbororace cars whiz past Marlboro signs. Philip Morris Cos., whichmakes Marlboro, says it didn't approve the use of its logosand demanded that the machine's maker, Sega Enterprises Inc.of San Jose, Calif., drop the Marlboro name from the games.   Sega, which says it is removing the trademarks, says theyappeared as &quot;a game designer's innocent attempt to mimic&quot;real racing.   Sega and Philip Morris say they had no agreement on usingthe Marlboro name, but smoking critics have their doubts.Indeed, the flap even prompted a bill, being considered bylegislators in Sega's home state of California, to outlaw anymention of cigarette or alcohol brands in video games usedmainly by minors.   Home video games may come into the spotlight next. FerrariFormula One, computer racing software made by Electronic Artsof San Mateo, Calif., shows the Marlboro name on the boxcover several times, and the game itself shows the Marlborologo on a car driver's helmet, on signs and on the car.Philip Morris and Electronic Arts say they had no agreementto include the Marlboro logo in the game.   A Philip Morris offer of a free rock-music compact diskwith the purchase of its Parliament Lights cigarettes earlylast year drew a stinging editorial from CD Review magazine.&quot;It's pitiful that the CD is being aligned with the stench ofcigarettes,&quot; wrote Larry Canale, the magazine's executiveeditor. &quot;Parliament is targeting a young crowd -- theimpressionable 16- to 17-year-olds who are most attracted tothe type of music on the disk.&quot; Philip Morris counters thatthe promotion was actually aimed at adult consumers, who buythe bulk of CDs, and says it specifically selected artists,such as Tina Turner, to appeal to older listeners.   RJR's Camel advertising has been widely criticized for itsappeal to children. Intentional or not, the redesignedcartoon camel character, accompanied by beautiful women andrace cars and jets, has intrigued youngsters. Tobaccobillboard opponent Jacqueline Jackson says that when sherecently asked fifth- and sixth-graders at Detroit's J.R.King Elementary School what they knew about Camel, theyrattled off specific details from ads: the kind of jacketsthe camel wears, the number of planes shown and the types ofcars. At Atlanta's Northside High School, Camel hats havebeen hot items.   RJR says it doesn't believe the Camel cartoon campaignappeals to children. And the brand itself, says aspokeswoman, is targeted mainly at 21- to 30-year olds.   The free Camel T-shirt promotion has been particularlycontroversial. At a congressional hearing in March, Rep. JimSlattery (D., Kan.) charged that youths were the real goal ofthe advertising. He told of a 13-year-old in Simsbury, Conn.,who called the ad's toll-free number, indicated he was over21 (the minimum age for the offer), and was added to acompany mailing list. Shortly after he received the T-shirt,the boy was mailed a flier for three free packs of Camels.&quot;When you are giving away T-shirts, you are targetingchildren,&quot; said Rep. Slattery in his testimony. &quot;You aren'ttargeting adults.&quot;   RJR records show the boy claimed he was 24 and smokedMarlboro Lights, a spokeswoman says. &quot;Parents ultimately haveto be responsible for whether or not their children lie,&quot; shesays.   Tobacco critics say even subtle imagery should be stampedout. Bubble-gum cigarettes modeled after real brands havebeen sold for years, and toys have popped up resemblingcigarette packs and lighters. Cigarette makers say they tryto eradicate trademark infringements.   But smoking activists say the companies ignore suchproducts because having their brand names mixed with candynames, on store shelves or in vending machines, adds an airof respectability to otherwise controversial products. Incontrast, says Edward Popper, a tobacco expert and marketingprofessor at Bryant College, Smithfield, R.I., &quot;If someonecame up with fake Coca-Cola, Coke attorneys would be in theiroffice immediately.&quot;   John W. Richards Jr., who is president of Doctors Ought toCare and has written medical journal articles on the effectsof tobacco ads on youths, worries that the pervasiveness ofcigarette names sends a dangerous message to youngsters --namely, that cigarettes can't be all that bad if they appearin videos, on billboards and at sporting events.   Some children do seem to take cigarette advertising forgranted. When the Junior League of Washington dispatchedjunior high students to collect information for an alcoholand tobacco billboard study last year, one student, AngelaAustin, jotted some notes about a Salem ad. &quot;It makes memad,&quot; she wrote, referring to some graffiti around the ad.She was unfazed, however, by the placement of the Salem ad onan ice cream truck.</TEXT></DOC>