<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910729-0132</DOCNO><DOCID>910729-0132.</DOCID><HL>   BCCI Founder: `These Things Happen'   ----   By Najam Sethi</HL><DATE>07/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</NS><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)LUXEMBOURG (LU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)PAKISTAN (PK)UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   LAHORE, Pakistan -- Dressed in a spotless, raw-silk&quot;kurta&quot;, or pajama suit, Agha Hasan Abedi sits motionless inan upright chair in his all-white living room. In labored butdetermined tones, the founder of Bank of Credit andamp; CommerceInternational denies any responsibility for the murkydealings that have closed down his bank. Mr. Abedi gave upcontrol in February 1988, after developing heart trouble. Hesays, &quot;The bank was strong when I left it.&quot;   Asked about the alleged BCCI frauds and illegaltransactions that occurred prior to 1988, he shakes his headvehemently in denial. &quot;Things like that are often alleged.But one should have faith in God.&quot; He points a fingerheavenward and murmurs, &quot;God knows better.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Banking regulators, depositors and creditors world-widewould like to know what God knows. What is known is thatBCCI, once the Wunderkind of the Third World, is at least $5billion short of its declared $20 billion in assets. It hasbeen shut down for &quot;widespread fraud over a prolongedperiod,&quot; according to the governor of the Bank of England,Robin LeighPemberton, in his statement seizing the bank.   For both the bank and its founder it is a stunning fallfrom grace. Mr. Abedi rose from obscure beginnings tobefriend world figures, extend patronage to thousands andrule over a private financial empire, all the whileproclaiming a philosophy of moral profit and spiritualuplift. The bank grew from a startup with $10 million capitalin 1972 in Luxembourg to assets listed at $20 billion in 69countries and more than 300 branches.   Now Mr. Abedi, age 68, is an invalid, weakened by twoheart attacks, brain damage and a heart transplant. At aninterview this month in his home in an affluent Karachineighborhood, his hands twitch; he wears thick glasses; andhis memory seems spotty.   What does emerge, however, from this interview and fromthe firmer memories of those around Mr. Abedi, is a portraitof a man who from the start believed himself destined forgreat deeds of global scope.   Born in 1922, Mr. Abedi was raised in a Shiite Muslimhousehold in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. There, hisfather managed the princely estates of the Raja ofMahmoodabad. Living in Lucknow, once the heart of the MughulEmpire, the young Abedi grew up moored to a rich Muslimtradition, including the sense that patronage and power arethe essence of empire. Mr. Abedi's philanthropy and hisfondness for perfume, gourmet cuisine, fine clothing, art,and the color white for its purity can all be attributed tohis Lucknavi Muslim heritage.   After getting a law degree from Lucknow University, Mr.Abedi joined Habib Bank as a junior officer and settled intoan arranged marriage. For months, he sat behind a grubbycounter counting thick wads of currency notes and stampingdeposit slips. When the Indian subcontinent was partitionedin 1947, the family moved 850 miles west to the Pakistaniport of Karachi, where Mr. Abedi joined the head offices ofHabib Bank.   It was at Habib that he showed for the first time thedrive and opportunism that would mark his career. In 1956,the Karachi Municipal Corporation wanted a bank on itspremises but the state-run National Bank was dragging itsfeet. Then Mr. Abedi, 34, walked in to discuss the matterwith the KMC chief. The following day, a few tables and asafe had been set up in a room and a signboard welcomedcustomers into the new Habib Bank branch.   By the late 1950s, Mr. Abedi was restless; he decided toset up a rival bank -- Pakistan's first since independence.For this, he exercised his ability to befriend and influencerich and powerful men -- a knack that served him throughouthis career. Less than six months after meeting a Punjabitextile magnate, Mian Yusuf Saigol, Mr. Abedi persuaded himto capitalize United Bank Ltd. with an initial deposit of 30million rupees, about $7 million at the time.   UBL mounted a spirited challenge to Habib Bank. As part ofMr. Abedi's &quot;progressive&quot; approach, UBL was the first inPakistan to computerize records and set up a researchdivision. He set up branches in far-flung rural areas wherethere had never been any banks, which helped to build UBL'sprofile. &quot;These were hardly profitable but Abedi was keen onserving poor farmers,&quot; says Mian Yusuf Saigol's son, Azam.&quot;He was always more interested in deposits than in carefulmanagement.&quot;   A lax attitude toward deposits was a habit that wouldlater surface in BCCI, which now stands accused of acceptingdeposits from alleged drug lords, terrorists and armssmugglers.   Mr. Abedi also set up charities to help widows and orphansand gave scholarships to poor students.   With UBL up and running, Mr. Abedi looked around again. Hesaw great opportunities among the sheiks and oil millionairesof the Middle East, flush with cash but with limitedfinancial expertise. So in the mid-1960s, according to familyfriend Hamuyun Gauhar, Mr. Abedi chartered a two-seataircraft and took off for the Mideast.   With an exquisite handknotted carpet under his arm and areluctant assistant in tow, he landed near the fortifiedpalace of Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahyan, then and now thetribal ruler of Abu Dhabi. The unknown Pakistanis bearinggifts were eventually granted an audience with the sheik. Theresult was that Mr. Abedi obtained Sheik Zayed's permissionto establish a UBL branch in Abu Dhabi as well as acommitment of deposits. His parting advice to themanager-designate of the new branch was, &quot;Hang on to thesheik's coattails.&quot; Mr. Abedi himself encouraged themonarch's affection for falconry and partridge shoots byinviting him to Pakistan for elaborate hunting expeditions.   When Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who had pledged to nationalizethe country's banks, became president of Pakistan in 1972,Mr. Abedi decided it was time to dip into his Mideastcontacts and establish a Third World bank abroad -- the firstof its kind. Later that year, he floated BCCI in Luxembourg,a site chosen for its European panache and tight bankingsecrecy laws. Helped by his old friend, Sheik Zayed, Mr.Abedi launched BCCI with $10 million in capital. (The sheikand government of Abu Dhabi still retain 77% of the bank.)   The 1970s were the best of times for BCCI. The Islamicsheikdoms were awash with oil money and hundreds of thousandsof skilled Pakistani workers left home to work in Europe andthe Mideast. To send their money home, they turned to BCCI.Particularly in Britain, BCCI attracted Pakistani migrants,drawn by the shared language and culture. For them, BCCI wasa friend that took their deposits, advanced capital andshowed them the ropes of financial planning, feasibilitystudies, and import and export procedures. Because of theirdependence on BCCI, these overseas Pakistanis are among thepeople worst hit by the bank's failure. Mr. Abedi says ofthem, &quot;They will recover, get loans from other banks,`Inshallah.'&quot;   During this period of hectic expansion Mr. Abedi did nothire professional managers. Instead, he consciously stuffedBCCI with Pakistanis, many of whom didn't know the firstthing about banking or finance. No matter, former associatessay, Mr. Abedi figured Pakistanis deserved moreopportunities. This reflected his overriding concern withbroad issues of morality, God, and man's place in the world.Under his &quot;cosmic management&quot; philosophy, employees wereassessed as much or more on their spiritual development as ontheir professional performance.   Says a former BCCI manager: &quot;On the rare occasions whenMr. Abedi formally addressed bank executives, he alwaystalked of the misfortune and liabilities of the Third World,how it was necessary for its citizens and leaders to help oneanother break the shackles of backwardness.&quot;   The 1970s saw an exodus from Pakistan of retired civilservants, executives disgruntled by Mr. Bhutto's socialism,relatives, friends, friends of friends and distant relatives.Mr. Abedi rarely turned anyone away. He gave them jobs,promotions, soft loans, mortgages, medical and humanitarianassistance. No wonder, then, that BCCI became their home andfamily and they responded with blind loyalty not to a chiefexecutive but to their patron-in-chief.   Beneath the surface, however, rumors were alreadycirculating about mismanagement and financial malfeasance,most of which are now common knowledge: How Mr. Abedi built a&quot;bank within a bank&quot; removed from the prying tentacles ofinternational regulators. How he befriended presidents, primeministers, generals and the new Mideast aristocracy. How BCCIcut corners and ruffled financial markets in the West. How itbrokered clandestine arms deals and helped businessmen evadetaxes. And finally, how there was at least a $5 billionshortfall in its assets when it was shut down.   It was a crushing blow to a man whose entrepreneurialidiom is liberally sprinkled with philosophical notions ofwelfare and the common good. &quot;I wanted a bank which would behonest and good for humanity, which would make profits forits clients,&quot; he says. &quot;The purpose of life is to be happy;money is for humanity.&quot;   Of Mr. Abedi's social influence, a Pakistani bankerremarks: &quot;We were such a backward people, we didn't know thefirst thing about international finance and big business.Abedi took us by the hand and showed us the big, beautifulworld outside. He instilled confidence and self-respect intous, gave a new meaning to the term `self-reliance' and helpedus get rid of our colonial mentalities.&quot; Mr. Abedi's manyPakistani admirers point to BCCI-related trusts, foundations,charities and journals that helped hundreds of Third Worldcitizens, including impoverished poets, students, journalistsand politicians-in-exile.   For all this and more, Pakistanis view Agha Hasan Abedi asa hometown hero. They share his anguish at the demise of BCCIand suspect a Western conspiracy against a Third Worldupstart, which many believe was fomented by Jewish bankersagainst a Muslim rival. Writing in the Gulf News, Pakistanicommentator Mushahid Husain defends BCCI this way: &quot;Afterall, approximately $125 billion of drug money goes into theAmerican banking system every year. While BCCI was the banktargeted . . . its `share' was just the paltry amount of $15million.&quot; Sure, Pakistanis concede, BCCI lined the pockets ofthe rich and powerful, but important people have always actedthat way. At least Mr. Abedi tried to help out the less fortunate, so why pick on him?   Mr. Abedi himself doesn't quite see it this way, saying&quot;The West has done no wrong by me.&quot; Management, he says, musttake &quot;collective responsibility&quot; for the bank's collapse. Butin an hour-long interview, the man who founded and ran BCCIfor 16 years washes his hands of what went wrong.   What about the bank's CIA links, arms transactions,money-laundering, false deposits, tax evasions? He shakes hishead. What about his friendship with Ghaith Pharaon, thealleged front man for the illegal takeover of First American?Another shake of the head. &quot;I don't hold my self responsiblebecause I have not had anything to do with the affairs ofBCCI for the past three years,&quot; he says. &quot;I don't blameanyone, neither the West nor Sheik Zayed. These thingshappen.&quot;   The thousands of depositors who have lost their savingsmay find it difficult to share Mr. Abedi's fatalism. BCCInever had a base in any major country. It was structured sothat it was offshore everywhere, thus skirting regulatoryscrutiny. And it never became a financial institution in thegenerally accepted sense of the word. Pakistani politicalscientist Eqbal Ahmad says: &quot;The BCCI's rise and fallpresents a case study in the problems of institution-buildingin the Muslim world. At first, its organizers displayedenormous dynamism, intelligence and capacity to acquire newskills. But soon they fell prey to extravagances, a hankeringfor the quick buck, an inclination to beg and buy favors. TheBCCI became less a bank than a clearing house, aphilanthropic organization, secret society and laundrymachine. From its founding, it was linked to dictators whotypically rob the many to enrich the few.&quot;   Part of the tragedy here is that Agha Hasan Abedi, despitehis personal strengths, could not transcend a world view thatvalued patronage and privilege above all. He never came toterms with the modern rules of the capitalist game. Instead,the international bank he created became a mirror of thecontradictions of modernity, paternalism and corruption thatcharacterize much of the Third World elite.   ---   Mr. Sethi is editor of Friday Times, a weekly newspaper inLahore.</TEXT></DOC>