<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910116-0126</DOCNO><DOCID>910116-0126.</DOCID><HL>   Financial Stakes:   A War Might Boost   The Economy if Short,   But Batter It if Long   ---   Economic Advisers Tell Bush   Prolonged, Messy Conflict   Could Inflict Much Harm   ---   Few Industries Would Benefit   ----   By Alan Murray   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)AEROSPACE (ARO)PETROLEUM (PET)AIRLINES (AIR)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)FORECASTS AND ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)BANKS (BNK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Despite conventional wisdom that warstimulates the economy, a prolonged conflict in the PersianGulf could be dangerous to the nation's economic health,administration and private economists agree.   President Bush's top economic advisers informed himyesterday that a short and successful war lasting roughly amonth or less could clear the way for an economic recovery.But a prolonged war of as much as six months, they said,could be very damaging.</LP><TEXT>   The meeting in the White House Cabinet Room underscored afact that becomes more painfully evident as war apparentlydraws closer: Conflict in the Persian Gulf is a high-stakesgamble for the U.S. economically as well as politically andmilitarily.   The president's bet is that he can win a war in shortorder. If he's right, his advisers told him, the effects onthe economy could be cathartic.   After this short war ended, oil prices would tumble. Thestock market would surge, at least in the short run. Andperhaps most important, consumers might shake off much of thepessimism that has dragged down the economy in recent months.   But if the president were wrong, the results for the U.S.economy could be serious.   In addition to the tragic cost in human life, oil pricescould be driven to $60 a barrel or higher by a protracted andmessy war in the Gulf. Consumers and businesses would puttheir spending plans on ice. The Federal Reserve wouldprobably suspend its efforts to cut interest rates. And aprolonged recession might put at risk the survival ofhundreds of banks.   The odds? Administration officials continue to believe theenormous air superiority of the U.S. assures a quick victoryin a Gulf war. But others still worry that the economic risksare considerable.   &quot;There's not much to be gained on the upside,&quot; warnsThomas Juster, an economist at the University of Michigan,&quot;and a lot to be lost on the downside.&quot;   Attending yesterday's meeting with the president wereTreasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, presidential economicadviser Michael Boskin, White House Chief of Staff JohnSununu, Comptroller Robert Clarke, Federal Reserve BoardChairman Alan Greenspan and Domestic Policy Adviser RogerPorter.   Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the groupconcluded that &quot;hostilities&quot; in the Persian Gulf might cause&quot;some uncertainties and fluctuations, but it was reallyimpossible to calculate them at this time.&quot;   &quot;The potential scenarios are so varied,&quot; said Mr.Greenspan following the meeting. &quot;They are really describingfundamentally different economies with fundamentallydifferent policy responses.&quot;   There is agreement, though, among administration officialsand private economists that an Iraqi conflict might debunkthe hoary notion that wars stimulate the economy. That mayhave been true for the Vietnam War, World War II, World War Iand even the Civil War. But those wars required the nation'sdefense establishment to stoke up its assembly lines and turnout new weapons at a prodigious rate.   This war is different, officials say. It is being foughtout of inventory.   The nation already has a sizable stockpile of tanks andfighter planes, ordered during President Reagan's Cold Warbuildup. Most defense experts now believe the U.S. has morethan enough weaponry to deal with the post-Cold-War world. Asa result, unless a Gulf war lasted far longer than mostexperts think possible, defense contractors would be likelyto get relatively little kick out of it.   &quot;If you lose 1,000 M-1 tanks, are you going to buy a bunchmore? I don't think so,&quot; says Lawrence Korb, a formerassistant secretary of Defense who is now at the BrookingsInstitution. &quot;The Army will still have 7,000, which is morethan enough to handle the crises that may arise in the `newworld order.'&quot;   Defense Secretary Richard Cheney's recent decision tocancel the A-12 warplane in the face of a looming warillustrates the new defense environment: The Iraqi crisis maymoderate the decline in the defense industry, but it won'tchange the basic trend. Moreover, much of the supplies forthe military force will come from overseas. &quot;Some of the foodand all of the fuel is coming from Saudi Arabia,&quot; says RobertGordon, an economist at Northwestern University.   There are some U.S. industries that would get a shot inthe arm from a war. Companies that make uniforms, boots anddesert gear, for instance, are already enjoying aPentagon-led boom. Munitions manufacturers may also get aboost.   And in the long run, the Iraqi crisis could provide morebusiness for big-ticket defense contractors. Already, eventsin the Middle East and the Soviet Union are leadingadministration officials to rethink their plans for cuttingmilitary spending in the future. The administration is alsolikely to be willing to sell more armaments to Saudi Arabiaand Kuwait to help insure future stability in the region.   But the effects such spending will have on the U.S.economy over the next six months are relatively small. Andthey are likely to be swamped by the other big economic wildcard of a Gulf war -- oil.   The world's oil supplies are more than adequate to weatherthe relatively brief hostilities that President Bushenvisions. Indeed, if the U.S. could quickly demonstrate itsdominance, oil prices could well stay below last year's peaksof about $40 a barrel. And once the war ended, prices mightwell fall into the teens.   &quot;Tanks are brimming over, and tankers are around with oilin them,&quot; says Elihu Bergman, executive director of Americansfor Energy Independence, a nonprofit policy group. &quot;Priceswill come back down assuming the military action isshortlived.&quot;   But in the event of a prolonged war, and especially if theIraqi military managed to do damage to Saudi Arabian oilfacilities, prices could skyrocket. The specter of$100-a-barrel oil envisaged several months ago by Ahmed ZakiYamani, the former Saudi oil minister, may be exaggerated.But many analysts think prices could run to $60 a barrel orhigher. And if they stayed there for long, the cost to theU.S. economy would be tens of billions of dollars, and amuch-deeper recession.   Oil economists say every $5-a-barrel increase in the priceof oil cuts about one-half a percentage point from thenation's growth rate -- a total loss to the economy of morethan $100 billion should oil prices double from their currentlevel of about $30 a barrel.   Airlines might be especially hard-hit, since the war couldsqueeze the supply of jet fuel. At a time when three U.S.airlines -- Eastern, Continental and Pan Am -- are in thebankruptcy courts, the additional blow could be fatal toothers.   Energy Secretary James Watkins and other U.S. officialsargue that any damage to the well-protected Saudi oil fieldswould probably be small and relatively easy to repair.Moreover, the U.S. and other nations would try to calmmarkets by releasing as much as two million barrels of oil aday from their strategic reserves.   But attacks on Saudi loading and refinery facilities couldbe more troublesome. And in the midst of a crisis, psychologymight prove far more critical than supply and demand. If warbred a panic, automobile drivers and others could rush tofill their tanks, prompting an oil shortage despite plentifulsupplies.   &quot;On a rational basis, everything looks rosy,&quot; says EdwinRothschild, energy-policy director at Citizen Action, aconsumer organization. &quot;We've got plenty of oil, the Saudifields are protected and we've got the Strategic PetroleumReserve. But if people panic, all hell could break loose. Wecould see $100-a-barrel oil.&quot;   A spike in oil prices, in turn, would be likely to spillover into interest rates. &quot;As oil shoots up, bonds are shotdown,&quot; says Stan Field, director of energy programs forconsultants SRI International. &quot;Interest rates rise. Oureconomy, which was already headed down, would get an extrapush&quot; in that direction.   Higher oil prices would pummel other industrial nations aswell. And they could turn some developing countries thatdon't produce oil into economic basket cases.   A long war also would do heavy damage to the U.S. budgetdeficit, already projected to exceed $300 billion this yearfor the first time. Pentagon officials say the estimated costof keeping troops stationed in Saudi Arabia for this year --excluding war -- is about $30 billion. They won't revealtheir estimates of how much a war would add to that, but Mr.Korb says the cost &quot;could amount up to $2 billion a day.&quot;   His estimate assumes the planes and tanks destroyed wouldall be replaced -- an unlikely outcome. But even so, thecosts would be enormous. &quot;War, the way we fight it and man itand stock it, is a very expensive operation,&quot; says U.S.Comptroller General Charles Bowsher.   Mr. Bowsher, head of the General Accounting Office, won'tgive any numbers, except to say that war would cost &quot;hundredsof millions of dollars a day.&quot;   As a result, war spending is likely to obliterate thesavings made in last year's hard-fought budget deal. The&quot;peace dividend&quot; from lower defense spending that many budgetexperts thought would help close the budget gap is now goingto be spent in the Gulf.   And of course, to pay for these steep costs, the U.S. willhave to borrow more money from the world's credit markets.After a long war, heavy borrowing could in turn mean higherinterest rates and another drag on economic growth.   For the Federal Reserve, an extended war would poseparticular problems. Past wars, such as Vietnam, havecontributed to inflation; a sharp rise in oil prices couldexacerbate the price increases. But administration and Fedofficials point out that a Persian Gulf war, unlike theVietnam war, would be occurring at a time when the U.S.economy is already in recession. As a result, there's muchless danger that any war spending would create inflationproblems. And with unemployment rising, the calling ofreserves to fight in the Gulf poses less of a problem for thelabor market.   For several months now, top economic officials in the Bushadministration have argued that a quick resolution of theIraqi crisis would be good for the economy. Mr. Boskinexpressed the prevailing sentiment in a recent interview,explaining: &quot;The sooner the situation in the Gulf isresolved, the sooner oil prices will come down, much of theuncertainty will be resolved, and the sooner this big drag onthe economy will be removed, which would be a very positivefactor in turning the economy around.&quot; Thus, in purelyeconomic terms, a quick, successful war is better for theU.S. than maintaining the current stalemate.   Administration economists note that the recession wasprecipitated in part by a plunge in consumer confidenceduring August, September and October, in which many peoplestopped buying big-ticket items. They believe consumers werespooked in particular by the prospect of a Gulf war. A quickvictory, they say, might restore some of that confidence.   Private economists, however, are less certain. Mr. Juster,the Michigan economist and a longtime student of consumersentiment, says that these changes in consumer sentimentaren't easily reversed. The fear of war may have provoked thechange, he argues, but consumers have found plenty of otherthings to worry about, such as failing financialinstitutions, falling home prices and rising unemployment.When the war is over, those other problems will remain.   &quot;If the whole war situation is resolved, then I thinkthere will be a period of much improved consumer spirit,&quot;says Fabian Linden, who watches consumer behavior for theConference Board. &quot;But whether that consumer spirit willgenerate sufficient vigor in spending to turn the economyupward, it's very hard to say.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>