<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900503-0057</DOCNO><DOCID>900503-0057.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   Milken's Accomplishments: Not Such a Big Deal   ----   By Herbert Stein</HL><DATE>05/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><IN>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)</IN><LP>   In a statement at the U.S. Courthouse in Manhattan onApril 25, Arthur Liman, Michael Milken's lawyer, said:   &quot;It is an enormous accomplishment for Michael to have beeninstrumental in finding the capital for hundreds of Americancorporations, which are generating jobs, providing alivelihood for hundred of thousands of people. . . . It isMichael's hope that in the long run history will see hisviolation in context and judge him not just on the basis ofhis lapse but on the basis of the contributions that he madeto the economy and to the American people.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   This reflects an error that is common among people whohave not been exposed to economics. It is like the claim thatincreasing defense spending creates jobs or that increasingimports destroys jobs. It fails to distinguish between whathappens in a part of the economy and what happens to theeconomy in total, and it fails to recognize that there is anequilibrating mechanism in the economy that tends to keepcapital and labor fully employed.   Mr. Milken did not save or create the capital that hefound for his corporate client. He attracted the capital fromthe people who saved it -- mainly from savers who had puttheir money in insurance companies, mutual funds and savingsand loans. He arranged for the sale of junk bonds to theseinstitutions. If the institutions had not bought the junkbonds they would have invested the money in some other way,presumably in some other corporation but possibly in homemortgages.   Mr. Milken did not increase the net flow of capital intoinvestment. He altered the direction of the flow. There aresome corporations that received capital because of hisefforts. We know their names and Mr. Milken can point tothem. But there are corporations and potential home ownerswho, as a result of his efforts, were unable to obtaincapital. We do not know their names, but they are real andimportant.   Because he did not increase the total stock of capital,and even if he did, Mr. Milken did not create jobs. Given areasonably stable monetary environment, and Mr. Milken hadnothing to do with that, people who seek jobs find jobs,except for market frictions with which Mr. Milken had nothingto do either. It is wrong to think that the people employedin Mr. Milken's client corporations would not have beenemployed there or elsewhere if it had not been for him.   The real issue is not the total flow of capital or thetotal amount of employment. It is whether Mr. Milken'sefforts affected the quality of the investment made with theflow of capital and consequently affected productivity andincomes.   Here we must distinguish three kinds of cases:   a) The cases usually described on Mr. Milken's behalfwhere it is alleged that he corrected a market imperfectionand improved the allocation of capital, making it moreproductive. The argument is that the market had overestimatedthe risks in junk bonds. As a consequence companies thatdepended on raising money by issuing junk bonds would havefaced an unrealistically high risk premium in their cost ofcapital and would have been unable to make investments with ahigher probable yield than the investments actually made bycompanies that financed themselves in other ways. By findinga market for these bonds that evaluated these risks moreproperly, it is said, Mr. Milken helped capital to flow toits more productive uses.   But there are two other kinds of possible cases.   b) Cases in which Mr. Milken nurtured and exploited amarket imperfection and by so doing made the allocation ofcapital worse. These would be cases in which investmentdecisions were made not by the ultimate savers but by agentsand dealers -- investment bankers and managers of financialinstitutions -- whose motivation was not the totalproductivity of the investment but the short-run cash flowthat could be extracted as commissions, salaries and tradingprofits. The money of the passive savers was diverted intoinvestments whose probable yield was less than could havebeen earned elsewhere and this reduced the productivity ofinvestment.   c) Cases that had no effect on the real productivity ofinvestment but only shifted wealth around. Financialinstitutions bought junk bonds whose proceeds were used tobuy existing equities at prices well above the previousmarket prices and to pay commissions to the managers of thedeals. The corporation does not acquire any additionalcapital in the process. It is only the shell for thetransaction. The previous stockholders have a gain, themanagers of the transaction have their fees and the investorsin the financial institutions have assets for which they paidmuch more than markets previously thought they were worth andwhose riskiness they did not prefer. In the case of thesavings and loans these ultimate investors turned out to bethe taxpayers.   I do not know in what proportions these kinds of casesexisted, and I do not think that anyone else knows either.But I guess that the second and third kind were mostimportant. I think that partly because, at least toward theend, when the flotation of junk bonds was largest, they camemore and more to involve well-established corporations thatprobably would have had little difficulty raising capital inother ways. Also, I am impressed by the persistence of Mr.Milken's dominance of the junk bond market and by the size ofhis earnings. I wonder, what was his unique asset thatallowed that? His initial insight that junk bonds wereundervalued would, I suppose, not have remained unique forvery long. But his Daisy Chain of money managers willing tosubordinate the interests of clients to whom they hadfiduciary responsibilities, and even to take the risk ofgoing to jail, may have been more durable.   But this is only a speculation. If Mr. Milken'scontribution to the American economy is to be an importantfactor in determining his sentence, a more serious effortshould be made to evaluate that contribution than has beenmade to date. But I am not hopeful of finding an answer.   Certainly Mr. Milken can afford to hire an econometricianwho can &quot;prove&quot; that his contribution was large and positive.Probably the government can afford to hire an econometricianwho will &quot;disprove&quot; it. And even the most objective analystwill probably be unable to render a verdict. By the timeenough history has passed to see how Mr. Milken'stransactions have come out so many other things will havehappened that it will be impossible to isolate the effect ofhis activities from all the other noise in our data.Moreover, we shall never be able to measure the effect of theloss of confidence in financial markets generally that hisactivities caused.   Anyway, where is it written that criminals should beevaluated by the size of their contribution to the GNP --especially when the contribution was a byproduct ofself-interested action?   The GNP does not include the value added by criminalactivities, like prostitution or drug trade, so I don't knowwhether the Department of Commerce will include Mr. Milken'svalue added.   ---   A former chairman of the president's Council of EconomicAdvisers, Mr. Stein is an American Enterprise Institutefellow.</TEXT></DOC>