<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910208-0042</DOCNO><DOCID>910208-0042.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Central Europe Borders Tighten   As Emigres Flood in From East   ----   By Tim Carrington   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   KLINGENBACH, Austria -- Tangled in the frozen undergrowthof the forest here are a few rusting coils of the IronCurtain that Eastern Europe countries erected to keep theirpeople from fleeing to the non-Communist West.   The barbed wire got snipped 16 months ago, when theHungarians defied their Communist allies and opened thisborder to tens of thousands of East Germans streamingwestward.</LP><TEXT>   But today, the gate is closing again.   A few yards from where most of the East Germans rushed tofreedom, watchtowers and armed frontier guards have made ajarring reappearance -- this time on the Western side of theborder. With less commotion than the Hungarians caused whenthey opened the frontier, the Austrians have tightenedcontrol along parts of the old border in hopes of regulatinga tide of migrants from Romania, Bulgaria, Albania and, it isfeared, the Soviet Union.   Other Europeans share the Austrians' worry. &quot;It's going tobe a much bigger problem than people anticipated 12 or 18months ago,&quot; says Glyn Ford, a British member of the EuropeanParliament. &quot;I think we'll see a major movement out of theSoviet Union westward.&quot;   Meanwhile, waves of Romanians and other East Europeanmigrants are providing a foretaste. Marios Petcu, 14 monthsafter fleeing Romania, is grateful to have a job dispensingblankets, foam mattresses and toilet paper to other refugeesat Austria's Traiskirchen camp near Vienna.   &quot;I tried to escape (Romania) four times and was arrested,&quot;says the young man, who lives with his wife at the camp.Despite a new government in Bucharest, he wouldn't considerreturning: &quot;They've changed only the name. I try to get mymother and father on the phone, and after 30 seconds they cutit off. What's changed in Romania in a year? Nothing.&quot;   Austrian soldiers on the border are gentle but firm. Theywon't fire their guns -- not even into the air -- and theyexpress sympathy for the mostly Romanian migrants who arrivecold, exhausted and frightened. But they insist that Austria,a country of 7.6 million, is too small to accommodate all whomay want to come.   Before the Austrian government began to tighten up lastSeptember, as many as 400 migrants crossed the border eachday -- often penniless and unskilled. &quot;The Romanians saythey'd rather live in an Austrian jail than in Romania,&quot; saysAustrian army Maj. Peter Logar, who helps coordinate theborder patrol.   But like other Central Europeans, his real fear involvesthe possibility of Soviet migration. &quot;There are 40 millionRussians living below the poverty level, and they're hungry,&quot;he says, adding that even with the new patrols &quot;it's easyenough to go to Austria.&quot; The violent crackdown in Lithuaniaand Latvia has increased worries of an exodus to the West.   The biggest impetus for the predicted migration westwardis economic misery. David Roche, chief strategist with MorganStanley andamp; Co. in London, reckons that the former East blocwill experience vast unemployment before it edges its wayinto the world economy. There could be 50 million joblesspeople in the Soviet Union by 1994, on top of 12 millionunemployed in Eastern Europe.   At a recent meeting on migration problems in Viennabetween government officials from Europe, the U.S., Canadaand Australia, Vladimir Scherbakow, head of the Sovietdelegation, said fears of an exodus were exaggerated. But hesaid that between 1.5 and two million Soviet citizensprobably will try to leave. He didn't specify over whatperiod, but said it might begin later this year when Moscowis supposed to ease travel and passport laws.   Western countries have a long way to go before they comeup with a common approach for handling even that much of aninflux. Germany has a program for giving Soviet workerstemporary jobs, but it is designed so they can acquire skillsto take back home. Moreover, because of its policy ofaccepting ethnic Germans throughout the East bloc, as well asmany Jews, Germany can accommodate few of the other migrants.   France and Italy are busy absorbing waves of migrants fromNorth Africa. And Britain, with a sizable immigrantpopulation already, is bracing for the tens of thousandsexpected to move from Hong Kong because of the colony'sreversion to Chinese rule in 1997.   As a result of limits elsewhere, &quot;all things stop inAustria,&quot; complains Wilhelm Hootera, director of theTraiskirchen camp. Austria took in 22,789 asylum seekers lastyear, twice the 1987 level.   Considerable worry has been focused on the proposed Sovietliberalization of visa rules and travel regulations.Officials fear that, once inside Europe, the travelers willtry to exchange their tourist visas for refugee papers. Now,with Moscow retrenching, the liberalizations are in doubt,and Europeans are relieved. But there is worry that whenpeople get desperate, they move with or without travelpapers.   The Soviet Union is also home to two million Germans, 1.4million Jews, 3.5 million Armenians, 500,000 Gypsies and100,000 Hungarians. As conditions worsen, many could seek torejoin their communities in the West or in the more stablecountries of the former East bloc.   Istvan and Katalin, ethnic Hungarians, recently quitrelatively prestigious jobs in the Carpathian region of theSoviet Union and moved to Hungary as political refugees. TheKGB had begun pressuring the married couple to inform onother Hungarians in the Soviet Union. They joined thousandsof Hungarians returning to their homeland from theTransylvania region of Romania, where about one millionHungarians endure deprivation and bigotry.   Not far behind the ethnic groups may come Sovietintellectuals and professionals, according to Hungarianborder officials. After that, they predict, would be youngparents seeking a better life for their children.   Several of this last group have already rolled intorefugee barracks at Bicske, near Budapest. One couple andtheir three-year-old son drove a decrepit Lada automobile allthe way from the Soviet Crimea, and applied for refugeestatus in Hungary. Anticipating more such families, Hungaryis adding a dining hall and children's resource center at theBicske camp. Hungary, which already carries the biggest percapita debt in Europe, is shouldering most of the refugeecosts, though Finland, Britain, the U.S. and the U.N. providefinancial help.   Under the old Cold War regime for migrants, peopleclassified as political refugees were accepted with fewquestions. Those seeking higher living standards, rather thanto escape persecution, encountered tough obstacles. But thesedays, most European migrants are of the economic sort. Theycome from countries that have accepted a degree of politicalreform, but whose economies are in ruins.   Jobs are becoming harder to find as the economies outsideGermany slow down. But the incentives are still compelling:It is estimated that a Romanian doctor can earn 100 timesmore abroad than at home; in two months of work in the West aPolish construction worker can pick up what it would takefour years to earn in Poland.</TEXT></DOC>