<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900405-0113</DOCNO><DOCID>900405-0113.</DOCID><HL>   The U.S. Takes the Wrong Immigrants   ----   By George J. Borjas</HL><DATE>04/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><LP>   Just as countries compete in a world-wide market wheregoods and services are exchanged, they also compete in themarket for people. The U.S. accepted about 600,000 legalimmigrants annually during the 1980s, not including the 2.5million persons who applied for amnesty under the provisionsof the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act. Includingillegals, more immigrants were admitted during the 1980s thanin any other decade in American history.   By presenting a specific set of economic opportunities,and by pursuing an immigration policy that prevents the entryof some persons but encourages the entry of others, the U.S.makes a particular type of offer in the &quot;immigration market.&quot;The evidence is clear that the American offer is becomingprogressively less attractive to the world's most talentedpeople.</LP><TEXT>   Since the immigration reforms of 1965, U.S. immigrationlaw has encouraged family reunification and discouraged thearrival of skilled immigrants: 75% of legal immigrants in1987 were granted entry because they were related to anAmerican citizen or resident, while only 4% were admittedbecause they possessed useful skills. As a result, the skillsof immigrants entering the U.S. have declined sharply overthe past few decades relative to the skills of natives. Newlyarrived immigrants admitted in the late 1950s had about halfa year more schooling than natives did and earned about 8%less per hour. Immigrants admitted in the late 1970s had 0.7fewer years of schooling and earned about 17% less thannatives.   The U.S. competes for immigrants with several othercountries, but its main rivals are Australia and Canada.Among them, these three countries account for two-thirds ofthe world's legal immigration. But since 1965, Australia andCanada have succeeded better in drawing the most talentedimmigrants. While the predicted lifetime earnings -- the bestindicator of the value of the technical and intellectualskills that immigrants bring with them -- of the immigrantswho entered the U.S.in the late 1970s were 30% lower thanthose of American natives, immigrants to Canada who arrivedin Canada during that period are projected to earn only 13%less than Canadian natives. Late 1970s immigrants toAustralia will likely earn about the same as Australiannatives.   By contrast, those immigrants who arrived in the U.S. inthe early 1960s will have lifetime earnings just 7% belowthose of natives -- a figure exactly to the performance ofcontemporary immigrants to Australia and only very slightlyworse than the 3% less that early 1960s immigrants to Canadawill earn.   The flagging performance of immigrants to the U.S. is duein part to the changes in their national origins. Thenational origin groups that dominate the immigrant flow todaydo relatively less well in the labor market than the groupsthat dominated earlier flows. For instance, the predictedlifetime earnings of immigrants from Canada, Germany orBritain are about 20% higher than those of natives;immigrants from India or Korea earn about 7% less thannatives; and immigrants from the Dominican Republic, Jamaicaor Mexico earn 30% to 40% less than natives.   One ready explanation for these disparities is that theskills of workers originating in advanced, industrializedeconomies are more easily transferable to the U.S. labormarket than are the skills of persons from less developedcountries. But a subtler cause is at work too: It is the mostskilled workers who wish to leave such countries as Swedenand Britain.   Because of the wage structure and redistributive incomepolicies in the European social democracies, the income gapbetween the highly skilled and the less skilled is small.Highly skilled workers are not well rewarded and the lessskilled are protected from poor labor market outcomes. Thiscreates an incentive for those highly skilled people toemigrate. In poor countries, on the other hand, the wage gaptends to be very large, and it is the less skilled who havethe most incentive to leave.   The problem with unskilled immigrants is not, as is oftensupposed, that they reduce the living standards of nativeworkers. A 10% increase in the number of immigrants decreasesthe average native wage by at most two-tenths of 1%, and haslittle effect on the unemployment rate of practically allnative groups, including the black poor.   In fact, even a large and unexpected increase in thesupply of immigrants -- such as the arrival of 125,000 Cubansinto the Miami area during the 1980 Mariel boatlift -- doeslittle harm to native earnings and employment. The trend inthe wages and unemployment rates of both black and whitenatives in Miami over the 1979-1985 period differs littlefrom the trends observed in a number of comparable cities,none of which received anything like the Miami influx.   But though unskilled immigration doesn't deprive nativesof jobs or wages, it does have other costs. The poverty rateof newly arrived immigrants admitted in the late 1960s wasfive percentage points higher than that of natives, while thepoverty rate of immigrants admitted in the late 1970s was 18percentage points higher. Similarly, immigrant householdsadmitted in the late 1970s are about two percentage pointslikelier to receive public assistance than immigrants whoarrived in the early 1960s.   The differences in poverty and welfare recipiency ratesamong national origin groups are huge. Only 7% or 8% of theimmigrants from Britain or Germany are living below thepoverty line, but 14% of Koreans, 26% of Mexicans, and 34% ofimmigrants from the Dominican Republic are. The nativepoverty rate is 12%. Similarly, only 5% of German and Britishhouseholds are on welfare, but 10% of Filipino households,17% of Cuban households and 26% of Dominican householdsreceive public assistance. Eight percent of native householdslive on welfare.   The shift toward a more unskilled immigrant flow increasesthe burden of income transfer programs. There really is afundamental conflict between the welfare state andimmigration. Before welfare benefits became widely availablein the 1960s, prospective immigrants to the U.S. would maketheir decision based on a comparison of the economicopportunities available to them here and in their country oforigin. Now they compare welfare opportunities too. Withoutwelfare, the U.S. could open its borders entirely, knowingthat those who were needed would stay, while those whoweren't would probably leave.   National income and tax revenues are substantially lowerthan they would have been if the U.S. had attracted moreskilled immigrants. If the people who immigrated in the late1970s had been as skilled as those who came in the early1960s, national income would be at least $6 billion higherand tax revenues would have increased by $1.5 billion peryear.   In both Canada and Australia, visas are now allocatedthrough a point system, which grades visa applicants in termsof educational attainment, age and occupational background.The presence of relatives in the country is only one factoramong many. Canada and Australia also &quot;sell&quot; visas to personswho have sufficient financial resources to open businessesand create employment opportunities for natives. But it maywell be, for instance, that the skilled persons who chooseAustralia or Canada would have preferred the more favorabletax policies or labor market conditions provided by the U.S.If American law were different, they might have come hereinstead.   Of course, a visa allocation system based on theapplicant's ability to pay discriminates against people wholack these financial resources. Similarly, a point systemdiscriminates against people who lack the favored skillcharacteristics. Any visa allocation system, however, isbound to lead to inequities, and the inequities that would becreated by a merit-oriented immigration policy would be nomore egregious than those associated with present or previousimmigration policies. Throughout the first half of thecentury, the nationalorigins quota system flatly prohibitedthe entry of Asians; current policy prevents the entry ofmost persons who do not have relatives in the U.S.   Immigration policy is inherently discriminatory. Itselectively picks and chooses from the many applicants. Itmay stress national origin, or skills, or financialresources, or family ties, or any combination ofcharacteristics that Americans deem economically andpolitically desirable, and consistent with the country'svalues and beliefs. Because there are only a limited numberof visas, the policy has to restrict or prohibit the entry ofmany classes of persons. Inevitably, difficult choices mustbe made.   ---   Mr. Borjas, a professor of economics at the University ofCalifornia, Santa Barbara, is the author of &quot;Friends orStrangers: The Impact of Immigrants on the U.S. Economy,&quot;(Basic, 1990).</TEXT></DOC>