<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911127-0021</DOCNO><DOCID>911127-0021.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>11/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   U.S. OFFICIALS SIGNALED their impatience over Middle Eastpeace talks.   The State Department said it was concerned about thefailure of Israel, Syria and Palestinians to agree to attendthe peace talks slated to start next Wednesday in Washington.A State Department spokeswoman made it clear the U.S. wantedyes or no answers from these three delegations. She saidWashington would entertain no conditions and give no promisesin exchange for attendance. In the case of the Palestinians,who form a joint delegation with Jordan, the U.S. said itwon't issue entry visas for PLO members to act as advisers tothe negotiators.</LP><TEXT>   Jordan and Lebanon are the only countries to have acceptedthe invitations so far. The Israeli inner Cabinet is todecide its response today.   ---   A former top CIA official was indicted on seven felonycharges stemming from the sale of missiles to Iran as part ofthe IranContra operation. The federal grand jury indictmentof Duane Clarridge alleges that former White House aide Northenlisted Clarridge's help in 1985 in getting Hawk missiles tothe Iranians.   ---   A military task force started putting up the first tentsat the U.S. naval base in Cuba to provide temporary shelterfor 2,500 Haitian boat people. The Pentagon said the decisionto transfer the Haitians to the base was made because of&quot;intolerable&quot; overcrowding aboard Coast Guard cutters thathave been rescuing the refugees.   ---   A federal judge issued an order blocking the EnergyDepartment's plans to open an underground storage site in NewMexico for defense-plant waste. The agency had hoped to beginshipping toxic and plutonium-contaminated wastes this monthto the site, a series of salt caverns that critics contendare unsafe for storing hazardous material.   ---   The U.N. Security Council began consultations on a plan todeploy peacekeeping troops around specific demilitarizedtrouble spots in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia. Britain,France and Belgium proposed a draft resolution stressing thatthe deployment would proceed only if a cease-fire holds.   ---   Condoms were given to New York City high school studentson demand as part of a Board of Education program that drewprotests from Roman Catholic Church officials and someparents. The free condoms were distributed at a Brooklynschool, the first to participate in a planned citywide effortto help combat the transmission of AIDS.   ---   Kenya arrested two once-powerful government officials forquestioning in the slaying of Foreign Minister Ouko, whoreportedly was investigating government corruption when hewas found dead in February 1990. Meanwhile, the World Banksaid it would halt all aid to Kenya for six months because ofhuman-rights violations.   --   South Korea plans to join an international ban on oceandrift-net fishing. After Tokyo's decision this week tosuspend the practice, the Seoul government apparently doesn'twant to be left as the sole major supporter of the huge nets.South Korea is said to be sending a cable to its U.N.delegates advising them of the shift.   ---   Azerbaijan's Parliament voted to take control of thedisputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, according to Soviettelevision. It said an emergency session of Parliamentannulled the autonomous status of the territory, the scene ofa long-running guerrilla war between Azerbaijan and theneighboring republic of Armenia.   ---   A New York jury convicted Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, aColombian alleged to be the most feared assassin of theMedellin cocaine cartel, of using a false identity and lyingto federal agents who arrested him. The two charges eachcarry prison terms of up to five years. Sentencing will beJan. 13.   ---   An Army surveillance specialist spied on targets inCambodia, Zimbabwe and an Indian Ocean island, using atelescope aboard shuttle Atlantis. Thomas Hennon viewed theEarth from the orbiting craft. He is the only person aboardAtlantis who isn't a full-time astronaut, though each of thefive others has a military background.   ---   The remaining U.S. troops will leave Kuwait before the endof next month, the Defense Department said. The 1,500soldiers are scheduled to return to several U.S. bases inGermany. A Pentagon spokesman said that the first 100 troopsleft the emirate yesterday, adding that most of the restwould depart next week.   ---   Italy's main opposition party urged the impeachment ofCossiga, saying the president has overstepped his authorityas an appointed figurehead by trying to reform thegovernment. The move by the Democratic Party of the Left,which is the renamed Communist Party, didn't appear to haveenough support in Parliament to pass.   ---   The Doomsday Clock was turned back to 11:43 p.m. -- itsfarthest point ever from &quot;nuclear midnight.&quot; The symbolicclock, which appears on the cover of the Chicago-basedBulletin of Atomic Scientists, had stood at 11:50 p.m. sinceMarch 1990. It was closest to midnight -- 11:58 p.m. -- in1953, after the U.S. tested the hydrogen bomb.</TEXT></DOC>