<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920312-0139</DOCNO><DOCID>920312-0139.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Costa Rica Winning War Against Drug Influence in Politics   ----   By Jaime Daremblum</HL><DATE>02/28/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><RE>CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)COSTA RICA (CS)CUBA (CU)PANAMA (CZ)MEXICO (MX)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)WEST INDIES (WIS)</RE><LP>   SAN JOSE -- Free elections have in recent years marked thereturn of democratic rule in several Latin Americancountries. However, freedom to vote for candidates representsonly the first step in what makes a country truly democratic.   A functioning democracy also demands genuine checks andbalances between branches of government, effectivesubordination of the armed forces to civilian authority and,above all, institutions outside the formal realm of politicalpower -- particularly a free press -- to act as the voice andvigilant eyes of society. A lack of adequate mechanisms toscrutinize the conduct of public officials endangersdemocracy by allowing corruption to go uncensored.</LP><TEXT>   In this regard, illegal drugs and the vast amount of dirtycash the drug business accumulates, poses an unprecedentedthreat. Costa Rica, the oldest democracy in Latin America,has shown how a free press and an independent congress cancleanse the political system of attempts by drug merchantsand money launderers to buy their way into key institutions,from political parties up to the supreme court.   In 1986, shortly after Mexican drug baron Rafael CaroQuintero was captured here, the daily newspaper La Nacionuncovered the shocking story of how the country was in dangerof becoming a bridge in cocaine trafficking from SouthAmerica to the U.S., as well as an active center for thelaundering of proceeds from the narcotics business. Promptedby this and other stories that followed, congress establisheda special bipartisan commission in order to investigate thescope of corruption and its effect on our political system.   Since the first congressional report was issued in 1987,two successive commissions have pursued the issue, based to alarge extent on what the media keep unearthing. Theinteraction between the press and congress has been fruitful:three supreme court justices have been forced to retire; thegeneral manager of a leading state bank was removed; acongressman was prevented from becoming president of thelegislature; and various police and government officials werefired. Most of these individuals did not break the law; theyonly committed improprieties, such as accepting gifts orfavors from people under investigation or from foreignerssought abroad for drug-related crimes.   Current investigations have revolved around the subject ofcampaign contributions. Although the state providessubstantial financial support to the parties, rising costsand longer periods of campaigning make candidates highlydependent on private donations, a loose and largelyunregulated area of growing concern. Consequently, aselection day approaches, candidates tend to intensify theirsearch of economic support -- at home and abroad -- sometimeswithout an adequate knowledge of the source.   The shortcomings and risks of this exposure wereunderlined last month, when the bipartisan commissionsummoned the former president and Nobel Peace Prize winner,Oscar Arias. Specifically, the congressional group wanted toquestion him about serious charges of impropriety, some ofwhich were made by former political associates. Up to the eveof the hearing, Mr. Arias tried to convince the commissionnot to call him, alleging it could damage Costa Rica'sprestige. However, since other current and former heads ofstate -- including President Rafael Angel Calderon -- hadtestified, the proceeding went on (although it was held in aclosed session at Mr. Arias's request).   Mr. Arias's deposition illustrated both the thoroughnessof the evidence obtained by congress as well as the crucialinput provided by the press. Under intense interrogation, Mr.Arias acknowledged having solicited and obtained donationsfor his campaign (1985-1986) from dubious local and foreignindividuals who, as it turned out, had police records.Notwithstanding, some even became officials of his electoralmovement and later received government appointments.   A telling chapter of this story concerned three Cubanexiles, owners of a shrimp export concern linked by the pressand the authorities to money-laundering activities. Inaddition to paying the candidate's expenses in Miami(including medical bills), the Cubans gave Mr. Arias $20,000,which he deposited in his personal account. Shown thecanceled check at the hearing, the Nobel laureate said themoney ultimately went to his finance committee. However, hiscampaign treasurer told the commission that the committeenever received those funds.   The former president was also interrogated about hisrelationship with Ricardo Alem, a shadowy figure now undertrial in Costa Rica for money laundering. Mr. Alem was apropaganda manager and a heavy contributor to the Ariascampaign. One witness, a close aide to Mr. Arias, gave thecommission an ample account of the thousands of dollarsprovided by Mr. Alem, whose sudden affluence could not beexplained by anyone. Furthermore, the witness recalled, thethen-presidential hopeful attended gatherings in the lavishhome of the Alem family.   In spite of this worrisome background, once in office Mr.Arias appointed Mr. Alem as the Costa Rican director of theCentral American Bank of Economic Integration, a functionthat carries diplomatic privileges. One year later, Mr.Alem's alleged activities had bank and drug-enforcementauthorities pushing alarm buttons. Through several accountsin San Jose, he moved in and out some $40 million over ashort period of time, part of which he allegedly broughtpersonally to the banks in suitcases. Asked finally to resignin 1988, shortly thereafter he was arrested in connectionwith an attempt to bring crates of cash from Los Angelesthrough Costa Rica's international airport.   The commission was particularly interested in Mr. Arias'slinks with former Panamanian strongman Manuel AntonioNoriega. After watching a video of himself socializinginformally with the general in a luxurious villa in Panama --also in the company of Luis del Cid, a confessed drugmerchant now jailed in Miami -- a discomfited Mr. Ariasacknowledged that he obtained donations from Mr. Noriega'scoffers.   Congressional findings will undoubtedly yield a stricterhandling of campaign finances by the parties, and mostprobably a law regulating foreign contributions will beenacted. But more important than any piece of new legislationis the encouraging reality of the decisive role played bypublic opinion, a most treasured democratic bastion of CostaRica, in this country's successful efforts against drugs andcorruption. No doubt there is a lesson to be drawn by othernations. For nurturing the freedom of expression is bound tostrengthen political pluralism and allow the interplay ofinstitutions to repel the threats to democracy.   ---   Mr. Daremblum is a Costa Rican business lawyer andessayist.   (See related letter: &quot;Letters to the Editor: Arias Linkedto Drugs? Ludicrous&quot; -- WSJ March 12, 1992)   920228-0020</TEXT></DOC>