<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910114-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>910114-0070.</DOCID><HL>   International:   If Attacked, Israel Is Poised   To Respond With Ferocity   ---   Opportunity to Cripple Iraq   May Be Too Irresistible;   U.S. Is Urging REstraint   ----   By Peter Waldman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   JERUSALEM -- Israel is like a tightly wound spring, saysreserve Gen. Benjamin Peled, who commanded the Israeli airforce in the 1970s.   As on the eve of past Mideast wars, Israel, a nation thatcan't agree on where its own borders should lie, has achieveda rare consensus: Saddam Hussein and his war machine must go.Eight months of Iraqi threats against Israeli civilians, andthe pent-up anxiety from sitting passively all the while,appear on the verge of erupting in massive Israeli firepowerif provoked by Iraq. Like the street tough who sticks out hischin and says, &quot;hit me,&quot; Israel is spoiling for war.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;This is an emotional, frustrated, angry government,&quot; saysGen. Peled, a defense contractor who is no dove himself.&quot;They feel the Holocaust over their shoulders. They'llrespond to Iraq accordingly: hysterically, with full force,like an elephant in a china shop.&quot;   Moshe Arens, Israel's defense minister, put it differentlyon Israeli television last week: &quot;Our response {to Iraqiaggression} will be aimed at putting an end to this thing,&quot;he said.   Iraqi provocation may never come, of course, if PresidentSaddam Hussein observes United Nations resolutions andwithdraws from Kuwait; or the Iraqi leader may hear thedrumbeat here and refrain from opening an Israeli front if awar does break out.   If he does attack Israel, there's still a chance, too,that the U.S. will keep Israel out of the war by retaliatingon Israel's behalf against Iraqi targets, particularlyagainst its missile launchers.   But, says a senior Israeli military officer, &quot;It's hard tobelieve that Israel will absorb missiles and wait for asecond salvo.&quot; Adds Eliyahu Ben-Elissar, chairman of theDefense and Foreign Affairs Committee of the IsraeliParliament, &quot;I can't envision any scenario where Iraq attacksIsrael without response.&quot;   Since its founding in 1948, the Jewish state has based itssecurity on the doctrine that Israeli lives and territory aretoo scarce to lose in battle. What that means in practice isthat Israel wages war on enemy territory and uses sudden anddevastating force to bring the fighting to a rapid end. (Thestrategy failed when Israel was taken by surprise in the YomKippur War in 1973, leading to a wrenching self-examination.)For its tactics to work, Israel needs nearly infallibleintelligence and a free hand to incapacitate the enemy with apre-emptive first strike.   In the current crisis, Israel has neither. Iraq's primarythreat against Israel, as Mr. Hussein so often points out, isits Soviet-supplied missiles, which can reach Israel in justsix minutes. To keep tabs on these weapons, Israel depends onU.S. satellite photos, which Israeli officials complain don'tarrive quickly enough. Moreover, even with a warning, Israelwould find it difficult to pre-empt an Iraqi missile attack,as its leaders have apparently promised Washington thatIsrael won't start a war that could shatter the coalition ofWestern and Arab powers confronting Iraq.   U.S. officials say Secretary of State James Baker receivedassurances from the leaders of Saudi Arabia and other Gulfstates during his visit to the region last week that theywouldn't withdraw from the anti-Iraq coalition if Israelresponded to an attack by Baghdad on Israeli territory. Butthe same might not be true if Israel launched a pre-emptivestrike against Iraq, the U.S. officials say.   In weekend meetings with Israeli leaders, Deputy Secretaryof State Lawrence Eagleburger once again was urging Israel tostay out of war, according to President Bush's nationalsecurity adviser, Brent Scowcroft.   On ABC-TV's &quot;This Week With David Brinkley&quot; yesterday, Mr.Scowcroft said the U.S. doesn't want Israel to attack Iraq,even in retaliation for an Iraqi strike on Israel, though heconceded, &quot;I don't know whether it's realistic.&quot; U.S.officials are worried that Saddam Hussein, convinced that waris inevitable, may launch a preemptive strike at Israel totry to win Arab support and start hostilities on his ownterms. And Syria said this weekend it wouldn't tolerateIsraeli involvement in a Gulf war.   Meanwhile, Israel waits, assured by its leaders that theaccuracy of Iraq's missiles is poor, their potential to causeharm slight and Israel's retaliatory power massive. Militaryofficials say Iraq has about 800 ground-to-ground missilesbut that fewer than 100 could reach Israel. Of these, it canlaunch only six to 10 in an opening salvo, officials say,after which Israeli or U.S. planes could destroy the missilesites.   Israeli officials aren't sure whether Iraq can putchemical warheads on its long-range missiles, but they'regiving that possibility the benefit of the doubt. Thegovernment has instructed Israeli civilians to seal doorcracks and windows in one room of their homes with plasticwrap and tape. At the sound of air-raid sirens, Israelis aresupposed to gather in these airtight rooms, don gas masks andwait for instructions on the radio. The bomb shelters innearly every basement in Israel aren't to be used, becausepoison gas sinks.   Among other precautions, hospitals are being prepared forthe wounded. Bomb shelters are being resupplied. Sales ofbottled water are brisk. And flights leaving the country, onthe handful of airlines still flying here, are booked.   If war breaks out, Israel is unlikely to pass up theopportunity to strike at Iraq's entire militaryinfrastructure, especially its nuclear-weapons program.Israeli intelligence officials say Iraq is still five yearsaway from producing a nuclear bomb. But other sources heresay it could be much closer.   Hirsh Goodman, editor of the magazine Jerusalem Report,which has published articles on the subject, says Iraqproduces enough enriched uranium to make one bomb a year,though it still has only primitive triggering technology. TheIraqis keep their four uranium-enrichment centrifuges atdifferent sites deep underground, which might requirecommando raids or tactical nuclear warheads to destroy them,some military experts say.   Israel may welcome war at this juncture for other reasons.With the expected arrival of 300,000 to 600,000 Soviet Jewsthis year, the government faces the enormous cost ofresettling them. At the same time, the government must allotbillions of dollars to compete in a Mideast arms race that isaccelerating rapidly.   &quot;It's very obvious that if you project the arms race todayin a straight line into the future, Israel can't keep up,&quot;says a Western diplomat based in Tel Aviv. So, if Israel,with U.S. help, can erase the military threat of one of itsmost intractable and strongest foes now, the victory couldbring crucial savings later.   Aside from missiles, Iraq has about 700 combat airplanes,of which 100 are considered high quality, mostly MiG-25s,MiG-29s and Su-24s. Israel has 630 combat jets, with nearly200 regarded as high quality, mostly F-15s and F-16s.   But perhaps most important, say military experts, whileIraq's pilots have almost no experience in air-to-airdogfights, Israel's aviators have notched up a remarkablerecord over the years for shooting down Arab-flown jets.   &quot;The Iraqi air force is no match for Israel's,&quot; says ZeevEytan, co-editor of Middle East Military Balance, a guide tothe region's armed forces.   There is concern among Israeli military officials,however, that if Israel is drawn into a war, U.S. and Israelipilots could wind up inadvertently shooting at each otherbecause of a lack of coordination between the countries'militaries. Some military experts say contingency planningmust have been high on the agenda for Mr. Eagleburger's visithere this weekend.   Another big unknown is Jordan. In the past several weeks,King Hussein has dispatched much of his 80,000-man army tothe Israeli border to shore up defensive positions thathaven't been manned in years. It isn't clear whether themoves were meant to appease the Islamic fundamentalists andPalestinians who control Jordan's Parliament or are really asign that the king intends to resist Israeli use of Jordan'sairspace against Iraq.   The king said in an interview Friday that Jordan wasdetermined to prevent aircraft &quot;from any side in thisconflict&quot; from using Jordanian airspace if war breaks out. Hesaid in an interview with ABC-TV that the policy applies to&quot;any flights from any direction toward any other targetsurrounding us.&quot;   Israeli military officials say Jordan, which has about 15batteries of improved Hawk anti-aircraft missiles, hascooperated militarily with Iraq for the past year. Gen. Peledand other tacticians say Israeli planes don't necessarilyhave to fly over Jordan to get to Iraq. But alternativeroutes, over Saudia Arabia, Syria or Turkey, pose problems oftheir own.   &quot;What if something goes wrong and a pilot needs to gethome in a hurry?&quot; asks one of Israel's top military testpilots. &quot;You think he wants to fly over Jordan with Hawkmissiles pointing up at him?&quot; If Iraq does attack Israel,this aviator concludes, Israel's first strike must be atJordan's anti-aircraft batteries.   If a ground war breaks out, Israel, like the U.S., willhave significant technological advantages. In the pastdecade, Israel has spent billions of dollars to developradar, laser and infrared technologies, to improveintelligence-gathering and to give tanks, planes and missilespinpoint accuracy. Strategists here contend that thesestrengths, and the skill of Israel's technician-soldiers,more than offset the country's numerical weakness.</TEXT></DOC>