<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910906-0094</DOCNO><DOCID>910906-0094.</DOCID><HL>   Soviet Parliament Disbands Itself, Sets Up   Transition Government Run by Republics   ---   Center Holds Precariously,   Supported by 10 States;   Human Rights Codified   ----   By Laurie Hays   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- The Soviet Union moved to break more than sevendecades of repressive central control when the nationallegislature agreed to dissolve itself and set up in its placea transitional government dominated by republics.   Under the new structure, Soviet President MikhailGorbachev hopes to preserve some semblance of a union, albeita smaller one, with 10 republics participating in thegovernment. But his new role as mediator for the ever moreassertive republics will surely test his political skills asthe government goes about setting up a new constitution andironing out difficult problems in the economy and military.</LP><TEXT>   And, given the fluid nature of the political situation, itis by no means certain that this arrangement of thegovernment will be its final form, or whether the center willend up holding any real power at all.   With the old union of 15 centrally controlled republicsnow officially dead, however, many see the new powerstructure as the beginning of a more democratic and balancedassociation of sovereign states. Mr. Gorbachev has maintainedsince the failed coup last month that such a confederation isthe only way to save the union. The coup accelerated thesecession of republics that have been warring with theKremlin over everything from finances to border controls, andMr. Gorbachev pleaded with the lawmakers to understand that anew country had been born.   Mr. Gorbachev complimented the legislature, saying it&quot;rose to the occasion at this crucial and, without anyexaggeration, historic moment in the development of ourstate.&quot; Mr. Gorbachev also expressed hope that the worldwould welcome the results.   &quot;We feel ourselves to be an organic part of the worldcommunity now more than ever before and will pursue a policyof strengthening cooperation with all countries and peoples,&quot;Mr. Gorbachev said.   &quot;It is now the spring of our democracy,&quot; said SergeiStankevich, a former deputy mayor of Moscow and now areformist aide to Russian republic President Boris Yeltsin.Mr. Stankevich pronounced the Communists crippled, saying,&quot;They will never have another chance.&quot; But he warned thatanother kind of nationalist challenge could soon come.   The U.S. reacted positively, but cautiously, to theapproval of the plan for a new transition government. &quot;Wecertainly hope that it will contribute to peaceful change inthe U.S.S.R. through an orderly, democratic process,&quot; saidState Department spokesman Richard Boucher. &quot;Passage of theplan is a hopeful sign that the republics and the center arearriving at a constructive and cooperative relationship.&quot;   Mr. Gorbachev exerted firm control over the legislature,the Congress of People's Deputies, threatening to dissolve ithimself if it didn't vote for its own demise. Theconstitutional measures passed relatively swiftly with littleargument even from Communist hard-liners. Liberal reformerscomplimented Mr. Gorbachev for rendering the conservativeshelpless by placing the emphasis on republics, thus leavingthem unable to object to their own governments realizingpower.   Nikolai Petrushenko, an army colonel and member of theconservative Soyuz group, confessed that while he didn'tapprove of the breakup of the union, &quot;I look at thingsrealistically. One has to compromise.&quot;   There were indications that the new confederation mightsucceed in keeping a majority of the republics together.Galina Staravoitava, an Armenian deputy, said a vote forArmenian independence scheduled for this month could goeither way now because &quot;there are advantages to the newfederation. It allows for a democratic distribution of poweron different levels.&quot;   The legislature made no decision about the three breakawayBaltic states, even though it was on the agenda. Mr.Gorbachev is expected to recognize soon their independencedeclarations by decree, or put the question to a vote of thenew government, which is likely to approve it. Georgia andMoldavia, which have also declared independence, decided notto join the republican council and most likely won't join thenew voluntary union.   In another remarkable break from the repressive Sovietpast, the Congress, before dissolving itself, passed a humanrights declaration based on international models and the workof the late human rights advocate and scholar AndreiSakharov. The declaration, a first for the Soviet Union,recognizes individual rights, including equality, privacy,freedom of speech, conscience and religion and free choice ofwork, above those of the state.   The declaration was intended to be part of a newconstitution drafted 18 months ago, but because theconstitution has now been postponed pending establishment ofa new government, Mr. Gorbachev asked that it be adoptedseparately.   Under the new government, the Kremlin and the largelyconservative Congress are being replaced by a two-tieredParliament. The more powerful body, called the State Council,will consist of Mr. Gorbachev and leaders of theparticipating republics. There will be no vice president, andthe State Council would choose a new president should Mr.Gorbachev become unable to work.   The second, weaker organ will consist of electedrepresentatives drawn from the Congress and the SupremeSoviet. All its decisions will have to be approved by theState Council. A separate interrepublic economic committeewill coordinate the economy.   Republics will be free to decide whether they want to joina new Union of Sovereign States, and if so, in what form theywould like to be associated with it. In the meantime, theywill sign agreements that would keep the economy functioningand guarantee a centralized system of security, includingmaintenance of the armed forces, KGB, police and stateprosecutors.   The Baltic states, however, have said they preferbilateral economic agreements in some form.   The plan still has huge gaps that will have to be filled.One of the biggest is whether the Soviet Union is to be afederation, a confederation or an even looser arrangement ofindependent states. Some representatives from the Ukraine,the second largest republic after Russia, are already talkingabout a Soviet version of the European Community, in whicheach member is independent and conducts its own foreign anddefense policies.   The biggest problem the new government must deal with,however, is the economy. Numerous republics are declaringplans to establish their own currencies. Already there havebeen many conflicts over republics withholding food andsupplies from each other. In addition, while Mr. Gorbachevand others express a serious desire for Western aid andbusiness cooperation, the looser structure of republicscreates a chaotic business climate.   The first job will be surviving the winter. Ivan Silayev,the Russian prime minister who heads the economic cooperationcommission, told Isvestia that the first task is to ensurefood supplies and consumer goods over the coming months.   With every republic now wanting to set up its own nationalguard, there are also big military issues to be solved. Butthe new Soviet defense minister, Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, told anews conference yesterday that the army would remain singleand indivisible, no matter what the country's structureturned out to be.   Mr. Shaposhnikov also tried to reassure the world that thecountry's nuclear weapons are back under secure control andthat even during the coup weren't accessible to anyone. &quot;Nowwe have increased control over them manifold,&quot; he said.</TEXT></DOC>