<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910614-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>910614-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Dialing for Free:   Thanks to Hackers,   Cellular Phone Firms   Now Face Crime Wave   ---   An Altered Computer Chip   Is Permitting Easy Access   To Networks Nationwide   ---   Mr. Sutton's Key Omission   ----   By John J. Keller   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   BTY PAC</CO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)IRELAND (EI)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)HONG KONG (HK)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SPAIN (SP)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   Robert Dewayne Sutton wants to help stop the tide of fraudsweeping the cellular telephone industry. The 35-year-oldclearly knows plenty about fraud. After all, he helped sparkthe crime wave in the first place.   Mr. Sutton is a computer hacker, a technical whiz who usedan acquaintance's home-grown computer chip to alter cellularphones so that they dial for free. Mr. Sutton went intobusiness selling the chips, authorities say, and soonfraudulent cellular phone calls were soaring nationwide.</LP><TEXT>   In February 1989, federal agents finally nabbed Mr. Suttonin his pickup truck at a small Van Nuys, Calif., gas station.He was about to sell five more of the custom chips to amiddleman. But by then it was too late. The wave of fraud Mr.Sutton had helped launch was rolling on without him.   All those free calls are adding up: Experts say theindustry is out about $200 million a year -- more than 4% ofannual U.S. revenue -- because of fraud involving cellularphones, which transmit calls via high-frequency radio waves.Cellular industry investigators and the U.S. Secret Service,which handles phone crime, have uncovered numerous scamsalong with Mr. Sutton's, including instances where accessnumbers of legitimate customers have been stolen from phonecompany offices.   &quot;Our fear is that cellular fraud could reach $600 millionnext year and that there are no security departments at thecellular companies to deal with it,&quot; says Earl Devaney, whois in charge of the Secret Service's fraud division.&quot;Managers are just waking up to the problem.&quot;   Mr. Sutton, on the other hand, spotted the opportunitysome time back. About seven years ago, the soft-spokenchainsmoker, who liked to tinker with motorcycles, took aused computer as partial payment for a car he sold. It proveda watershed event in his life. Soon Mr. Sutton wasprogramming the thing like an expert. &quot;I knew I wasn't anidiot; anything I do I'm pretty good at,&quot; he says in aninterview.   His foray into computers soon led to the soul of themachine itself: the memory chips that produce the programs.Mr. Sutton, who lives in Saugus, Calif., taught himself to&quot;burn,&quot; or reprogram, a chip, a complicated process thatinvolves electronically altering the chip's software. It alsoled to swapping tips with other hackers, such as KennethSteven Bailey, an acquaintance who lived in Laguna Niguel,Calif.   It was Mr. Bailey, investigators say, who actually crackedthe cellular system. In early 1987, Mr. Bailey allegedly tookapart a Mitsubishi cellular phone and discovered that hecould use a personal computer to rewrite the software in thephone's memory chip. Authorities say his new program made itpossible to change the phone's unique electronic serialnumber, which tells a cellular phone company's computers toaccept a phone call and let it pass. By replacing thefactory's chip with one of Mr. Bailey's homemade devices, auser could gain free access to the phone system.   Keen to control his new market, Mr. Bailey allegedlyincluded a security check in his program that forced users toreturn to him each time they wanted to transfer the programto a new phone, investigators say. That way, the programcouldn't be copied.   But fate worked against Mr. Bailey, investigators say. Onenight, during a party, he allegedly asked Mr. Sutton's helpin rebuilding a portion of his computer. In the course of histinkering, Mr. Sutton ran across Mr. Bailey's specialprogram, investigators say. He decided to copy the programbut made one crucial omission: He left out the electronicsecurity check.   Now Mr. Sutton had a much-in-demand program, whichauthorities say he eventually sold for several hundreddollars a copy. (Mr. Sutton denies he sold the chips, thoughhe admits to making them.) But he also had no control overits spread: Anyone who had a copy could now duplicate it atwill. Soon, the program was spreading like wildfire acrossthe country.   Pirate phone operations sprang up from Queens County,N.Y., to Southern California. Simply give a few dollars tothe guy in the parked car with the blacked out windows,police say, and he'll let you hop into his back seat and callanywhere in the world for 15 minutes.   &quot;Top-level cocaine traffickers and money launderers havethese phones,&quot; says Patrick McCurry, a lieutenant in the SanBernardino, Calif., Sheriff's Office. &quot;In fact, we haven'tarrested anyone recently with a legitimate cellular phone.&quot;And all of the altered chips can be traced back to the basicBailey-Sutton design, the police say.   Now law enforcement authorities in other countries believeother hackers are programming knock-off chips of their own.Scotland Yard, the police and British Telecom, the telephonecompany, meanwhile, have been scouring England for thieveswho are stealing close to 50,000 phones a year and alteringmany of them to filch free cellular calls. The revampedphones, which include altered chips of a different design,are turning up in other places, too, such as Ireland, Spainand Hong Kong.   Cellular companies are understandably loath to admit howdeeply their systems have been penetrated, and generallyplaydown the problem. A spokesman at the CellularTelecommunications Industry Association in the U.S. says aspecial software &quot;patch&quot; designed last year by the SecretService to cut off bogus calls has stopped most of the fraud.&quot;Is there fraud? Absolutely,&quot; says Lee Kaywork, president ofMetro One, Paramus, N.J., a cellular phone marketing company.&quot;But the industry has responded quickly to stay on top of it.CTIA has done a nice job. We've responded with electronicfixes.&quot;   But Mr. Sutton just chuckles. If the patch were working,he says, &quot;it would have taken effect immediately in the L.A.basin area and it hasn't.&quot; Tom Truesdale, director of revenueassurance at PacTel Cellular, a unit of Pacific TelesisGroup, says that of eight different ways people are known tocircumvent cellular security systems, the patch only stopsthree.   &quot;That patch is just what the name implies -- a temporaryremedy,&quot; adds fraud investigator Michael Guidry ofTexas-based Guidry Associates. Mr. Guidry, a former Texasstate trooper who was one of the first investigators to crackcellular scams, says the different cellular networks acrossthe country are often incompatible, and that's hampered theinstallation of the patch nationwide.   Indeed, unlike the old Bell system, which was homogeneous,the cellular systems have no method of cross-checking databases, which complicates matters further. Most cellularsystems allow any electronic serial number to pass throughwhen a call is initially dialed. If the security computerthen finds that the number is bogus, it cuts off the callafter a few seconds. But when a customer enters a callingterritory beyond his regular service area -- goes &quot;roaming,&quot;in industry parlance -- sometimes the security system can'treact fast enough to kill the fraudulent call at the start.   It was that gaping hole in the cellular network thatinvestigators say Mr. Bailey exploited. He simply fooled thesecurity systems into thinking each initial call was aroaming call. Fitting the phones with the counterfeit chipsis, moreover, so simple that investigators had a hard timecracking the Bailey and Sutton cases.   They began by tailing a cellular phone installer, DennisAllen, who investigators say was distributing phones that hadbeen fitted with Messrs. Bailey's and Sutton's pirate chips.Then in December 1988, the Secret Service and the Los AngelesPolice Department set up a sting.   An undercover informant gave Mr. Allen some legitimatephones to be reprogrammed with the new devices. One of thephones, however, had been fitted with a tiny transmitter. TheSecret Service and the police then followed Mr. Allen using apolice helicopter as he took the phones to a meeting with Mr.Bailey at a Denny's restaurant near the Orange Countyairport. The agents watched as Mr. Allen later left themeeting, walked out to his motorcycle, fumbled around in hissaddle bags and then left.   Mr. Allen later turned the phones over to an informant,who he thought was a customer, and investigators were shockedto find out the phones were already altered. &quot;Obviously healtered the phones while they were in his saddlebags,&quot; saidone official involved with the case.   Not long after, the informant gave Mr. Allen a phonesecretly fitted to send out a signal when it was opened. Thesting climaxed in February 1989 at the Van Nuys gas station,where the signal sounded and federal agents arrested Mr.Allen and Mr. Sutton. Mr. Bailey was picked up several weeksago after spending time out of the country.   When the dust settled in U.S. District Court in LosAngeles this April, Mr. Sutton pleaded guilty to productionof counterfeit access devices and, after agreeing tocooperate with investigators, was sentenced to three years'probation and a $2,500 fine. Mr. Allen got the same sentenceafter pleading guilty to conspiracy to produce counterfeitaccess devices. Mr. Bailey hasn't yet been tried. He couldn'tbe reached for comment, but his attorney says he has pleadednot guilty and that &quot;there's a lot more to the case thanmeets the eye.&quot; She wouldn't elaborate.   But in adversity there is opportunity, or so believes Mr.Sutton. He says he's got a marketable expertise -- hisknowledge of weaknesses in cellular phone security systems --and he wants to help phone companies crack down on phonefraud. He'll do that, of course, for a fee.</TEXT></DOC>