<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910122-0055</DOCNO><DOCID>910122-0055.</DOCID><HL>   Military Details of Progress   In Gulf War Are Sobering   ---   U.S. Aides Say That Threat   Of Iraqi Missile Attacks   Will Persist Indefinitely   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Bruce Ingersoll   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- U.S. officials acknowledged yesterday thatthey haven't yet crippled Iraq's military command andcommunications network and that taking out the Iraqi airforce will be a slow task.   Those disclosures, along with other new military details,gave a more somber cast to the military situation, dispellingthe euphoric mood that followed initial reports of success byU.S. and allied warplanes.</LP><TEXT>   Senior military and civilian officials also warned thatthe threat of attacks by long-range Iraq missiles willpersist for an indefinite period. Pentagon aides said Iraqiforces have been using decoys to mislead American and alliedpilots trying to knock out the mobile launchers used to fireSoviet-made Scud missiles.   Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein has hundreds of sparemissiles, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said. And, Mr. Cheneydisclosed, Iraq also has fielded some homemade mobilelaunchers in addition to perhaps two or three dozen mobilelaunchers it is believed to have acquired from the SovietUnion.   &quot;They had, really, two categories of mobile launchers,&quot;Mr. Cheney said on ABC TV's &quot;Good Morning America.&quot; &quot;He hadsome {of} what we think of as a traditional mobile launcherthat he acquired from the Soviets. But he also had ahomegrown variety, where he'd take a truck -- a lowboy, ifyou will -- that hauls equipment around, put rails on it, anduse it to create a mobile launcher, as well.&quot;   Iraq continued to launch Scud missiles at Saudi Arabiayesterday and this morning, local time. U.S. forces continuedto counter them with Patriot missiles.   The Scud missiles don't pose a serious threat to theAmerican-led military campaign, because they are olderweapons with poor accuracy that do relatively light damage.&quot;They are absolutely not militarily significant,&quot; said Lt.Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations for the Pentagon'sjoint staff. But they have the potential to damage morale inSaudi Arabia and to create a political problem by drawingIsrael into the fight, and they are complicating militaryplans because U.S. commanders have to use planes and weaponsthat might otherwise be diverted to more useful targets.   To further reduce the chances that Iraq can use the Scudthreat to expand the war, more Patriot missile-defensesystems have arrived in Israel to protect it from attack,Pentagon officials said last night.   Another nagging problem for the U.S. and its Arab andEuropean allies has been the weather. Clouds have beencovering both Kuwait and southern Iraq, restricting attemptsto assess damage from early bombing raids and sometimeshampering new, follow-up attacks.   But the weather is expected to clear soon, U.S. officialssaid, and that should improve the effectiveness of theU.S.-led air war in the next few days.   In one piece of good news for the U.S., two Air Forcepilots yesterday helped pull off a daring search-and-rescuemission in the Iraqi desert, saving a pilot just minutesbefore he would have been captured.   Capt. Paul Johnson, 32 years old, of Dresden, Tenn., saidhe and the pilot of another A-10 spent four hours yesterdaysearching the Iraqi desert for the downed pilot, finding himjust as a large Iraqi truck approached him.   The two A-10s sprayed the truck with their tank-killing 30mm Gatling guns, setting it on fire as a U.S. rescuehelicopter arrived to carry away the pilot, who wasuninjured. The downed pilot wasn't immediately identified.   &quot;The truck was in the wrong place at the wrong time,&quot;explained Capt. Randy Goff, 26, of Jackson, Ohio, the secondA-10 pilot. The two rescuers said their planes had to berefueled in the air four times during the search. So far,Iraq claims to have captured 11 U.S. pilots.   On the broader war effort, administration officials fromPresident Bush on down have been concerned about the burst ofeuphoria that was seen around the country after initial,inaccurate reports suggested that U.S.-led allied forces hadknocked out almost the entire Iraqi air force and decimatedits most elite troops within hours. The administration didlittle to counter those reports in the first night of theoperation and has been struggling to temper publicexpectations ever since.   In addition, the administration moved quickly yesterday toquell public dismay concerning Saddam Hussein's treatment ofhis first American prisoners of war. The initial group ofseven POWs -- including three Americans -- was forced toappear on Iraqi television and make public statements. Inaddition, Iraq later said that it had 20 POWs, who would bemoved to sensitive sites around the country to serve as&quot;human shields&quot; against attacks.   A grim President Bush declared at the White House that theIraqi use of POWs as shields &quot;isn't going to make adifference&quot; in how the U.S. prosecutes the war. Theadministration bluntly threatened war-crimes trials later forany Iraqis who help move prisoners into the line of fire.House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D., Wash.) stood by thepresident's side and warned that mistreatment of theprisoners &quot;will have very, very strong repercussions, notonly throughout the United States, but throughout the world.&quot;   One particularly troubling sign for U.S. officials is thatheavy bombing raids by the U.S. and its allies apparentlyhave failed to cut off communications between Saddam Husseinand other Iraqi leaders and their troops in the field. &quot;Thecommand element is still in control of military activity inthe country,&quot; said Rear Adm. Mike McConnell, the DefenseIntelligence Agency's director for joint staff support, at anews briefing for reporters.   U.S. officials had hoped that, by quickly knocking out theability of Saddam Hussein and his political leaders tocommunicate with forces in the field, they would rapidlyundermine Iraq's ability to mount any coordinated response tothe onslaught by forces in the anti-Iraq coalition. Gen.Kelly said that command and control facilities &quot;are high onour list of priorities&quot; and asserted that damage has beendone already. He maintained that the surprisingly low levelof fighting so far by Iraq's army and air force indicatesthat some communications with Iraqi leaders had beendisrupted.   But the ability of Iraq to coordinate the firings of Scudmissiles in recent nights suggests that Iraqi leaders stillare able to communicate with important elements of theirforces.   In addition, there is some Iraqi resistance. The Pentagonreported that another U.S. plane was lost to Iraqi fire, theninth so far. And Pentagon officials said that 14 Americansnow are missing in the combat, all of them from air crews.   Gen. Kelly said that the task of destroying Iraqi aircraftwill be a time-consuming one because so many of the planesappear to have been put in hiding places that requireprecision bombing to knock out.   He said that allied aircraft, weather permitting, continueto bomb airfield bunkers and other hideaways where much ofthe Iraqi air force has apparently taken refuge.   &quot;We know where the bunkers are,&quot; he said. &quot;We think thereare airplanes in them. We have the capability to take themout. It just takes some time to do that.&quot;   It takes a direct hit by a precision-guided bomb to takeout a bunker, he told reporters. In the first five days ofthe air war, he added, U.S. and allied pilots flew more than8,100 sorties, many of which were attacks on Iraqi groundtroops.   At the same time, Gen. Kelly said, U.S. forces continue topursue search-and-rescue missions for 14 flyers currentlylisted as missing in action. &quot;Some of those people went downdeep in the country,&quot; he said.   Three Americans appear to be in Iraqi hands, judging fromvideotapes shown yesterday, he said. The Pentagon willcontinue to list these apparent prisoners of war as missingin action until the Iraqi government notifies the U.S. oftheir capture, as required by the Geneva Convention.   And the administration was trying to use public pressureto force Iraq to abide by at least some Geneva Conventionprovisions. The State Department reacted swiftly to Iraq'sthreat to use captured pilots as human shields at possibletarget sites, calling in the senior Iraqi diplomat here towarn that such actions would be considered war crimes.   If Iraq places coalition prisoners of war at targets,&quot;Iraqi officials -- whether members of the Iraqi armed forcesor civilian government personnel -- will have committed a warcrime,&quot; said Margaret Tutwiler, the department's spokeswoman.&quot;Iraqi individuals who are guilty of authorizing or carryingout war crimes are personally liable and subject toprosecution,&quot; she added.   By angering U.S. officials, the Iraqi use of POWs for itsown purposes may be making it even less likely that the Bushadministration will be open to any peace plans calling for acease-fire to allow a resumption of diplomacy. Jordan alreadyhas proposed such a cease-fire, and more diplomatic overturesare likely. Iran, for instance, said yesterday that theNon-Aligned Movement will launch a peace initiative.   But Egyptian diplomats denied reports that President HosniMubarak was crafting a peace offer to Iraq that would callfor a temporary cease-fire to explore Iraq's willingness towithdraw from Kuwait. The diplomats said that Mr. Mubarak,like Mr. Bush, isn't interested in any peace formulas thatdon't start with an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait as the firststep.   In any case, there isn't any sign that Iraq is looking forany diplomatic formula to end the fighting. Iraqi radioreported that Saddam Hussein has turned down a peace proposalby Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, asserting that theU.S. is the aggressor in the current conflict and that peaceplans therefore should be directed to President Bush.   ---   David Rogers in Washington and John J. Fialka in SaudiArabia contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>