<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910211-0151</DOCNO><DOCID>910211-0151.</DOCID><HL>   The Jordan Shuffle:   King Hussein Tries   To Position Himself   As Post-War Mediator   ---   He's Still Neutral, He Insists   In an Interview, but U.S.   Remains Angry at Speech   ---   Kuwait Invasion Was `Wrong'   ----   By Geraldine Brooks and Robert S. Greenberger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   AMMAN, Jordan -- In the formal reception room of thepalace here, a small side table filled with framed picturesof world leaders provides a symbol of the everchanging roleof King Hussein. During the Gulf crisis, the pictures havebeen in constant motion. Saddam Hussein slipped from thefront row after his occupation of Kuwait. Egypt's HosniMubarak disappeared altogether, while George Bush's portraitwas pushed behind a lamp. Now, Mr. Bush has re-emerged andhas been positioned on the same row as Saddam Hussein. But,in the very front, there's a newcomer: It's Pope John PaulII, who has called for an immediate end to the war.   For the 38 years of his reign, King Hussein has oftenfound a way to shuffle alliances so he could move comfortablyeven among leaders who warred with each other. He has managedto balance his own moderation and close ties with the Westagainst the needs of his radical, majority-Palestinianpopulation, confounding those who regularly predict hisdemise. &quot;He has been to the funerals of all those who said hewouldn't last a week,&quot; says Dan Shifton, an Israeli expert onJordan.</LP><TEXT>   But with his tough speech last week in which he accusedthe allies of trying to &quot;destroy Iraq,&quot; he may have thrownaway the net under his high wire act. The performance thatfollows will either cripple the 55-year-old monarch or hugelyenhance his power and prestige.   When the last shots are fired in the Gulf war, KingHussein may be left an outcast -- or the only leader who canhelp the West heal relations with radical Arabs, deal withthe Palestinians, perhaps even stabilize post-war Iraq. Gulfmonarchs and Western politicians who now excoriate him forhis pro-Iraqi rhetoric may yet find themselves begging forhis intercession to mend a shattered region.   Despite his diatribe against the U.S.-led alliance, theking insists that Jordan hasn't abandoned its neutrality.During a three-hour interview at the palace, he saysspeculation that he would enter the war on Iraq's side isbaseless. &quot;To do what?&quot; he asks. Instead, he says, he hasissued &quot;clear orders to the armed forces: Look in everydirection.&quot; Violations of Jordan's borders or air space fromeither Israel or Iraq will be repulsed &quot;as best we can.&quot;   Washington isn't buying it. The Bush administration wasoutraged by the harsh speech, which has prompted a review ofU.S. aid to Jordan, expected to total about $30 million ineconomic assistance and about $20 million in military aid.Speaking yesterday on CBS's Face the Nation, Secretary ofState James Baker hinted that &quot;serious budget constraints&quot; inthe U.S. may result in cuts in assistance to Jordan. He saidthe U.S. &quot;must allocate our foreign aid in a way that makesthe most sense from the national interest standpoint.&quot;   Some senior administration officials also say the king ismiscalculating if he is angling to play a more influentialrole in the post-war period. Siding with pro-Iraqi forcesfurther alienates Saudi Arabia, which Jordan will need tobankroll its stumbling economy, as well as the U.S. &quot;Hedoesn't seem to be thinking clearly about his long-terminterests, only about what he has to do to play to theemotions of the Palestinians in Jordan,&quot; says an Americanofficial.   Indeed, the king's speech was only a mild echo of theoutbursts coming from the streets of Jordan. In one recentsermon at Amman's largest mosque, the speaker whipped up thecrowd with warnings to the U.S. that &quot;your pigs will onlycome back to you in coffins, God willing.&quot; But the kingbrushes aside suggestions that his own harsh words weredesigned to catch up with, or manipulate, this angry mood.&quot;It wasn't to defuse feelings by playing up to people. It'swhat I have been feeling very, very strongly,&quot; he says.&quot;People are frustrated, they are in despair. They need tohear from their leaders what their feelings are.&quot;   King Hussein is riding an unprecedented wave of domesticsupport, winning over even his most radical Palestiniansubjects. In Amman's refugee camps, there are mutteringsagainst Yasser Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organizationchairman, but none against the king. &quot;Where is Arafat?Everyone is asking this, even my 90-year-old mother,&quot; saysFakri Jabali, an official with the PLO's military wing. Hisopinion of King Hussein &quot;has changed 180 degrees since Aug.2. He is a good man -- the best in the area.&quot;   Even Jordan's devastated economy hasn't tarnished hisimage. The already impoverished state has lost everything:aid, agricultural markets and remittances from the Gulfstates are gone, possibly for good; tourism is nonexistentand exports of its sole commodity -- phosphates -- have beenrendered uneconomical by increased shipping insurance.Unemployment is estimated at 30%. But to some Jordanians, thehardship is a badge of courage. &quot;We felt guilty thatPalestinians on the West Bank have suffered for three yearswhile we've lived comfortably,&quot; says Nasser Sharif, a travelagent, referring to the uprising against Israeli occupation.&quot;This is our chance to do a little something ourselves.&quot;   The situation would get worse if U.S. aid is reduced. Twonights after the speech, sitting with his American-born wifeand 10-year-old son, the king learns from Cable News Networkthat the U.S. may postpone Jordan's aid. He shrugs and flipsoff the remote control. &quot;The noose is tightening,&quot; he says.&quot;But I'm not prepared to subject every word I say tocensorship or criticism from any source.&quot;   Although still guarded in his remarks about SaddamHussein, the king says he was disappointed in the path takenby the Iraqi leader. But he also lashes out at Egypt'sPresident Mubarak, calling him &quot;driven by hatred&quot; in hisstand against Iraq. &quot;Right now, I'm much more angry with someof our Arab brothers than I am with Israel,&quot; the king says.   The image of King Hussein as enemy of the West fitsuneasily with the man and his life style. His criticisms aredelivered in rounded British accents of Harrow and Sandhurst,where he was educated. Beside him, his blue-jeaned queen, theformer Lisa Halaby of Washington, D.C., describes a day spentfielding calls from the U.S. and faxing texts of the king'sspeech to American friends. Their son plays with a hand-heldgame of Nintendo, a toy that the king sometimes borrows tohelp soothe his nerves. The stack of tapes alongside thevideo reveals the king's preference for American Westerns andadventure films.   But all this is grafted onto a character deeply rooted inthe Arab world. &quot;When he sits down and doesn't want to talkabout airplanes or cars -- his hobbies -- he always talksabout history,&quot; says Laila Sharaf, a senator close to thepalace.   King Hussein's Hashemite lineage traces to the ProphetMohammed. His great-grandfather, Sherif Hussein of Mecca, ledthe Arab Revolt of 1916 against the Ottomans, which manyArabs now see as the golden age of Arab nationalism. Thefamily was to have ruled the Arab heartlands: the Sherif inMecca, his sons in Jordan, Iraq and Syria. But King Husseinis all that remains of that grand design. The Sherif wasdriven from Mecca in 1924 by the al-Saud clan. In Iraq,Faisal II, King Hussein's cousin, was butchered in 1958 in acoup that the young Saddam Hussein supported. And in 1967,the king lost part of his own realm -- the West Bank -- byfollowing Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt to war against Israel.   Since Jan. 16, he says, &quot;I have been reliving on a fargreater scale than ever before my failure to alter things --the course of events with Nasser in Egypt, with the family inIraq&quot; and, now, the failure to moderate either Saddam Husseinor the alliance against him. &quot;There's the nightmare that Ihave: Could anything more have been done?&quot;   He has begun reassessment of his decade-long alignmentwith Iraq. &quot;I supported Saddam Hussein all the years of thewar (with Iran) and beyond. I tried to create something thatwould have been a stabilizing influence in this area. And Ifailed,&quot; he says. He won't, he says, &quot;try to shrug offresponsibility&quot; for that. &quot;But while I supported him morally,others supported him financially,&quot; he says, referring toSaudi and Kuwaiti largess.   The king has been roundly criticized for failing in hisFeb. 6 speech to balance his attack on the alliance's&quot;imposed&quot; war on Iraq with any mention of Iraq's invasion ofKuwait. &quot;The invasion of Kuwait, the occupation of Kuwait,the annexation of Kuwait were wrong,&quot; he says now. &quot;But Ican't turn around and say (to the alliance), `You areright.'&quot;   He still maintains Saddam Hussein was ready to withdrawfrom Kuwait in August; that Egypt conspired to block thatwithdrawal and that the annexation came only as a response tothe threat of foreign troops. The Iraqi president, he says,felt that confronting such a massive build-up woulddemoralize his army &quot;unless he told them they were fightingfor Iraq proper.&quot;   The king says his mediation efforts continued right up tothe eve of the war, when he tried one last-ditch attempt tobroker an Iraqi-Saudi dialogue. But King Fahd refused to takehis call. He says the Saudi message was that the only rolefor him was to go to Baghdad and tell Saddam Hussein to getout of Kuwait and, if the Iraqi refused, to say so publicly.&quot;There was no way,&quot; says the king, &quot;that I was going to bethe person to give the green light to this onslaught.&quot;   Now his role, he says, is to push for a cease-fire. But,at least in Washington's view, his credibility has seriouslyeroded, and his speech poses a tough personal dilemma forPresident Bush. The Jordanian monarch was always considered aspecial friend. Mr. Bush went boating with the king on a 1987trip to the region as vice president. For his part, the king,who has known every U.S. president since Harry Truman, laudedGeorge Bush on his election, saying in 1989 that if Mr. Bushcouldn't advance the Middle East peace process, nobody could.And in his first press conference after the war began, Mr.Bush gave his longest, most emotional statement whileexplaining how he didn't want the war to hurt ties with Arabpeople in general, and Jordan in particular.   Yet Mr. Bush dropped plans to see King Hussein late lastyear in Europe because of pique at another speech the kinghad given that was critical of the U.S. and sympathetic toIraq.   At the beginning of the Gulf crisis, Jordan radio andtelevision were broadcasting Iraqi communiques. But now,senior American officials complain, the king himself hasbecome the voice of Iraqi propaganda. U.S. officialsunderstand the king's problems with his domesticconstituency, but they also accuse the king of fanning theflames of radicalism. They note, for instance, that last yearthe king hosted a meeting of Palestinian radicals that gushedwith anti-Western rhetoric.   To the king, such criticism sounds hypocritical. The U.S.,he says, has always pressed Arab states to allow more freedomof speech, and since elections in 1989, Jordan's newlyrevived democracy has won praise even in the U.S. StateDepartment's recent human rights report.   In any event, one senior U.S. official says, when the waragainst Iraq ends, &quot;He won't be the one we'll talk to. No onewill go looking for him.&quot;   Some U.S. analysts conclude that the tough new U.S.approach is intended to discourage the king from becoming thespokesman for anti-Western forces. &quot;We're reacting to thefact that there is the beginning of a groundswell in the Arabworld in favor of Saddam Hussein as the bombing goes on,&quot;says Paul Jureidini, a Mideast expert at Abbott Associates, aWashington-based consulting firm. &quot;The king is now extremelycredible in the Arab world. We don't want him to inflame thepassions any further.&quot;   In fact, King Hussein's credibility with the Palestiniansmay make possible a return to the aborted attempts in 1985 tocreate a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation for negotiations onthe Arab-Israeli dispute. More intriguing, however, are thepossibilities opened up by the king's championing of theIraqi people.   His speech never mentioned Saddam Hussein, focusinginstead on Iraq's &quot;heroic army, its steadfast people, itsglorious women and its brave children.&quot; In conversation, theking talks of his anguish for the Republican Guard, enduringthe poundings of B52 strikes. They are, he says, youths drawnpredominantly from the Bedouin tribes who drift betweenJordan, Iraq and Saudi Arabia. &quot;They are our people,&quot; hesays. &quot;Their relatives might be in the Jordanian army, theSaudi army.&quot;   Iraq was to have been ruled by the king's grandfather,Abdullah, until colonial dickering undid the deal. In 1958,briefly, King Hussein and his cousin Faisal II united Jordanand Iraq in a federation that fell apart in the coup. SaddamHussein recently has revived the memory of the murdered IraqiHashemites, renovating their tombs and erecting newmonuments. In the chaos after the war, some eyes may turn toKing Hussein as a potential stabilizer. A merger of Jordanand Iraq could sate both Arab hunger for unity and Westerndesire to prevent Iraq's dismemberment.   At the same time, King Hussein is being viewed much morebenignly by Israel's hard-line government. Some Likudofficials, led by Ariel Sharon, have always eyed Jordan as ahomeland for the Palestinians who live in theIsraeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza. But, lately, Israel hasbegun to appreciate the importance of a stable Jordan thatacts as a buffer zone between Israel and radical forces. &quot;TheLikud has discovered the value of the Hashemite king,&quot; saysMartin Indyk, executive director of the Washington Institutefor Near East Policy. &quot;For some of them, Jordan may bePalestine, but they don't want it to become Lebanon.&quot;   As for the king himself, it's clear he is thinking morethan ever of his heritage -- and perhaps his legacy. Herecently has grown a beard as a kind of tribute to hisgrandfather: &quot;I remember him saying he might be the last ofthe Hashemites to wear a beard,&quot; he says. It is onetradition, at least, that he can insure will last a littlelonger.</TEXT></DOC>