<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910128-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>910128-0080.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>01/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE U.S. BOMBED Kuwaiti oil facilities to check the flowof crude feeding a slick.   To combat the spill that is spewing into the Persian Gulffrom an off-shore Kuwaiti loading terminal, American planesstruck two pipeline installations that feed the terminal. Thestream of crude has created the largest slick in history,measuring about 35 miles long and 10 miles wide, and totalingan estimated five to ten million barrels. Although Iraqdenies it orchestrated the spill, U.S. military officials areconvinced Saddam Hussein is responsible. The black tidecreated by the spill has the potential to affect SaudiArabia's production of drinking water and electricity.</LP><TEXT>   Iraqi aircraft, mostly fighters, continued to fly to Iranto escape U.S.-led bombing raids, Schwarzkopf said. Tehranhas said it will seize the planes.   ---   GORBACHEV GAVE the KGB sweeping powers over the Sovietprivate sector.   The Kremlin leader's decree, issued Saturday, allows thesecurity police to crack down on &quot;economic sabotage,&quot;including the power to seize bank records and other documentsfrom Soviet groups and joint ventures. Like a decree issuedfour days earlier that withdrew high-denomination rublebanknotes from circulation, the latest order was targetedagainst the black market. Another order, disclosed Friday,authorized soldiers and sailors to patrol jointly with policenext month, particularly at demonstrations.   Bush is expected to meet today with Soviet ForeignMinister Bessmertnykh amid speculation over whether nextmonth's summit will go forward.   ---   Somalian guerrillas seized apparent control of the countryafter President Siad Barre was forced from his officialresidence. The rebels, who stepped up their fighting latelast month, reportedly also took over the airport and mainradio station in Somalia's capital, Mogadishu. Siad Barre'swhereabouts were unknown.   ---   Utah's Gov. Bangerter signed into law the nation'stoughest state anti-abortion legislation Friday, andabortion-rights advocates pledged a retaliatory tourismboycott campaign. The bill bans all abortions except in casesof rape, incest, when a women's life or health is threatened,or when an unborn child has serious congenital defects.   ---   China announced on Saturday that the cases of 71 peoplearrested in connection with the 1989 pro-democracydemonstrations had been completed. In the second round ofsentencing in Beijing, student leader Wang Dan and four otherdissidents received prison terms, while 66 activists werereleased.   ---   Bush selected Edward Madigan, an Illinois Republicancongressman, to be the new agriculture secretary on Friday,succeeding Clayton Yeutter, who was elected chairman of theRepublican National Committee.   ---   The Bush administration told Japan that the U.S. wants anew bilateral semiconductor agreement after the currentaccord expires in July. Separately, the White House will askCongress to extend for two years the special authority underwhich the administration has been negotiating trade accords.   ---   Croatia's President Tudjman ordered about 20,000 policereservists to demobilize Saturday under an accord to preventa clash with Yugoslavia's federal army, which responded bycanceling an order putting soldiers on combat readiness. Butthe republic stressed yesterday that it still wants moreindependence from central authorities.   ---   At least 12 Haitians were reported killed and 14 woundedin street violence provoked by rumors of a plot to free thejailed leader of a Jan. 6 coup attempt, according to radioreports. Officials in Port-au-Prince denied there had been anattempt to free Roger Lafontant and said he and his 15alleged conspirators remained under heavy guard.   ---   Thousands of mourners gathered in South Africa's blacktownship of Sebokeng to bury 39 African National Congresssupporters killed in a Jan. 12 shooting massacre. Meanwhile,leaders of the nominally independent Ciskei homeland saidtheir military foiled a coup attempt and killed the rebelleader.   ---   The New York Giants won the National Football League'sSuper Bowl, defeating the Buffalo Bills, 20-19, in Tampa,Fla.   ---   Boris Becker of Germany won his first Australian Openmen's singles tennis title, defeating the defending champion,Ivan Lendl of Czechoslovakia, three sets to one. On Saturday,Monica Seles of Yugoslavia beat Jana Novotna ofCzechoslovakia in the women's singles, two sets to one.   ---   Died: Colman M. Mockler, 61, Gillette's chairman and chiefexecutive officer, Friday, in Boston, of a heart attack . . .Robert E. Yancey Sr., 69, former president of Ashland Oil, inRussell, Ky.</TEXT></DOC>