<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920213-0057</DOCNO><DOCID>920213-0057.</DOCID><HL>   A New Chance:   Central America Starts   The Long Road Back   As Wars Flicker Out   ---   Reform Now Is Taking Root,   But Faded Soviet Threat   Discourages Aid-Giving   ---   Uneasy Peace in El Salvador   ----   By Jose de Cordoba   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/13/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (IAD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)COSTA RICA (CS)PANAMA (CZ)EL SALVADOR (ES)GUATEMALA (GT)HONDURAS (HO)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NICARAGUA (NU)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   LA MORA, El Salvador -- One day after a death squad killedhis father and burned down his house in 1980, Gavino Barrera,a peasant boy with a sixth-grade education, joined theguerrillas fighting to topple the military junta then rulingEl Salvador.   Twelve years later, Mr. Barrera, a slight, soft-spoken25-year-old in a green beret and fatigues taken from a deadsoldier, has other goals. He wants to finish primary school,and, most of all, &quot;I would like to learn how to drive a car.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   A cease-fire that went into effect Feb. 1 should end ElSalvador's 12-year civil war and permit the young guerrillato go to driving school. It should also end U.S. involvementin a civil war that was aggravated by Cold War overtones -- awar that cost some 75,000 lives (a majority of them civilianskilled by government security forces), that has displaced amillion of El Salvador's 5.5 million people, and that hascost the U.S. about $6 billion in aid.   But with the Cold War ended -- and with it U.S. fears of aSoviet-Cuban beachhead -- Central American leaders worry thatthe world will again forget this region. That would leaveCentral America to struggle by itself with the aftermath ofits civil wars, its deep-rooted poverty, its vulnerableeconomies and the challenge of nurturing its fledglingdemocracies.   The 1980s weren't a total disaster for the region. In thewake of the turmoil, democratically elected governments arein place in all the region's countries. Except for asmoldering insurgency in Guatemala, Central America is atpeace. And its governments are implementing economic change,selling off state companies and reducing tariff barriers.   The region has chalked up, the Inter-American DevelopmentBank says, &quot;impressive results in developing itsnontraditional exports,&quot; although its commoditybasedeconomies of sugar, bananas, coffee and tobacco remainvulnerable to world prices. One unforeseen economic benefitof the civil wars has been the creation of large expatriatecommunities that send money home. The more than a millionSalvadorans living abroad send their relatives here about$700 million a year, far more than the roughly $500 millionearned last year by El Salvador's traditional exports.   But Central American governments, except for Costa Ricaand Panama, face the difficult task of cutting down hugemilitary institutions created partly with U.S. aid. Many hopethe Salvadoran accord will help encourage military cutbacksin Guatemala and Honduras.   Guatemala, deeply divided among poor Maya Indians, peopleof European descent and mixed bloods, seems the mostresistant to change. That's partly because the military, in alargely unpublicized war, ruthlessly repressed a 30-yearinsurgency. Meanwhile, Hondurans look on nervously as themilitary moves into businesses, partly to replace diminishedU.S. aid. A common fear is that the region's colonels willplunge further into the drug trade.   In Nicaragua, where the U.S. backed the Contra guerrillasin a war that cost some 30,000 dead and wounded, democracyhas made marked progress since Violeta Chamorro was electedpresident. But Nicaraguans are worried because theSandinistas, the leftists who once ran the government, stillcontrol the scaled-down military and police forces. Andalthough a tough austerity program has tamed Nicaragua'shyper-inflation, its economy has failed to recover very much,hobbled by periodic Sandinista-inspired bouts of unrest andthe uncertainty caused by disputes over ownership of $1billion of property the Sandinistas grabbed just beforesurrendering power.   In Nicaragua as in the other countries except for CostaRica, building civil societies will be crucial (the CostaRicans disbanded their army 44 years ago). &quot;The region facestwo challenges,&quot; says U.S. Assistant Secretary of StateBernard W. Aronson: &quot;to really strengthen and buildfunctional democratic institutions, a court system, ajudicial system, police; and to promote serious economicgrowth and increased trade&quot; whose benefits the region's poorcan truly share.   In El Salvador, young Mr. Barrera, a captain in an eliteguerrilla unit, wonders how to return to civil society. For12 years, he fought El Salvador's U.S.-trained army, mostlyright here on the flanks of the Guazapa volcano a few milesfrom San Salvador. Today he watches impassively as U.S.Ambassador William Walker, in shirtsleeves, and Col. MarkHamilton, the tall U.S. military attache, sip Scotch under amango tree with guerrilla commandante Raul Hercules anddiscuss implementation of the peace settlement.   As the Americans and the guerrilla trade friendly barbs,Mr. Barrera thinks about his past and his future. Did he killany soldiers? &quot;Bunches,&quot; he says matter-of-factly, aKalashnikov automatic rifle by his side. But despite the hateengendered by civil war, Mr. Barrera says he is prepared tolive peacefully with his former enemies. After all, he adds,he has a brother in the army, with whom he met clandestinelywhile visiting family in the capital even during thefighting.   But El Salvador faces serious obstacles to carrying outthe peace accord signed in Mexico City Jan. 16. It calls forthe guerrillas to lay down their arms in stages by Oct. 31 aspart of a wide-ranging agreement on political, judicial,military and land reforms. Among these reforms are a 50% cutin the 63,000-man armed forces and replacement of somesinister police agencies by a new force under civiliancontrol.   Mr. Barrera recalls the days when groups of soldiers andpolicemen from these agencies ruled the area. &quot;You couldn'twork. You couldn't sleep,&quot; he says. In 1980, when Mr. Barreratook up arms, death squads were killing as many as 800 peoplea month. &quot;No young men could travel on this road. You'd findbodies in the morning,&quot; he says.   Guerrillas as well as members of the old police force willbe eligible for the country's new police force. Mr. Barrerawould like to join. If he can't, he says, he could helprebuild the country, although he is vague about just what hewould do.   Plenty of work lies ahead. For El Salvador, the 1980s wereawful. Peasants abandoned the war-torn countryside, and sodid landlords unwilling to pay guerrilla-imposed &quot;war taxes&quot;or risk kidnapping. The national air force bombed villages.And the guerrillas resorted to economic warfare, blowing upbridges and electric and telephone installations.   Early in the war, El Salvador's gross domestic productfell 22% as people and capital fled. By the end of thedecade, per capita income had fallen by more than 20%. Withthe military consuming a quarter of the budget, money forhealth and education shrank. By last year, adult illiteracystood at 30%, about twice the rate for Latin America as awhole. Infant mortality was a high 56 per thousand, and 60%of Salvadorans were impoverished.   In the past two years, President Alfredo Cristiani'seconomic liberalization program has begun to reverse thedecline. Gross domestic product grew about 3.5% last year,preliminary figures indicate. With the war over, economistshope the growth rate will rise.   An economic rebound depends heavily on continuedinternational assistance. In La Mora, that is very much onthe minds of about 40 peasants gathered to talk to U.S.officials, including Ambassador Walker. One leathery-skinnedman in a straw cowboy hat pleads for machinery and loans tocultivate rice, corn and other crops. Another stooped farmerwants education and health care.   But Mirna Lievano, who runs the country's $1.1 billion,five-year reconstruction plan, says that while the world hascheered the peace accords and expressed support, aid donorsaren't lining up. One pledge did come from the Inter-AmericanDevelopment Bank, which has promised $120 million in loans torebuild highways.   Many Salvadorans fear that extremists on both sides, butespecially revived rightwing death squads, will resort toterror in an attempt to derail the peace process. Already, aJeep belonging to a foreign correspondent has been blown up,clergymen and United Nations personnel have gotten deaththreats, and pamphlets have been left in military barrackscalling the agreement treason. Reacting to the right-wingpressure, Secretary of State James Baker told the SalvadoranCongress after the accord was signed that opponents of peacewho call themselves Salvadoran patriots were the realtraitors.   &quot;Murder is the daily bread of this country,&quot; says MarioZamorano grimly, as he waits for a U.N. helicopter that isferrying a rebel commandante to the guerrilla-held town ofSan Jose de las Flores, close to the Honduran border. Mr.Zamorano, the spokesman for the 1,000 or so unarmed U.N.troops monitoring the accords, says the country's bloodyhabits &quot;can't be changed overnight.&quot;   Despite somewhat alarming rhetoric -- including a warningfrom top guerrilla commander Joaquin Villalobos that any ofhalf a dozen potential disputes with the government over theaccords would be &quot;like heaping gasoline or firewood on aflame that is slowly going out&quot; -- compromise seems to be thenew fashion in warweary El Salvador. One recent night,delegates from the right-wing government party Arena, theChristian Democrats and leftists quickly agreed to anamnesty. Foot soldiers on both sides were pardoned, and thejob of investigating massacres, such as the killing of sixJesuit priests in 1989, was left to a U.N.-appointedcommission.   While the government and especially the armed forces seema bit dazed by events, the peace accord has created apolitical space that the guerrillas are rushing to fill.Guerrilla commandantes who a short time ago were wanted mennow appear on television talk shows. Slick paid messages fromthe Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front are on TVdaily, and the guerrillas' once-clandestine radio stationplans to open up in San Salvador. When it does, it willinvite speakers from all across the political spectrum, saysits director. El Diario de Hoy, considered to be themouthpiece for the radical right, grumbles that &quot;the beastsare now within.&quot;   In San Jose de las Flores, a cobblestoned hill town, the&quot;beasts&quot; seem to be everywhere. About 100 guerrillas, manybarely teen-agers, stand at attention before a display oftheir machine guns and mortars. A few hundred civiliansupporters, sprinkled with European and U.S. sympathizers,pack the tiny town square as commandantes lead the crowd incheers. Incongruously, in view of the peace accord, thecommandante leading the cheering shouts, &quot;Viva the people'sarmed struggle.&quot; Then another speaker, a bearded commandantein a sports shirt, says, &quot;Make no mistake. This is arevolution.&quot;   Bivouacked a few miles away at an abandoned farmhouse, Lt.Kelvin Aguirre takes the revolution in stride. As a soldier,Lt. Aguirre says he will obey the government's decisions. Hevolunteers that he won't have a problem with a blue-ribbonpanel that will review service records of army officers forhuman-rights violators.   The 27-year-old military-academy graduate concedes that hewould have preferred to wipe out the guerrillas. &quot;But youjust can't cut heads and kill everybody,&quot; he says. &quot;If thereare other ways, like dialogue, then I welcome peace.&quot;   Lt. Aguirre says the government won the war because theguerrillas will be laying down their arms. &quot;They will tryanother type of struggle-political struggle,&quot; he says. That'sall right with him.</TEXT></DOC>