<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920225-0086</DOCNO><DOCID>920225-0086.</DOCID><HL>   Changed Climate:   California, the Place   Long in the Sun, Now   Is Clouded by Doubts   ---   Its Unemployment Is High,   Some Firms Are Leaving,   Roads and Schools Lag   ---   High Cost of New Arrivals   ----   By Frederick Rose   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/25/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MASS TRANSIT, BUS LINES, SUBWAYS, HIGHWAYS (TRA)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   LOS ANGELES -- Judy Puldas's affection for Californiabegan almost the day, 40 years ago, when she arrived here asa child from Iowa.   Like millions of others who rode California's postwar waveof prosperity, her family created a comfortable life in thisstate. Its aircraft industry employed her father and hasprovided Mrs. Puldas and her husband with a cozy suburbanhome and land in the country. &quot;I can't think of livinganywhere else,&quot; she says.</LP><TEXT>   But now Mrs. Puldas is part of another wave -- one ofthousands of workers laid off in California's contractingeconomy. The 45-year-old mother of three says she is huntingfor another job, but her vision of the Golden State haschanged.   &quot;As I look at California, I get a little scared,&quot; shesays.   Buried in recession, the state that once swelled withconfidence is swept by doubt -- doubt that is blighting thenation's most populous state and the birthplace of much ofits popular culture and many of its trends. Californiarecovered rapidly from every economic downturn since WorldWar II. But this recession is finally making Californianscome to terms with a recent past in which problems werepapered over and a future in which they may have to makedifficult choices from an unappetizing menu. Business asusual could lead eventually to far less business.   Gov. Pete Wilson says that, without big changes, the statecould be &quot;headed for a fiscal train wreck.&quot; Highways, schoolsand even aqueducts are being increasingly strained by apopulation that has grown by nearly six million in the past10 years and may add an equal number in the 1990s. Thedefense industry, which has fueled growth since the 1950s andpulled the state out of past downturns, is fading swiftly.   Other states are suffering, too, but California's problemsare all the more unnerving because of the heights from whichit has slipped. Even once-boosterish business interests arebad-mouthing the state, complaining that overregulation isdriving companies out. Political analysts are asking whetherthe anger may turn California -- home to one in eightAmericans -- against President Bush in November.   Barely a year ago, worry about too much growth promptedGov. Wilson to appoint a study panel. Expansion seemedunbounded in a land where the desert was made to bloom.Through the 1980s, California's economy swelled at nearlyhalf again the national pace. Home prices soared at a ratedouble the national average; the 1981-82 recession, thoughsharp, barely budged the housing market here. Coddled by suchgains, many residents grew overconfident. Bumper stickersproclaimed, &quot;Prosperity: Your Divine Right.&quot; But, apparently,prosperity can run out of gas.   At 7:30 a.m., commuter traffic inching southward onInterstate 80 stretches as far as the eye can see down theeast side of San Francisco Bay, and Michael Wilkes, a trafficengineer, is watching as his car's speedometer sinks to zero.Nearby, cars jam a freeway entrance, and, to assist futurehighway planning, Mr. Wilkes notes variations in themorning's traffic patterns. On the seat beside him, a laptopcomputer records his car's stops and starts, a jaggedperformance showing how the drive from the fast-growingnortheastern suburbs to San Francisco is getting slower andslower.   For 20 years, engineers have wanted to widen this30-year-old highway, but a shortage of money and regionalrivalries have stalled them -- and Bay Area commuters everyworkday spend a total of nearly 60,000 hours mired in trafficjams. Officials say they hope to start work on I-80 soon.   Statewide, travel on California's highways has more thandoubled since 1970, while the miles of highway lanes haveincreased barely 15%. &quot;We've seen congestion mount at anexponential rate, angering people,&quot; says Lawrence D. Dahms,executive director of the Metropolitan TransportationCommission in Oakland.   In California's expansionist heyday, building roads andrailroads was practically a state religion. In the booming1960s, more than $1 billion was budgeted for the Bay Area'ssubway system alone.   But for two decades, investment in public facilities hastaken a back seat to burgeoning social programs. So one ofCalifornia's greatest strengths -- its infrastructure -- hasfallen far behind its growth, and an economy that, standingalone, would rank as the world's eighth-largest is beingshort-changed of everything from bridges to baccalaureatedegrees.   In the 1950s and 1960s, California spent more than 20cents of every state-budget dollar on capital projects. Thatslice dwindled to less than a nickel in the 1980s, and mostof that was borrowed. Proposition 13 in 1978 and subsequenttax-cutting measures have locked in place a tight-fistedstance. Over the years, voters have rejected hundreds ofmeasures to raise money for projects ranging from primaryschools to prisons. Last year, more than two-thirds of allcity and county bond measures failed.   &quot;California is suffering the shortsightedness of itsleadership and its voters for a decade and longer,&quot; saysGoetz Wolff, an economist and consultant in Los Angeles.   Over many years, California built an educational systemthat produced one of the world's most admired technologicalbases. California State University was created to back up theelite University of California. Now educating 366,000students, California State's 20 campuses producethree-quarters of the state's teachers and much of itshigh-tech work force. But the nation's largest college systemis also severely strained, with budgets being slashed andstudents being turned away.   On the first day of an introductory English writing classat San Jose State University, 39 students pack a small,crowded classroom. Some are perched on top of desks. Othersstand against the walls as they listen to a list of namesresonant of a new multi-ethnic California. &quot;Chueng, Iwamoto,Niedzie, Noia,&quot; instructor Carolyn Walker reads from a listof those admitted. &quot;Ramchandani, Ratliffe.&quot;   Only two-thirds of the students will get into the course,a basic requirement for advancement and graduation, afterbeing selected through a computerized lottery. As Ms. Walkerfinishes reading, many of the students not on the list startleaving. One of them, 18-year-old Nissa Foss, mutters, &quot;Thereare a lot of unhappy people around here.&quot;   &quot;Here&quot; is Silicon Valley, California's technologicalheartland, where education is slipping. San Jose State, whichprovides twice as many engineers for Silicon Valley companiesas any other university, has cut its faculty this year by 12%and its classes nearly 20%. And a 40% increase in tuitionthis year, to about $1,500, is straining the California Statesystem's populist premise of low-cost education -- and socialand economic opportunity -- for all.   &quot;Just when California is worrying about its economicfuture, about corporations moving out, and about the possibledemise of the middle class, the quality of higher educationis being put at risk,&quot; complains Barry Munitz, the system'schancellor.   From a Father-Knows-Best vision of homogeneity, Californiahas become a colloidal mix of dozens of cultures. In thesecond half of the 1980s, nearly half of newcomers to thestate were foreigners. Though many see eventual strengths inthat influx, which is expected to continue, some stateleaders complain that it will push up public expendituresrapidly. &quot;We've got ill-educated, unskilled laborers comingin; they have a raft of social needs,&quot; says Richard Sybert,director of Gov. Wilson's Office of Planning and Research.   School and college populations are rising far faster thanthe tax base. &quot;Even with an economic rebound, California willcontinue to face difficult budgetary decisions through thedecade ahead,&quot; Gov. Wilson says in his latest financial plan.   The governor and his advisers argue that spending,taxation and regulation all must change dramatically. He isseeking special authority to reduce eligibility for welfareservices and the payments themselves, as well as other budgetcontrols that he says are needed to curtail costs.   The strains were different in earlier decades. The state'spopulation jumped 50% in the 1940s and another 50% in the1950s, as people first flooded in to build warships andwarplanes during World War II and then many who had passedthrough on their way to battle in the Pacific decided theyliked California and settled here after the war. But those&quot;immigrants,&quot; though proportionately twice the size oftoday's immigration, came from elsewhere in the U.S.   California became an American melting pot by the sea.Schools, highways, colleges and water systems were built atenormous cost. But, in many ways, the influx was simply thelast step of what Americans had been doing for two centuries-- moving west. Mostly middle-class and suburban, with anexotic touch of beaches and palm trees, California came tosymbolize an essence of America.   For years, the state easily absorbed the newcomers bygenerating jobs faster than any other part of the country --60% faster than the nation as a whole since 1960. Althoughrecessions and consequent layoffs occasionally slowed thespectacular growth, only twice in 30 years -- until last year-- had employment actually fallen; those dips, in 1971 and1982, were minor.   But last year, something very different happened. Morethan 600,000 jobs were lost, and the total plunged 4.8%.&quot;These problems really are without precedent,&quot; says DavidHensley, director of the Business Forecasting Project at theUniversity of California at Los Angeles. The group viewsfurther layoffs as &quot;inevitable&quot; in some industries.   For example, employment in construction, one ofCalifornia's traditionally strong businesses, has plungedmore than 25% from its pre-recession peak. Two years ago,Brian McGraw had more work than he could handle, employing acrew of 20 men to paint huge housing tracts sprouting in thedesert north of Los Angeles. &quot;It was nonstop,&quot; the tall28-year-old recalls. &quot;We did 3,000 houses in three years.&quot;Money rolled in: $25,000 of revenue in a good week. Then themusic stopped. &quot;People went from building tracts of 100 ormore houses to 10,&quot; Mr. McGraw says.   Now, the father of three children is painting houseshimself, one at a time. And, he says, &quot;I've had to drop myprice as much as 50% to get business. It's that tough outthere.&quot;   How tough? After soaring early in the 1980s, defensespending in California has tumbled more than 25% since 1990,with further cuts looming. Banking, once a fastgrowingemployer, is contracting, squeezed by mergers and outrightfailures. And foreign investment, which in the 1980s surgedin California as in few other states, is dwindling rapidly.   Even more unsettling, a recent survey of 1,400 companiesaround the state found 23% planning to move some or all oftheir operations out of California; they complained of risingtaxes and burdensome regulations.   But whether many of those with itchy feet actually willmove isn't certain. Southern California Edison Co., the bigelectric utility that serves much of the state's heavyindustry, has tracked corporate customers that said theyplanned to leave. It found that, after 18 months, one in fivecompanies had moved, but they accounted for less than one in20 of the total employees of the surveyed companies.   Nonetheless, the lesson is clear. &quot;We are not irresistibleto business, and that is dawning on people,&quot; says Mr. Sybert,Gov. Wilson's planning chief. &quot;There is no doubt in anyone'smind that we have a serious problem.&quot;   Not long ago, Zero Corp., a Los Angeles maker of aluminumcases and air-cargo containers, was hunting for newmanufacturing facilities. After a study, it closed twooperations in the Los Angeles area and opened a plant in SaltLake City. There, the cost of health insurance was about 60%of that in Los Angeles, and workers' compensation cost wasroughly one-third that in California.   Such disparities persuade Wilford Godbold, Zero's chiefexecutive, that California, despite its sunny weather, vastmarkets and technological edge, risks not being able toattract or retain companies.   &quot;California is right on top of a cliff,&quot; he contends.People who don't believe that companies will move, hebelieves, &quot;are putting their head in the sand.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>