<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900524-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>900524-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Unyielding Iraqi:   Saddam Hussein Gains   As a Leader of Arabs   As Their Summit Nears   ---   Flare-Up in Israel May Play   Into Hands of Man Known   For Militancy, Brutality   ---   A Citizenry Afraid to Speak   ----   By Geraldine Brooks   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><LP>   BAGHDAD, Iraq -- It is news time on state-run television,and the news, as usual, is Saddam Hussein.   The lead item of the 25-minute program is a 15-minutereport of the Iraqi president examining his birthdaypresents, many of which happen to be portraits of him.Viewers have previously been treated to scenes of the53-year-old leader's actual birthday celebration: Iraqis inBabylonian garb prostrating themselves and chanting, &quot;Yourcandles, oh Saddam, are the torches of all the Arabs.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Such excesses might seem ripe for ridicule in these daysof crumbling dictatorships, but not in Iraq. Here, thepenalty for publicly insulting the president is death. Iraqishave long known what the rest of the world is only beginningto understand: Their president is powerful and potentiallyvery dangerous.   He also is emerging as the Arab world's single mostinfluential leader, at a time of heightening regionaltension.   Mr. Hussein's threat last month to &quot;scorch half of Israel&quot;with poison gas if it attacks Iraq won wild applause amongArabs who feel Israel hasn't responded to peaceful overtures.&quot;Saddam is giving them a chance to say, `We are rich, we arestrong, we are somebody,'&quot; says a Middle East diplomat inBaghdad.   On Monday, Mr. Hussein will play host to an Arab summithere called to oppose immigration of Soviet Jews to Israeland to repudiate what Iraq calls &quot;a Zionist-inspiredcampaign&quot; against Iraq's military buildup. The Middle Eastturmoil following an Israeli man's massacre of PalestiniansSunday is apt to inspire Mr. Hussein further. With the Arabmood so inflamed, moderate Arab leaders could lose even moreground to his militancy.   Iraq is more than just a regional power. The world'sbiggest arms buyer over the past five years, it now has abouta million men under arms and 700 combat aircraft, more thanBritain or France. It has a chemical arsenal matched only bythe two superpowers -- and one it isn't afraid to use, aswitness its recent gas attacks on Iranians and on its ownKurdish minority.   Iraq also has missiles that can deliver warheads to pointsas far away as Tehran or Tel Aviv. Recent U.S. customsseizures of nuclear triggers suggest as well an advancednuclear-arms program, although Baghdad denies this. With oilreserves second only to Saudi Arabia's, Iraq has ample fundsto continue expanding its military might.   All this is controlled by a leader who has demonstratedruthlessness in his eight-year war with Iran and repressionof his own people in peacetime. His reach extends beyond thesun-baked boulevards of Baghdad. In London, an exiled Iraqidentist named Bayan al-Hakim always carries in his wallet adogeared card. In handwritten block letters, it tells howIraq has killed 23 members of his family, and gives the nameof a Scotland Yard detective to contact if he, too, ismurdered.   In 1988, a gunman killed one of Mr. al-Hakim's cousins inthe lobby of the Khartoum Hilton in Sudan, then fled in anIraqi embassy car. Sudan asked Iraq to waive diplomaticimmunity to allow the suspect to be questioned, but Iraqrefused. (Earlier this year, the U.S. expelled an Iraqidiplomat for allegedly plotting to kill an Iraqi dissident inCalifornia.)   The al-Hakims' troubles began in 1983 because one memberof the family was leading opposition to Iraq from insideIran. To pressure him, Iraq arrested almost all his malerelatives. According to Amnesty International, their agesranged from nine to 76. Some were executed; others remain injail. &quot;Saddam is worse than Ceausescu,&quot; says Mr. al-Hakim.&quot;If he ever falls into the hands of the people, there won'tbe film of his corpse like the Romanians showed, becausethere won't be a fingernail left to photograph.&quot;   Other Iraqis respond angrily to such criticism, creditingthe president with forging a nation from a chaos of competingminorities, and with wisely using oil wealth for development.&quot;In the middle of the war, when every dinar was decisive forsurvival, he established four new universities,&quot; says AwniShaaban, president of Tikrit University. Now, he says, Iraqisare proud of Mr. Hussein's tough talk. &quot;We were underimperialist pressure from Ottomans, then British, and we'vebeen pushed around too much. We won't be dictated to on whatarms we can have.&quot;   Nevertheless, comparisons with the late Romanian dictatorseem apt. To increase Iraq's war-depleted population, Mr.Hussein bans contraception and prescribes the death penaltyfor performing abortions. Like Mr. Ceausescu, Mr. Hussein hasplans for a grandiose new palace. And just as Mr. Ceausescudemolished ethnic Hungarian villages, Mr. Hussein hasdepopulated a swath of Kurdish land, because rebellious Kurdssupported Tehran in the war with Iran.   Hussain Sinjari, a 27-year-old Kurdish rebel, still makesrisky illegal forays into Iraq, across the porous mountainborder. On his last trip, in December, he says thedevastation he saw was total. Villages had been bulldozed todust, mountain springs choked with cement. &quot;I cried when Isaw the dead trees, the dry springs,&quot; says the tall, toughrebel. &quot;You can say that the people were traitors, but whatdid the birds do, or the fruit trees?&quot;   Iraq says the Kurds have been resettled in modern townswith superior services such as electricity, but thegovernment didn't respond to a reporter's repeated request tovisit one of the new settlements. &quot;They are nothing butconcentration camps,&quot; contends Jalal Talabani, leader of oneof the main Kurdish resistance groups. &quot;There are no schoolsor mosques, and no one can leave without permission.&quot;   From the highway, all that can be seen of the new towns isa strip of fresh tar road leading to compact groups ofconcrete-block buildings. Asking a driver to approach for acloser look elicits a nervous refusal. &quot;Afterwards, theywould interrogate me about who you were and why I took youthere,&quot; the driver says.   In a 1977 speech, Mr. Hussein warned Iraqis to &quot;beware ofthe foreigner, for the latter is a pair of eyes and ears forhis country, and some of them are saboteurs of therevolution. Therefore, accompanying foreigners or talkingwith them in the absence of known controls is forbidden.&quot;Iraqis still stick strictly to that prohibition. &quot;I pushed ababy carriage around the streets of Iraq for two years,&quot; saysa diplomat's wife. &quot;Not once, ever, did anyone smile at mybaby or say so much as kootchy-kootchy-koo.&quot;   Foreign journalists are particularly suspect. In March,Iraq executed a British-based reporter, Farzad Bazoft, sayinghis attempt to investigate an explosion at a militaryfacility was espionage. Two weeks ago, Iraq seized all thefilm of a British Broadcasting Corp. crew, even though it hadcome on government invitation and filmed under constantsupervision.   Western publications aren't available, and the governmentmakes no bones about its total control of the press. On May5, the Baghdad Observer quoted Foreign Minister Tariq Azizsaying Mr. Hussein had &quot;ordered that Iraqi media should haltits anti-Syrian drive as a measure necessitated by thesummit.&quot; The usual abusive references to the Syrianpresident, Hafez Assad, promptly vanished.   So far, U.S. policy seems to put more weight on Iraq's oilwealth than on a human rights record the State Departmentterms &quot;abysmal.&quot; The U.S. has urged Iraq and other Arabstates to moderate their rhetoric at next week's summit --Iraq has published what it says is the text of such a U.S.message. However, in January President Bush overrode acongressional ban on Ex-Im Bank credit guarantees to Iraq.   &quot;We might want to be holier-than-thou, but this isn't acountry you can tell to go sit in a corner,&quot; says a U.S.official. &quot;The potential for tremendous conflict is here, andwe need to be talking.&quot;   A Western businessman who knows the Iraqi president sayssanctions might only increase his excesses. &quot;You can'tout-tough Saddam because he can always be more ruthless,&quot; hesays. &quot;The only hope to moderate his position is to engagehim in a dialogue and expose him to Western thinking.&quot; Butthe businessman laments that such a dialogue isn't easy:&quot;Everything you try to tell him, he says, `I know.'&quot;   To most Westerners, Mr. Hussein remains enigmatic. Hedoesn't travel outside the Arab world, and longstandinginterview requests remain unanswered. The Iraqi presidentgrew up in poverty and political turmoil. Newly independentIraq was wracked by bloody coups. Iraqi King Faisal, justbefore his death in 1933, wrote despairingly of his realm:&quot;There is still -- and I say this with a heart full of sorrow-- no Iraqi people but unimaginable masses of human beings,devoid of any patriotic idea . . ., prone to anarchy, andperpetually ready to rise against any government whatever.&quot;   Mr. Hussein was reared mainly by an uncle, KhairallahTulfah, who later became his father-in-law. A hint of hischildhood milieu can be gleaned from a leaflet authored byMr. Tulfah, entitled: &quot;Three Whom God Should Not HaveCreated: Persians, Jews and Flies.&quot; Persians, says thepamphlet, are &quot;criminals God created in the shape of humans,&quot;while Jews are a &quot;mixture of the dirt and leftovers ofdiverse peoples.&quot;   Many Iraqis seem reluctant to talk about the president,even to praise him. &quot;We have many books and articlesexplaining his personality, so what can I add?&quot; asks AbdulLatif Taha, governor of Tikrit, the president's home town. Ata museum, one exhibit features the president's school reportcard. Asked which were his best and worst subjects, a guidereplies: &quot;All are good.&quot; She refuses to translate the marksfor each subject.   Yet the museum does provide some insights into Mr.Hussein's early life and later rule. Swept up by the violentpolitics of his times, he took part at age 22 in an attemptto assassinate the prime minister, Abdul Karim Qassem. Itfailed and, during the assassins' escape, Mr. Hussein pulledhis gun on his own gang to prevent their taking a badlywounded comrade to a hospital. Shot in the leg himself, henevertheless managed to flee the country by motorbikedisguised in Bedouin robes.   From the coffee shops of Cairo he continued to plot,shocking some Egyptian acquaintances by his ruthless talk ofshooting all opponents. One museum exhibit shows the oldOptima typewriter on which he composed seditious leaflets. Aspresident, he has kept such dangerous machines under tightcontrol, requiring until recently that every typewriter belicensed.   Since the 1988 cease-fire with Iran, Mr. Hussein has saidhe wants to liberalize Iraq, even talking of alternativepolitical parties. &quot;Half of me is still with the opposition,&quot;he told a group of Arab lawyers in February. So far, reformshave been limited. Travel abroad now is permitted, andweather reports appear in the press (during the war, even theprevious day's temperature was a state secret). Militarycheckpoints are fewer and less tense. And communications areeasing -- somewhat.   &quot;They told us we could import a certain brand of faxmachine,&quot; says a diplomat in Baghdad. &quot;When we brought in adifferent brand with the same specifications they told us itwasn't acceptable. Probably they only know how to bug onebrand.&quot;   Perhaps the most intriguing change is a decline in thenumber of the huge portraits of the president that deck thestreets. Two years ago, it wasn't uncommon to see hismustachioed visage beaming from all four corners of anintersection. These days, the density has declined to aportrait every few blocks. But hard information on even thisslight trend proves scarce.   &quot;We have many pictures of the president. We love thepresident,&quot; replies an anxious Ministry of Information guide,when asked about a portrait non-proliferation policy. Asenior government official also demurs. &quot;I wouldn't know,&quot; hesays, gazing out the window of his downtown office. &quot;I don'tgo into the city much.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>