<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910524-0112</DOCNO><DOCID>910524-0112.</DOCID><HL>   Latin Turnaround:   Long-Sickly Mexico   Has Investment Boom   As Trade Hopes Grow   ---   Outlook for Pact With U.S.   Improves, and Companies   Gird for a Changed Game   ---   New Political Climate Helps   ----   By Matt Moffett   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AND MONETARY INDICATORS (IEI)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)PETROLEUM (PET)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>MEXICO (MX)</RE><LP>   MEXICO CITY -- Nearly a decade to the day after the startof a severe economic slide, Mexico has high hopes that thedepression stemming from its enormous foreign debt is at lastover.   That cheerful outlook is getting a strong boost now as theU.S. Congress moves on President Bush's request for broadleeway to begin free-trade negotiations between the U.S. andMexico.</LP><TEXT>   The trade negotiations would surely accelerate whatalready has been Mexico's most powerful economic upsurgesince oil prices crashed in May 1981. Though a tradeagreement probably won't be signed until next year, &quot;the mereprospect of free trade is already generating additionalinvestment, exports and imports,&quot; says Ciemex-Wefa, aneconomic consulting firm.   That investment boom, mostly fueled by Mexicans whowouldn't have even considered investing at home during the1980s, will probably push Mexico's economic growth this yearwell above last year's robust 3.9%. Inflation is plummeting,interest rates have dropped to historic lows, and the stockmarket is roaring. Mexican corporations are moving plans offthe drawing board and onto the plant floor.   Inside an old pulp mill, Grupo Chihuahua, a lumber giantin the hills of northern Mexico, is rushing to complete for ascheduled July startup a state-of-the-art paper-makingmachine, the centerpiece of a $500 million investmentprogram. The mill's daily production of 350 tons of paperwill be marketed through another facet of Grupo Chihuahua'sfree-trade strategy: a partnership with Stuart Hall Inc., ofKansas City, Mo. Grupo Chihuahua bought a 10% stake in StuartHall, which, in turn, agreed to sell a big share of the newmill's output in the U.S.   Why are both companies betting so heavily on Mexico?   &quot;Policies in Mexico have always changed when presidentsdid, but free trade gives a sense of permanence to the verysound policies of this administration,&quot; says RodolfoFigueroa, a Grupo Chihuahua executive. &quot;That's why we havethe confidence to set up the United Nations here inChihuahua.&quot;   His joke exaggerates the company's new internationalism,but not by much. At the construction site, German techniciansfuss over a cutting machine. Hard-hats from Finland assemblea huge crane. &quot;Not to be decrying the competition,&quot; says IanMackay, the Scottish chief engineer, &quot;but there's no otherpaper machine in North America that will move this fast.&quot;   The whole country had better move fast. One question stilllooming over the economy -- and a big one -- is whetherinvestment and exports can be generated fast enough to coverMexico's huge trade deficit. Imports have jumped 2 1/2 timesin the five years since Mexico began tearing down tradebarriers. Last year, the deficit in the current account, thebroadest measure of trade, was $5.2 billion. This year, withoil revenue down and economic activity up, it could reach $10billion.   Nevertheless, Mexico has two reasons to take heart: Theimports are weighted toward capital goods purchased bycompanies, like Grupo Chihuahua, that are strengtheningoperations to gear up for free trade. These machineryimports, which surged 43% last year, should eventuallyproduce exports and thus foreign exchange for Mexico.   Moreover, local investors are financing plant outlays byrepatriating some of the billions of dollars they had movedabroad when oil prices collapsed. Last year, after PresidentCarlos Salinas de Gortari unveiled his free-trade proposal,Mexico took in $8.4 billion in new capital -- through bondissues, equity investments and other sources -- compared withjust $700 million in 1989, according to Salomon Brothers Inc.The New York securities firm estimates that about half oflast year's capital inflow was money previously held abroadby Mexicans. And the inflow is accelerating, Salomon says.Mexico's currency reserves now total a near-record $14billion.   &quot;It's hard to believe I'm really saying this about Mexico,but the problem at the moment is that there's too much moneycoming into the country,&quot; says Benito Solis, an economisthere. He fears that too much liquidity could fuel inflation.   Nonetheless, Mexican investors' resources probably can'tsatisfy the country's voracious appetite for foreignexchange. So President Salinas has been trying, with onlymodest success, to attract foreign capital.   But many investors in industrialized countries, worried byrecessions at home, are staying conservative; others havebeen diverted toward the newly liberated economies of EasternEurope. &quot;The greatest competition of the coming decade,&quot; Mr.Salinas says, &quot;is the competition for capital.&quot; Mexicanofficials are counting on U.S. approval of free-tradenegotiations to perk up transnational companies.   If the money doesn't keep flowing in, Mexico couldeventually lack enough hard currency to support the peso,which has been allowed to appreciate against the dollar forthree years. The strong peso has been crucial to Mexico'sprogram of spurring growth and reining in inflation.Pessimists see certain worrisome parallels between Mexico nowand Chile in the early 1980s, when the Chilean governmentbased rapid economic growth on an appreciating currency.Chile couldn't maintain the capital inflows needed to fundits huge trade deficits, and its currency collapsed.   And even if Mexico does meet all of its investment needs,President Salinas still will face a raft of problems, rangingfrom a tattered educational system to environmental hazardsin major cities. But in tackling the problems, he at leasthas the Mexican business community behind him. &quot;Thispresident will go down in history; he is a revolutionary,&quot;gushes Rafael Cattan, chief of Vanity, Mexico's biggestproducer of women's clothing.   Mr. Cattan is supporting Mr. Salinas with investments aswell as words. He is working to penetrate the heavilyprotected U.S. clothing market, whose import barriers arelikely to be reduced under free trade. Part of his strategyis to improve the quality of his raw materials; thepercentage of cloth that Vanity imports has jumped to 85%from 15% a few years ago. The company is also getting newequipment, such as a computerized design machine.   &quot;Free trade is the most important reason we're spendingmoney,&quot; Mr. Cattan says, &quot;but we're also impressed with thecongruence in the government's policies and the change in thecountry's attitude. All the pieces come together perfectly,like in a well-made suit.&quot;   One major reason Mexican investors consider the businessclimate tailor-made involves oil. Although Mexico's left haslong viewed oil as a symbol of Mexican sovereignty, businesspeople have seen it as symbolic of the way nationalism hasinterfered with sound economic management.   Now, Mexico is slowly opening the state-controlled oilindustry to greater private and foreign participation becausethe government doesn't have the money to invest in it. Oilprovides one-third of Mexico's export earnings, andincreasing sales of petroleum abroad could be crucial tomeeting the country's huge foreign-exchange requirements.   Last month, Mexico signed an unprecedented contract withTriton Production Systems Inc., a Houston-based oil-servicescompany, to drill an exploratory well. Mexico also isawaiting final approval from the U.S. Export-Import Bank ofseveral billion dollars in guarantees for loans that would beused to hire U.S. oil-services contractors. More changes areexpected.   Also reassuring to Mexican investors is the way thecountry's present economic team has displayed prudence ingood times as well as persistence in bad.   &quot;In the past, our policy makers had trouble, as they said,`administering the abundance,'&quot; says Jorge Vazquez Costilla,an economist at Grupo Visa, a big conglomerate. &quot;But thisgovernment has been extremely responsible.&quot;   During the oil-price surge last year, Pedro Aspe, the40-year-old finance minister, shrewdly kept part of Mexico'swindfall in a contingency fund, to prevent the extra moneyfrom flooding into the economy and pumping up inflation.Later, correctly anticipating that the Persian Gulf war wouldbe brief, he sold oil futures contracts to lock in prices forMexican crude at the higher, prewar levels. Mexico earnedabout $25 a barrel on some shipments, even while postwarprices tumbled.   And, meanwhile, Mexico's leftist opposition seems to befading off the political map. Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, thepopulist leader, won nearly a third of the vote in thedisputed 1988 presidential elections, but since then fewthings have gone his way. Internal rifts have plagued theparty he formed after his strong electoral showing. &quot;Thebusiness community is beginning to factor Cardenas out of theequation,&quot; says Rogelio Ramirez, a Mexico City economist.   However, Mr. Salinas's ruling party has done little tochange its reputation for corruption and incompetence. Tosome investors, the next important event is the midtermcongressional and gubernatorial elections on Aug. 18. Thevoting should make clear whether Mr. Salinas'seconomic-policy successes can translate into honestly wonelectoral victories.   When Mr. Salinas took office in 1988, he based hiseconomic program on negotiating a big cut in Mexico's $80billion foreign debt, partly by playing on U.S. fear of Mr.Cardenas. After wrangling with its banks through the firsthalf of 1989, Mexico achieved a reduction of only about $1.5billion in its debt service, then running roughly $10 billiona year.   Then, early last year, amid renewed investor gloom, Mr.Salinas proclaimed that the real solution to Mexico's debtcrisis lay in &quot;trade, not aid.&quot; Free trade not only wouldgive investors confidence in the continuity of hismarket-oriented policies but also would meet Mexicanindustry's longstanding demand for greater access to the U.S.market. And to further buck up investors, Mr. Salinas lastMay announced the privatization of the banking system, whose1982 nationalization inflicted lasting trauma on the privatesector.   The economic opening has won wide acceptance in Mexicodespite the country's strong strains of isolationism andanti-Americanism. The National Chamber of the Industry ofTransformation, which represents thousands of smallcompanies, had been a bastion of protectionism ever since itscreation in the 1930s by President Lazaro Cardenas, thefather of Mr. Salinas's political foe. &quot;But times change, andwe all agreed that the old ways weren't working anymore,&quot;says Manuel Gonzalez, a chamber member and vice president ofa family-owned trailer-making company.   So Mr. Gonzalez is going global. He plowed more than $1million of last year's $15 million in revenue into newmachinery. He also is negotiating a partnership with a Germantruck maker. His father, who founded the company in the1950s, is having trouble getting used to the new ways ofdoing business. &quot;But the one good thing about the crisis ofthe '80s is that it taught my generation of businessmenadaptability,&quot; Mr. Gonzalez says.   Just ask 32-year-old Victor Almeida, chief executive ofInterceramic, Mexico's largest ceramic-tile maker. He tookover in 1981 after his father, Interceramic's majorstockholder, cleaned out the management group that had leftthe company unprepared for the country's economic slump. Whenthe young Mr. Almeida took over, the factory couldn't evenpay for the cardboard wrapping for its tiles.   Somehow, Mr. Almeida muddled through the 1980s. WhenPresident Salinas took office and stepped up Mexico'seconomic opening, Mr. Almeida saw the payoff at hand.Free-trade talks would offer Interceramic the prospect ofgreatly expanded export revenue because the 21% tariff itcurrently pays on tiles sold to the U.S. would probably bephased out.   To position itself to make the most of the opportunity,Interceramic has invested $50 million in a new plant and aresearch laboratory. To obtain marketing expertise, it signeda joint-venture agreement last fall with Armstrong WorldIndustries Inc., of Lancaster, Pa.   Mr. Almeida is serene about all the changes. &quot;In 1981, myfirst decision as chief executive was to fire half ourworkers,&quot; he says. &quot;Later, I had to renegotiate our debt withMexican banks that had just been seized by the government.After surviving that and more, how can I let free trade worryme?&quot;</TEXT></DOC>