<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900621-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>900621-0107.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   They Love Old Glory Now -- They Reviled It Back Then   ----   By Hodding Carter III</HL><DATE>06/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   There are probably a few politicians in Washington who areseriously and unreservedly in favor of amending the Bill ofRights each time some transient threat arises. Sen. JesseHelms comes immediately to mind. There is undoubtedly aslightly larger clutch of office-holders who have convincedthemselves that two or three dedicated flag-burners (or twoor three hundred for that matter) pose a threat to the nationso great, a challenge to the nation's sense of itself soimpudently presumptuous, that qualifications should beattached to the First Amendment's guarantee of free speechand expression.   But the number of congressmen, Democrat and Republican,who honestly believe flag-burning is a clear and presentdanger to the Republic is as small proportionately as thenumber of exhibitionists champing to torch Old Glory. Thevast majority backing the amendment are cynical partisans,cowards, summer soldiers or timeservers without a convictionmore meaningful than the need for self-protection.</LP><TEXT>   Watching the news or reading the papers, it isoccasionally difficult to hold down the food. When apolitician in a leadership role like House GOP whip NewtGingrich contemptuously refers to the &quot;five lawyers&quot; on theSupreme Court who struck down the flag-burning law, it's easyto believe the clock has been turned back 36 years. Then,another Supreme Court overturned precedent and ruled&quot;separate but equal&quot; schools unconstitutional, and anothergroup of barking political jackals declared war on the court.The late Sen. James Eastland of Mississippi, thesegregationist champion, was no less cynical than Rep.Gingrich is today telling cheering crowds they had a &quot;sacredduty&quot; to defy the court. And all those Southern politicianswho declared eternal resistance to the decision invokedmajority opinion as their sacred god no less than those whonow push for a constitutional amendment to save the nationfrom itself.   There is something else worth noting in comparing theblatant hypocrisy of the never-never segregationists of the1950s and 1960s and the flag-savers today. High in the ranksof today's Capitol Hill patriots are men who were ardentdefenders of sedition and silent supporters of insurrectiononly yesterday. Among them are men who implicitly stood onthe side of the mobs when federal force was required to givelife to the principle of equal justice before the lawregardless of race. To watch them speaking grandiloquently ofthe need to protect the symbol of the nation is to realizethere are people without shame.   For some time it has been hard to remain silent whenencountering some of those sporting American flag lapel pins.I remember when their public commitment to that symbol ofAmerican unity might have been meaningful, but wasconspicuously absent. In the early and mid-1960s, those whoflew the American flag or otherwise displayed it in manyparts of the Deep South were perceived as enemies of &quot;our wayof life.&quot; During that terrible last convulsion of the oldracist order, when the Eastlands, Wallaces and Barnetts werecalling the Southern shots -- and a number of today'sall-American political heroes were their aides -- everythingthe American flag represented was fair game.   That was a time of real crisis, when basic American valueswere at stake and everyone had to decide what mattered andwhat did not. To put it bluntly, some now leading the chargefor protecting the flag were among those desecrating it bytheir actions and attitudes then. There is no need to listnames, though each knows his own and I would provide them forthose who ask. The point is, the bedrock meaning of thenation and its future direction were being determined inthose days, and the side those politicians chose wascontemptible in goal and vicious in method&quot; -- un-American&quot;in word and deed, to use one of their favorite phrases.   Such men are but a tiny minority of those who now clamorto head the list of those who would torch the Bill of Rightsto save its symbol. The vast majority supporting aconstitutional amendment to prohibit flag-desecration areopportunists above all else. They've read the polls and knowtheir duty -- join the lemmings' rush. At root, that is also&quot;un-American.&quot; Ours is not a plebiscitory democracy whereissues are instantaneously decided by moving majorities, buta representative government in which those we elect aresupposed to represent principle and thought as well astoday's popular opinion.   Put the president at the head of those who should knowbetter, and he probably does. He knows the televised imagesof flag-burning are gross distortions. He knows those whoburn the flag are at least as cynically manipulative as thosewho would profit politically from their symbolic games.George Bush knows that in the real world of tough issues,flag-burning is not in the top 100, let alone the top 10.Unfortunately, he also knows a free ride when he sees one,and he is incapable of passing one up no matter howdemeaning.   It is good to see the Democratic leadership in both housescome out forthrightly against the amendment. It is depressingto realize this is not an issue on which heavy chits arebeing called, as witness the decisions of such orthodoxDemocrats as Sen. Max Baucus of Montana and Rep. Tom McMillanto support the amendment. There is too much sympathy amongmany Democrats about the understandable need for thiscongressman or that senator to take a walk on the issue, lesthe be bludgeoned into political oblivion. Utterly amoralpolitical consultants are quoted regularly about the issue'spotency, or at least its potential impact, and thosequotations become justification enough for cowardice.   It's the wrong time for the politics of expediency. Justas the Constitution itself has been preserved because of itsresilience, the Bill of Rights has been preserved because ofits enduring integrity. When you are dealing with somethingthis fundamental, you cannot take risks. Chop away a littlein the name of the flag today; chop away a little moretomorrow in the name of public morals; undercut it further onthe day after in the name of crime in the streets. It is atexactly the moment that a majority is most intent on tearingaway the protections that have preserved liberty that thosewho know better must stand up and say &quot;no]&quot;   There is no free pass on this one. Preserving the Bill ofRights is not a minor matter. Politicians who stress the needto save themselves to fight the good fight in the future arekidding themselves and the public. There will be no betterfight, not because the proposed amendment is particularlymeaningful in itself, but because the precedent would be sohorrific.   A little more than 30 years ago, all but a handful ofSouthern congressmen signed &quot;The Southern Manifesto,&quot;repudiating the Supreme Court's desegregation decision andendorsing resistance to it. Among them were men sickened bywhat they were doing but convinced they had to stay in officefor the sake of a larger good. But not one ever again foundhimself capable of breaking with the monolithicsegregationist front when it mattered. So it is likely to befor those who know better but reluctantly go along with theflag-burning amendment. Saying yes to this one, they willfind it even harder to say no to the next ones sure to comeif it is ratified.   ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads atelevision production firm.</TEXT></DOC>