<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910125-0093</DOCNO><DOCID>910125-0093.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Federal Judge Upsets Plan of NBA   To Curb Superstation Broadcasts   ----   By Arthur S. Hayes and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   GE OI KEEN MVL CBK TRB</CO><IN>MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SECURITIES (SCR)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENTS (RGU)CENTRAL U.S. BANKS (BAC)BANKS (BNK)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal judge in Chicago ruled that the NationalBasketball Association's plan to restrict the number of gamesa franchise may broadcast on superstations violates federalantitrust laws.   The ruling has the potential to diminish the value of theNBA's current contract with National Broadcasting Co. -- apact that earned the league $220 million in 1989 -- as wellas future television contracts. The ruling also could derailthe plans of other professional sports leagues to ban theirmembers from making licensing agreements with superstations.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;We view it as a real groundbreaking decision forsuperstations, fairness and freedom of choice for fans,&quot; saidJohn R. McCambridge, an attorney for one of the plaintiffs,WGN Continental Broadcasting Co. NBC declined comment.   The owner of the Chicago Bulls and WGN, which operates aVHF station that broadcasts Bulls games in Chicago,challenged the NBA's plan to reduce the number of games alocal team can license to broadcast over a superstation to 20from 25 and to ban all superstation telecasts by 1995. WGN'sbroadcasts, like those of other superstations, are picked upby cable companies in other cities. It is part of thetelevision group owned by Tribune Broadcasting Co.   The plaintiffs sued the NBA last year, alleging that theNBA's actions constituted a conspiracy to boycottsuperstations and to limit NBA telecasts to the detriment ofthe Bulls, WGN, and fans in the Chicago market andnationwide. The plaintiffs had entered into a five-year,multimillion dollar contract to broadcast games.   In a 71-page decision, Judge Hubert L. Will agreed withthe Bulls and WGN and permanently barred the NBA fromimposing the plan.   &quot;The NBA's decision to reduce the number to 20, clearly asignificant restraint of trade, has not been shown, on theevidence presented to us, to achieve or contribute to anylegitimate objective by increasing competition in thebroadcast of NBA games or between NBA games and other formsof TV programming,&quot; Judge Will ruled.   Joel Chefitz, an attorney for the Bulls, said the decisionmakes it &quot;less likely that other professional leagues willfollow&quot; the NBA's attempt to eliminate superstationtelecasts.   Media analysts had predicted that a ruling favorable tothe NBA would have been disastrous for the future ofsuperstations that depend on the revenue from sportsprogramming for survival, because other major professionalleagues would have tried similar bans.   Gary B. Bettman, NBA general counsel, said in a statementthat he intends to appeal the decision.   &quot;We are disappointed that we did not win at the triallevel,&quot; Mr. Bettman said. &quot;But the parties acknowledged earlyon that this is a case that ultimately will be decided by ahigher court.&quot;   ---   DAMAGES TOTALING $104 million awarded in consolidatedasbestos cases. Jury verdicts on the damages were reachedthis week in federal court in Brooklyn and state court inManhattan. The approximately 100 cases involve formeremployees of the Brooklyn Navy Yard who were exposed toasbestos during their work many years ago. The maindefendants in the cases were Owens-Illinois Inc., Keene Corp.and the Manville asbestos personal-injury trust. The trust,currently being restructured, was formed as part of ManvilleCorp.'s bankruptcy reorganization plan to pay asbestospersonal injury claims. Asbestos, once widely used asinsulation and in other industries, causes cancer andrespiratory illnesses. Perry Weitz, one of the main attorneysfor plaintiffs in the cases, said, &quot;Companies should realizethat when these cases are tried, the juries' reaction is thatthese diseases are extremely severe and warrant large amountsof money.&quot; Attorneys for the defendants couldn't be reachedfor comment. The cases are part of about 500 Brooklyn NavyYard asbestos lawsuits that were being handled by federalJudge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn and state Justice HelenFreedman of Manhattan.   ---   PRINCETON/NEWPORT DEFENDANTS argue appeal.   The U.S. appellate court in Manhattan heard arguments inthe appeal of six defendants convicted in 1989 in the firstsuccessful criminal prosecution of securities-firm officialsunder federal racketeering law.   In a lively round of give-and-take, the judges questionedattorneys on both sides about the convictions of five formerPrinceton/Newport Limited Partnership officials and a formerDrexel Burnham Lambert Inc. trader. The appeal raises severalmajor issues for securities-law cases, including the scope ofthe federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizationslaw and just what makes a shady securities transactionillegal.   The defense attorneys also urged the court to apply atwo-week-old Supreme Court decision that found that taxpayerscan't be prosecuted for criminal tax evasion if theysincerely believed their conduct was lawful. Theodore Wells,an attorney for James Sutton Regan, former general partner ofPrinceton/Newport, said his client hadn't been permitted toshow the jury that he made a &quot;good faith&quot; attempt to obey thelaw.   The defendants were each convicted of racketeeringconspiracy in connection with the allegedly sham sales ofsecurities to create phony tax losses and gains. The saleswere arranged between Princeton/ Newport and Drexel. Thegovernment also alleged that the scheme involved stockmanipulation and the evasion of regulatory requirements.   The defendants and the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattanreached a settlement last year on the defendants' forfeitureunder their RICO conviction. The prosecutors had sought atotal forfeiture of $21.7 million, but settled on a total of$3.8 million. The forfeitures will have to be paid only ifthe convictions are upheld on appeal.   During arguments before the appeals court, Mr. Wellsargued that RICO was improperly used in the case, because thelaw wasn't intended to apply to tax cases. &quot;Congress made adeliberate decision not to include tax crimes&quot; in RICO, Mr.Wells said.   Mr. Wells urged the court to pull in the reins onprosecutors' use of RICO. But Judge Ellsworth Van Graafeilandsaid, &quot;RICO has been applied in so many areas that Congressnever intended.&quot;   Mr. Wells said the Justice Department's own guidelines forusing RICO say the law shouldn't be used to prosecute taxcrimes. Neil Cartusciello, an assistant U.S. attorney, saidthe guidelines are meant to be applied in a case-by-casemanner, and the Justice Department supported the use of RICOin this case.   ---   CONTINENTAL BANK ELIMINATES in-house legal department.   At a time when many companies are taking more legal workin-house to cut costs, Continental Bank is hoping to savemoney by moving in the opposite direction.   The bank, a unit of Continental Bank Corp., announced thatstarting next month the Chicago law firm Mayer, Brown andamp; Plattwill be handling most of the work that was being donein-house. About 15-20 of Continental's in-house lawyers,including the company's general counsel Dick Brennan, willjoin Mayer Brown. Mr. Brennan will also remain generalcounsel of the bank. The remaining 135 law departmentalpositions, including 45 lawyers, will be eliminated, a bankspokesman said.   Mr. Brennan said that Mayer Brown will receive a fixedannual retainer for its work. The retainer is subject toadjustment after two years, he said.   In a letter sent to the department's lawyers, bankChairman Thomas C. Theobald said the move came after anevaluation of the company's legal services late last year byPrice Waterhouse.   ---   TWO LAWYERS MUST PAY at least $638,000 to Germaninvestors, jury finds.   In a federal civil racketeering suit filed by the fiveinvestors, the lawyers, William Werner and Robert Sylvor wereaccused of conspiring with Earl Belle -- once known as&quot;Pittsburgh's wizard of finance&quot; -- in a fraudulent stockscheme in 1979 and 1980.   The jury decided that the lawyers, partners in the NewYork law firm Sylvor, Schneer, Gold andamp; Morelli, had committedsecurities fraud by conspiring with Mr. Belle to sell stocksand bonds in nonexisting companies.   In addition to the $638,000 in compensatory damages, thejury said the plaintiffs were entitled to punitive damages.That amount will be decided at a March hearing in federalcourt. The lawyers will also be tried in March on the relatedracketeering charges.   The defendants could not be reached for comment.   ---   FEDERAL PROBE of Connecticut's largest personal-injury lawfirm widens.   Prosecutors are looking into allegations of insurancefraud, mail fraud, wire fraud, conspiracy and racketeering byEbenstein andamp; Ebenstein, a recently dissolved Hartford lawfirm. Documents filed in Hartford federal court also indicatethat prosecutors are seeking court permission to examine 10case files seized from the law firm. Such permission isnecessary because of attorney-client privilege.   Federal agents have been investigating the law firm forthe past few years but have recently widened the scope oftheir probe. Also under investigation are several doctors whotreated thousands of the law firm's clients.   For many years Ebenstein andamp; Ebenstein, with 25 lawyers andmore than 100 support staffers, had the biggestpersonal-injury practice in Connecticut. The law firm, headedby Norman Ebenstein and his son Douglas, closed last fall.The father-and-son team are also facing several civil suitscharging, among other things, that they double-billed someclients.   The Ebensteins have not been charged with any crime andhave denied any wrongdoing. &quot;We're aware of theinvestigation, that it has gone on for years and we inferfrom the length of it that they have thus far found nothingof significance,&quot; said Steven L. Seligman, a Hartfordattorney representing Ebenstein andamp; Ebenstein.</TEXT></DOC>