<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910627-0146</DOCNO><DOCID>910627-0146.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Davidoff, Former Head Trader   For Boesky, Gets Probation, Fine   ----   By Wade Lambert and Amy Stevens   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   DD FFC LABOR S SHW WNEWS</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>BUILDING MATERIALS, CONCRETE, GLASS, PAINT (BLD)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)SECURITIES (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)CONNECTICUT (CT)DELAWARE (DE)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)ILLINOIS (IL)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)OHIO (OH)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)ROMANIA (RO)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   Michael Davidoff, former head trader for Ivan Boesky and acrucial witness in the government's investigation of fraud onWall Street, was sentenced to five years' probation and fined$50,000 for helping Mr. Boesky violate securitiesregulations.   The sentencing comes four-and-a-half years after Mr.Davidoff agreed to cooperate with prosecutors and pleadedguilty to the felony of aiding and abetting a securities-lawviolation. Mr. Davidoff helped the government fill in theblanks in its securities-fraud investigation, and hiscooperation led to the successful prosecutions of MichaelMilken, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and John Mulheren Jr.</LP><TEXT>   At the sentencing in federal court in Manhattan, JudgeCharles E. Stewart also ordered Mr. Davidoff to perform 300hours of community service. Mr. Davidoff, 47 years old, couldhave been sentenced to a maximum of five years, and he hadfaced the threat of more serious criminal charges if hehadn't agreed to cooperate in 1987.   Now barred from the securities industry, Mr. Davidoff toldJudge Stewart he was sorry for his crime. But his attorney,Paul Rooney, told the court that Mr. Boesky was to blame forhis client's wrongdoing.   &quot;It's simple -- he wound up working for the wrong man,&quot;Mr. Rooney said. &quot;He did his best at his job, and he ended upbeing used by this man.&quot;   Mr. Boesky pleaded guilty to a securities-related felonyin 1986. Prosecutors portrayed Mr. Davidoff as Mr. Boesky'shenchman in arranging sham transactions with Drexel andothers. Many of the transactions involved &quot;parking,&quot; in whichone investor buys a large block of stock for another toconceal the true ownership.   Prosecutors said in a presentencing report that Mr.Davidoff never was told the full extent of the scheme betweenMr. Boesky and Drexel. Among other things, the transactionswere done to manipulate stock prices for Drexel's benefit andto enable Mr. Boesky to evade securities and tax regulations,prosecutors said.   Mr. Rooney told the judge that Mr. Davidoff and his wifecurrently operate a &quot;low-cal food store in southern NewJersey. . . . He does everything from washing the pots andpans to serving up the yogurt.&quot;   In the presentencing report, the prosecutors said Mr.Davidoff's help &quot;enabled the government to flesh out thedetails of Mr. Boesky's revelations&quot; about the arbitrager'sdealings with Drexel and Mr. Milken. &quot;Mr. Davidoff was ableto provide important details that Mr. Boesky was unable toprovide. Only with Mr. Davidoff's assistance and that ofother Boesky subordinates was the government able to identifyparticulars of the numerous illegal schemes that comprisedthe Drexel arrangement,&quot; the report said.   Information from Mr. Davidoff was vital in obtaining thecooperation of other witnesses, including former Drexeltrader Cary Maultasch, the report said. Both Messrs. Davidoffand Maultasch testified last fall at a presentencing hearingfor Mr. Milken, who is serving 10 years in prison forsecurities fraud.   Mr. Davidoff also testified against Mr. Mulheren, despitea death threat Mr. Mulheren is alleged to have made againstMessrs. Davidoff and Boesky in early 1988 when he learnedthey were talking to prosecutors. Mr. Mulheren, who wasarrested after leaving his mansion with a loaded assaultrifle, told police he wanted &quot;to get Davidoff and Boesky.&quot;Mr. Mulheren, who is manic-depressive, later said theincident was caused by his illness.   &quot;My life was threatened, and I still have a concern formyself and my family,&quot; Mr. Davidoff told Judge Stewart at thesentencing.   Mr. Mulheren, who was found guilty last year ofmanipulating a stock price for Mr. Boesky, is appealing hisconviction.   ---   FOUR LAWYERS CONVICTED in massive fraud against insurancecompanies.   A federal court jury in San Diego voted to convict theCalifornia lawyers for their role in a shadowy syndicate oflawyers known as &quot;the Alliance,&quot; which bilked insurers out ofup to $350 million by overbilling the companies for legalservices.   Four other attorneys were acquitted in the case, said tobe one of the largest criminal prosecutions ever broughtagainst lawyers. Previously, eight Los Angeles-area attorneysand four other men pleaded guilty to a variety of chargesarising from the plot to manufacture legal fees bycomplicating and prolonging litigation.   The scheme took advantage of insurance companies that werefunding the legal defense of policyholders. Under Californialaw, insurance companies must hire independent lawyers torepresent policyholders who have been sued if there is aconflict of interest between the policyholder and theinsurer.   This arrangement proved fertile ground for impropriety:The Alliance at first operated without much interference frominsurers, who didn't want to risk being accused of bad faithif they disputed policyholders' legal fees. Prosecutors saidthe Alliance padded bills in at least 10 Southern Californiasuits from 1984 to 1988.   But a federal investigation ensued reportedly after one ofthe Alliance members informed on his colleagues. A separatecivil case, brought last year by two insurance companies,Fund American Cos.' Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. and Sears,Roebuck andamp; Co.'s Allstate Insurance Co., is pending. Thatsuit, asserting claims of fraud, conspiracy, and mail fraud,seeks $6.3 million in damages.   After a 10-week criminal trial, lawyers Monty Mason II ofSherman Oaks, Lewis Koss of Woodland Hills, Leonard Radomileof La Jolla and Richard Noyer of Calabasas were found guiltyof racketeering and mail fraud. Mr. Mason was also foundguilty of perjury in the case.   The State Bar of California said it is investigating morethan 50 lawyers for ethical misconduct in connection with thecase.   The Alliance cases were the subject of stories in The WallStreet Journal and other newspapers and on the &quot;60 Minutes&quot;television program. Most of them focused on the syndicate'salleged ringleader, Los Angeles lawyer Lynn Stites, who fledthe country before he could be indicted.   Bradley Brunon, a Santa Monica lawyer for Mr. Koss, saidhe was &quot;disappointed&quot; by the verdict. Lawyers for the otherconvicted defendants couldn't be reached.   Assistant U.S. Attorney William Hayes said: &quot;We aresatisfied with the result, and feel it will have asubstantial impact in deterring this kind of conduct in thefuture.&quot;   ---   PAINTERS SUE lead paint makers for failure to warn ofhealth hazards.   Three Pennsylvania painters filed a suit against the LeadIndustries Association and 18 manufacturers of lead pigmentsand paints, claiming the companies misrepresented the safetyof their products. The plaintiffs seek court approval tobring the case as a class action on behalf of 21,000residential, commercial and industrial painters working inPennsylvania and New Jersey.   Several class-action suits filed by consumers andschoolchildren who have allegedly suffered from exposure tolead are pending, and some individual painters have suedpaint manufacturers and settled out of court.   Medical problems believed to be associated with exposureto lead include joint pain, memory loss, severe headaches,extreme fatigue and infertility.   The Lead Industries Association said painters have knownfor years that exposure to lead could be hazardous and deniedany wrongdoing. The group has been &quot;extremely responsible&quot; indisseminating information about medical problems associatedwith lead, said Mark L. Sullivan, an attorney with the Bostonlaw firm Sullivan, Sullivan andamp; Pinta, which advises theassociation on lead-related health cases.   Other defendants, including Sherwin-Williams Co. and DuPont Co., said they hadn't yet received a copy of the suitand couldn't comment on the allegations, which includeconspiracy to withhold medical information about healthhazards.   The plaintiffs are seeking compensatory and punitivedamages and several unusual awards, including a medicalmonitoring fund for regular screening of painters exposed tolead and a research and development fund for new safetyequipment.   ---   LIBEL CLAIM against Glamour magazine is settled.   A federal court in Washington previously threw out most ofthe libel claims in a suit filed by Eric A. Foretich allegingthat a Glamour magazine article left the false impressionthat he had sexually abused his daughter, as claimed by hisex-wife, Elizabeth Morgan. Mr. Foretich has denied any abusein the controversial dispute.   The settlement resolves a libel and emotional-distressclaim filed by Mr. Foretich's mother that was scheduled to goto trial this month. Conde Nast Publications Inc., a unit ofAdvance Publications Inc., publishes Glamour. Both sides saidthey had agreed not discuss the terms of the settlement.   ---   ROMANIAN PRESIDENT RETAINS New York law firm.   Hall, Dickler, Lawler, Kent andamp; Friedman will be speciallegal counsel to President Ion Iliescu. Partner Mark A.Meyer, who is chairman of the Romanian-American Chamber ofCommerce, will advise the president on legal and economicissues, such as Romania's transition to a market economy.Hall, Dickler will open an office in Bucharest next month tohandle legal work for President Iliescu and other clients.   The 65-lawyer firm also has offices in White Plains, N.Y.,Albany, N.Y., and Los Angeles.   ---   NOTED: Two Dallas law firms have agreed to merge. Glast andamp;Middleton and Geary andamp; Spencer will combine Aug. 1 to formGeary, Glast andamp; Middleton, which will have about 115 lawyers.Sam Glast, who will be managing director of the newgeneral-practice law firm, said the two firms had discussedmerging several times in recent years. Geary andamp; Spencer laidoff some lawyers earlier this year.</TEXT></DOC>