<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910912-0131</DOCNO><DOCID>910912-0131.</DOCID><HL>   Odd Couple:   A Political Neophyte   And an Ex-Sandinista   Run Nicaragua Today   ---   Chamorro Takes a Back Seat   To Her In-Law, Lacayo,   And a `New' Gen. Ortega   ---   Disputed Gifts of La Pinata   ----   By Jose de Cordoba   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)EL SALVADOR (ES)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NICARAGUA (NU)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MANAGUA, Nicaragua -- One tense afternoon last year, afterthe Sandinista Front lost the presidential elections toVioleta Chamorro, representatives from her 14-party coalitionmet for hours in the manicured grounds of a school here todiscuss the Ortega Problem. At issue was whether to removeGen. Humberto Ortega, the younger brother of SandinistaDaniel Ortega, from command of the Sandinista Armed Forces.   One by one, leaders of the 14 parties vehemently argued tooust the general. But after listening in silence, AntonioLacayo, Mrs. Chamorro's son-in-law and designated primeminister, said Gen. Ortega would stay.</LP><TEXT>   With that decision, Nicaragua's new power axis wascreated.   At one end is Mr. Lacayo, 43 years old, a tall formerJesuit seminarian and businessman with no previous politicalexperience. Mr. Lacayo has emerged as the government's &quot;superminister&quot; in charge of the actual workings of governmentwhile Mrs. Chamorro, a symbol of unity, reigns rather thanrules. Mr. Lacayo's hand is evident everywhere, fromnegotiating debt relief to bargaining with college deans overbudget cuts.   At the other end of the axis is Gen. Ortega, 44, a formerSandinista revolutionary who once said Managua didn't haveenough lampposts from which to hang all the bourgeoisie. Buthe has changed his tune. Earlier this year, Gen. Ortegacaused a sensation when he said he had heated disagreementswith his brother Daniel and added, in an interview, that arevolutionary's job now is to back Mrs. Chamorro'sgovernment.   It's an odd marriage of convenience, but it seems to beworking. &quot;We find ourselves fighting together for arevolution based on political pluralism, a state of law,reconciliation, the unity of the nation,&quot; says Mr. Lacayo. Atarmy headquarters, Gen. Ortega declares that violent classstruggle is passe. &quot;If revolutionaries don't realize thatit's not a matter of one class eliminating another, then wewon't find a way out of the country's troubles,&quot; he says,seated under a huge portrait of Augusto Sandino, who foughtU.S. Marines in the country in the 1930s and for whom theSandinista movement is named.   Their collaboration has produced results. Most important,Nicaragua's decadelong civil war, which left 30,000 dead andwounded, has ended. The vast majority of the 20,000U.S.-backed Contra rebels who fought the Sandinistas havedemobilized. The Nicaraguan army has been reduced to 21,000from 80,000. There is freedom of the press, and a workingcongress. &quot;We are changing our political fiber,&quot; says Mr.Lacayo. &quot;We are going from revanchism, coup d'etats anddictatorships to democracy.&quot;   During the first days of the Chamorro government, Gen.Ortega played a key stabilizing role within the shell-shockedSandinista army, says Enrique Sanchez, a Sandinista armyofficer. In one meeting, recalls Maj. Sanchez, Gen. Ortegatold a group of recalcitrant military men that a handful ofthem could march on the presidential palace and throw out thegovernment, but that such a move wouldn't solve anything. &quot;Hesaid there was a new reality. We had lost the elections andhad to help the government get the country moving.&quot;   Having won the peace, Mr. Lacayo says, his government ismoving to stimulate the economy, which was left a mess by thewar and Sandinista mismanagement. In March, after four daysof intense negotiations, Mr. Lacayo got the Sandinista unionsto agree to an austerity program that included a currencydevaluation crucial to curbing wild inflation that hit a rateof 4,700% in 1990. In May, he got commitments from severalnations to refinance part of the country's outstanding debtthrough the World Bank and other institutions, thus makingNicaragua eligible for new loans next year.   Clearly, Nicaragua still has plenty of problems. Foremostis the Sandinistas' refusal to return more than $1 billion inexpropriated properties they distributed among themselvesduring their last weeks in power. The so-called &quot;Pinata&quot;,named for the paper-mache figures that rain goodies whenbroken during children's birthday parties, is a white-hotissue in Nicaragua. A majority in the congress wants thegiveaway reversed, but Mrs. Chamorro and Mr. Lacayo havelargely acquiesced in the looting, heightening tensionsbetween the legislative and executive branches of government.   The relationship between Mr. Lacayo and Gen. Ortega,meanwhile, has confused and dismayed former allies of bothmen. On the Sandinista side, Daniel Ortega appears on theoutside looking threateningly in. Since the failure of hiselection bid last year, the former president has become thevoice of Sandinista hard-liners. From time to time, he issuesa call for the Sandinistas to &quot;rule from below,&quot; whichmilitant unions have heeded in the past by going on strike.   On the anti-Sandinista side, a good number of Mr. Lacayo'sformer electoral allies are also on the outside looking in.&quot;There is a co-government between the Sandinista Front andMr. Lacayo's group,&quot; contends Vice President Virgilio Godoy,who is the sharpest critic of the Chamorro administration andregularly blasts its accommodation with the Sandinistas. Mr.Godoy has only a marginal role in the government and saysMrs. Chamorro is in power in name only. The bulk of thebureaucracy, the Supreme Court, the military and the policeare still in Sandinista hands. The difference between theOrtega brothers is pure theater, insists Mr. Godoy.   There is also anger among the demobilized Contras. Some400 ex-Contras, dubbed Re-Contras, have re-armed and againtaken to the hills, hoping to pressure the government intofiring Gen. Ortega and speeding the distribution of landspromised them by the government after last year's election.Many Nicaraguans are skeptical of Gen. Ortega's reincarnationas a moderate. They feel the general, who is usuallyaccompanied by two Jeeps loaded with bodyguards, is asinister &quot;eminence grise&quot;. They claim it is Gen. Ortega whorules behind a democratic facade.   On this score, the shooting death of a teen-ager,Jean-Paul Genie, hasn't helped Gen. Ortega's standing. YoungGenie was shot last October, and his father believes Gen.Ortega's bodyguards did it when Jean-Paul tried to pass thegeneral's convoy in a car. The investigation has stalled.Gen. Ortega denies that his bodyguards were involved in theboy's death.   Meanwhile, Mr. Lacayo strives to keep his government on acourse of what he calls national reconciliation. At adiplomatic reception earlier this year, the spirit ofreconciliation was apparent as dark-suited ex-Contras andformer Sandinista &quot;commandantes&quot; drank whisky and arguedpolitics. Scotch in hand, Bayardo Arce, a hard-lineSandinista &quot;commandante&quot; who plans to open a bank, toldRamiro Gurdian, a businessman, that bygones should bebygones.   &quot;Where else in Latin America can you see former enemiestalking like this?&quot; Mr. Lacayo asked.   Mr. Lacayo is a workaholic, who acquaintances say has anauthoritarian streak. Before Mrs. Chamorro's election, Mr.Lacayo, an engineer trained at Georgia Tech and MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, had steered clear of politics. Hehad had plenty of practice dealing with the Sandinistas, whoin 1982 expropriated part of a cooking oil firm he managedand expelled him from the building. After a stubbornfive-year legal battle, the Sandinistas returned the company.   Later, Mr. Lacayo entered into a lucrative joint venturewith the then-Sandinista government, raising chickens. Mr.Lacayo, who has been criticized by conservatives forprofiting from his relations with the Sandinistas, says theventure &quot;helped me to know them a bit.&quot;   In the year and a half he has run the government, thecerebral Mr. Lacayo has developed a folksy speaking style.Sometimes he even sounds like a Sandinista, a trait somediplomats say is a way of defusing Sandinista rhetoric.Rafael Solis, a moderate Sandinista deputy in congress,speculates that Mr. Lacayo could one day run for president atthe head of a coalition that includes the Sandinistas.   Gen. Ortega cuts a very different figure. A tall,powerfully built man, he moves stiffly, the result ofshoulder wounds that left his right arm with little feeling.He suffered the wounds in 1969 while trying to spring acomrade from prison in Costa Rica, where Gen. Ortega lived inexile for many years. A baseball fanatic, he still pitches&quot;for recreation and rehabilitation,&quot; using his bad right arm.And he sponsors, through the armed forces, one of thenation's top baseball teams -- just as the late dictatorAnastasio Somoza used to.   Gen. Ortega's youth couldn't have been more different fromMr. Lacayo's. While Mr. Lacayo was studying for thepriesthood in a Jesuit seminary in El Salvador, HumbertoOrtega, the son of a printer, was involved in the struggleagainst the Somoza regime, receiving military andintelligence training in North Korea and Cuba.   Some acquaintances say Gen. Ortega is fascinated by theinbred Nicaraguan upper class. &quot;There were circles hecouldn't get into,&quot; says Mario Castillo, a former businessassociate. Mr. Castillo, now living in Key Biscayne, Fla.,remembers that at the time of their triumph over Mr. Somoza,Gen. Ortega ordered a general's uniform from the finesttailor shop in Managua. It was the same expensive shop he hadadmired, but couldn't afford, when years earlier he shoppedfor a tuxedo for his high-school prom.   The general clearly is politically savvy. Years ago, hecrafted the alliance between the Sandinistas and theNicaraguan middle class to overthrow Mr. Somoza. At the time,the Sandinistas disguised their radicalism. Roger Miranda,his former private secretary, tells of a more recent case inwhich Gen. Ortega saw a television newscast of a crowdburning the American flag in front of the U.S. Embassy inManagua. Mr. Miranda says Gen. Ortega quickly called hisbrother, Daniel, still the president at the time, and &quot;hesaid we shouldn't burn the flag. Instead, we should burn astraw figure of Ronald Reagan, because a lot of gringos whodon't agree with U.S. policy in Nicaragua would be insultedby burning the flag.&quot; The flag burning stopped the next day.   But Mr. Miranda and some others claim that Gen. Ortega ismotivated more by power and money than ideology. Mr. Miranda,who became disenchanted with the Sandinistas and defected tothe U.S. in 1987, says that, on Gen. Ortega's orders, hediverted $1.5 million in defense ministry funds to a secretSwiss bank account for the general's personal use. Through aspokesman, Gen. Ortega says Mr. Miranda's story is &quot;totallyfalse.&quot; U.S. officials have said they paid Mr. Miranda alarge sum of money after he defected.   Some politicians here say Gen. Ortega is cannilypositioning himself for a long and comfortable life in thepost-Marxist era as head of the army. Others see a morestartling transformation. They believe he is striving to winU.S. favor so he can become Washington's man in the region --another Somoza. To do that, he would have to overcome deepsuspicion among U.S. officials, who believe his army is stillsmuggling weapons to El Salvador's guerrillas, a charge Gen.Ortega denies.   Sipping coffee at armed forces headquarters, Gen. Ortegasays he thinks the best thing to do is to deepenunderstanding between the U.S. and Nicaragua, even though&quot;many extremists think my behavior is treason to therevolution.&quot; Besides, he says, he'd like to visit the U.S.&quot;One reason I have for going is to see a major leaguebaseball game,&quot; he says.</TEXT></DOC>