<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900425-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>900425-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Public Confession:   Milken Pleads Guilty   To Six Felony Counts   And Issues an Apology   ---   He Admits Cheating Clients   And Plotting With Boesky   To Assist a Posner Raid   ---   Teary Scene in the Courtroom   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   NEW YORK -- He was almost at the end of a detailedconfession when his voice faltered. Michael Milken bentforward, sobbing, as two of his lawyers rushed to supporthim. Suddenly, under the vast ceiling of Manhattan's largestfederal courtroom, the world's once-most-powerful financier,the bigger-than-life commander of the X-shaped trading desk,seemed mortal, even frail.   In contrast, the six felony counts to which Mr. Milkenpleaded guilty yesterday after an intense three-yeargovernment investigation showed the financier at the heightof his power, as founder and head of Drexel Burnham LambertInc.'s high-yield junk-bond department. He was able to orderthe country's largest arbitrager to take illegal stockpositions, to conceal the activities of corporate raiders, tocreate tax losses and gains, and to create artificial pricesof junk bonds.</LP><TEXT>   The six felonies, ranging from conspiracy to securitiesand mail fraud to a tax count, were far from the technicalviolations of obscure securities laws that many people hadcome to expect.   Together, they portray a financier with such total powerover the junk-bond market Mr. Milken largely created that heseemed to believe himself beyond the reach of law. And, wereit not for the unforeseen confession of a co-conspirator,former arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky, he probably would havebeen.   Four of the six counts directly involved Mr. Boesky,establishing the accuracy of much of what Mr. Boesky toldprosecutors at the time of his own plea bargain in 1986. Theother two involve David Solomon, the head of a junk-bondmutual fund and a former Drexel client who was grantedimmunity from prosecution and has been cooperating in thegovernment's investigation of Mr. Milken.   The six crimes show that Mr. Milken:   -- Defrauded investors by unlawfully concealing the factthat hostile suitor Golden Nugget Inc. had sold its positionin the stock of MCA Inc.;   -- Cheated clients of Drexel and Mr. Solomon's investmentpartnership by falsely reporting to them the prices at whichsecurities had been bought and sold, with Mr. Milken'shigh-yield department pocketing the difference;   -- Forced an unwilling Fischbach Corp. into the hands ofcorporate raider Victor Posner by having Mr. Boesky take alarge and unlawfully secret position in the company's stock;   -- Helped Mr. Solomon evade income taxes by creatinglosses for him, and then manufactured gains for him thefollowing year;   -- Entered into a criminal conspiracy with Mr. Boesky thatincluded secret record-keeping involving securities that Mr.Boesky held in order to illegally conceal their true owners.   -- Helped Mr. Boesky evade net-capital rules by secretlyagreeing to buy stock from him with the understanding itwould be bought back later at no loss to Drexel.   While wide-ranging, the counts to which Mr. Milkenadmitted guilt are a small fraction of the crimes alleged bythe government in its 98-count indictment or the even-largerindictment the government said it was prepared to seek asrecently as last Friday, when Mr. Milken accepted the offerof a plea agreement. The government said the full sweep ofMr. Milken's allegedly unlawful behavior will be made publicin its pre-sentencing memorandum.   Mr. Milken was warned by presiding federal district judgeKimba Wood that the six crimes carry a maximum prisonsentence of 28 years. In addition, Mr. Milken agreed to pay afine of $200 million and $400 million into a fund forrestitution as part of his settlement of related Securitiesand Exchange Commission charges. Judge Wood said Mr. Milkenwould be sentenced on Oct. 1, after the court has had time toconsider sentencing reports from the government and Mr.Milken's response.   &quot;I realize that by my acts I have hurt those who areclosest to me,&quot; Mr. Milken told the judge as his wife, Lori,his mother, his brother, Lowell, and several former Drexelofficials looked on. &quot;I am truly sorry. I thank the court forpermitting me to add this apology and for its fairness inhandling this complex case.&quot; Mrs. Milken wept as her husbandacknowledged guilt and apologized.   Judge Wood asked Mr. Milken repeatedly to assure her thathe believed himself to be guilty of the crimes alleged, andthat he hadn't been pressured into pleading guilty andrelinquishing his constitutional right to a jury trial. Ineach instance, Mr. Milken said that he was guilty and that hehadn't been pressured into settlement. He also said he wasn'ttaking any drugs, wasn't under the care of a psychiatrist,and was &quot;clear-headed.&quot;   Both the chief government prosecutor in the case, JohnCarroll, and Mr. Milken's principal lawyer, Arthur Liman,emphasized that Mr. Milken would cooperate fully in thegovernment's continuing investigation of wrongdoing in thefinancial industry. Mr. Carroll said the government wouldretain considerable leverage over Mr. Milken even though hiscooperation will commence only after he is sentenced. Thewritten plea agreement provides that Mr. Milken will speakwith federal officials whenever he is asked and will &quot;fullyand truthfully disclose all information with respect toDrexel-related activities.&quot;   Given his prominence in so many of the last decade's majorfinancial developments, from the rise of junk bonds and therapid growth of many now-troubled savings and loans to theleveraged buy-out and hostile takeover booms, Mr. Milkencould be the most valuable guide to the inner workings ofWall Street the government has ever obtained. If morewrongdoing exists, he is in a good position to know about it.Thus his testimony could trigger a wave of new investigationsand pleas.   At the very least, Mr. Milken's agreement is ominous forMr. Posner, who was named with Mr. Milken as a defendant inthe SEC's September 1988 civil complaint. With both Mr.Boesky and Mr. Milken cooperating, Mr. Posner's positionwould seem greatly weakened.   Robert Morvillo, an attorney for Mr. Posner, said, &quot;TheU.S. Attorney's office has not been involved in any way withus for a very long period of time, and we are not in theleast concerned about the Milken plea because we assume if hetells the truth, Victor Posner will be exonerated.&quot;   The government is also known to be investigating somemajor junk-bond purchasers that were clients of Mr. Milken,such as Columbia Savings andamp; Loan Association and FirstExecutive Corp. Both companies have denied wrongdoing.   As for Mr. Milken's brother Lowell, a defendant in theindictment, the government said it would no longer seekcriminal charges against him. This was a crucial aspect ofMr. Milken's decision to plead. In a statement distributedafter the proceeding in court, Lowell Milken said, &quot;I cantake no satisfaction that the charges against me are beingdropped. They never should have been brought in the firstplace, because I have done nothing wrong.&quot;   Attorney General Richard Thornburgh, whose office approvedthe settlement, characterized Mr. Milken's crimes as &quot;some ofthe most serious efforts undertaken to manipulate and subvertWall Street's securities markets.&quot; He added that the casesends a strong message about &quot;crime in the suites: Thosewhite-collar criminals are never so powerful or clever thatthey cannot be caught by diligent and persistent lawenforcement efforts.&quot;   SEC Chairman Richard Breeden, whose office also settledits case against Mr. Milken, said he was &quot;extremely pleased&quot;by the $600 million settlement, the largest in the SEC'shistory. While he declined to speculate on where Mr. Milken'scooperation might lead, Mr. Breeden said, &quot;This case clearlydoes involve some significant ramifications. We do expect thetestimony and cooperation we will receive will be valuable.&quot;He also noted that by settling the case now, the governmentwill obtain Mr. Milken's cooperation before so much timepasses that the statute of limitations might bar additionalprosecutions.   The settlement of the SEC case was filed in the samecourthouse shortly after Mr. Milken's criminal plea. Inaddition to the $600 million payment, the SEC settlement barsMr. Milken and his brother from the securities industry forlife. Both Milkens signed consent decrees in which theyneither admitted nor denied the sweeping allegations in theSEC's suit.   Of the $600 million payment Mr. Milken agreed to, the $200million that is a fine will go directly to the U.S. Treasury,a sum that comfortably exceeds the amount the governmentspent pursuing the Milken investigation, the prosecutor, Mr.Carroll, assured Judge Wood. The $400 million portion, to beadministered by the SEC, will be available to satisfy claimsby investors and others who assert that they have beendefrauded by Mr. Milken. Although civil suits have alreadybeen filed against Mr. Milken alleging damages far in excessof that amount, his attorney, Mr. Liman, told Judge Wood thathe was confident $400 million would be more than adequate,and that anything left over would go to the government.   If nothing else, the hundreds of people packed into thefederal courtroom for the criminal plea and many hundredsmore surrounding the courthouse in Foley Square were atestament to Mr. Milken's continuing celebrity. Entering thecourthouse through the main staircase, Mr. Milken eyed thecrowds and television crews gathered for his sentencing, andtold U.S. marshals escorting him, &quot;It never ceases to amazeme.&quot;   At first, the courtroom had the almost-festive air of areunion. The courtroom crowd included many longtimesupporters of Mr. Milken; scores of lawyers who have workedon aspects of the Milken and Drexel cases; a large contingentfrom the U.S. Attorney's office and the SEC, and dozens ofreporters. There were titters when Mr. Milken, whom Drexelpaid $550 million in one year alone, was told the court wouldappoint a lawyer for him if he couldn't afford one. But themood suddenly turned somber as Mr. Milken acknowledged guiltand began describing his crimes.   During his statement, Mr. Milken defended what willprobably be his most enduring legacy, the junk-bond market.Although that market has been in turmoil since last fall, Mr.Milken argued that his admission of guilt is &quot;not areflection on the underlying soundness and integrity of thesegment of the capital markets in which we {Drexel}specialized and which provided capital that enabled hundredsof companies to survive, expand and flourish.&quot;   Mr. Liman, commenting after the courtroom proceeding,added that &quot;it is Michael's hope that in the long run,history will see his violations in context and judge him notjust on the basis of his lapses, but on the basis of thecontributions he made to the economy and to the Americanpeople.&quot;   ---   Bruce Ingersoll contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>