<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910923-0128</DOCNO><DOCID>910923-0128.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   `Bring the Boys Home' at What Price?   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>09/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION, NATO (NTO)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)PHILIPPINES (RP)SOUTH KOREA (SK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   By fighting to save the big U.S. naval base at Subic Bayfrom opportunists in the Philippine senate, Cory Aquinosuddenly has become the chief defender of U.S. foreign policyin the Far East. Although the senators won the first round,she is confident that, in the end, the Philippine people willback her and a continued Yankee presence.   The irony of this is that President Aquino is getting onlyweak support from where she should expect it most,Washington. An increasingly vocal alliance of the right andleft in that town is preaching that the U.S. should sharplyreduce its world role, bringing the boys home from suchplaces as Subic, Ramstein, Incirlik and Yokohama. The U.S.,it is argued, can no longer afford to police the world onbehalf of its trade competitors.</LP><TEXT>   If the only U.S. role in the world were that of apoliceman, those arguments would be right. It could then besaid that when the world needs a cop, let it dial 100 orwhatever else is in the phone book. Why should U.S. taxpayerspay for global security when they are having trouble enoughgetting adequate security on the streets of their own cities?Japanese competitors, safe under the American securityumbrella, are throwing Americans out of work, right?   When the argument is reduced to these simplistic terms --which is where columnist Pat Buchanan and Senator Tom Harkinseem to prefer to keep it -- the logic is impeccable. Sadly,the Bush administration's handling of some of today'stroubles seems to support assertions that it's futile forAmerica to act as the world's policeman. Look how badly ithas fared in keeping the peace in the Middle East andYugoslavia, to cite two current examples.   The only problem with this isolationist revivalism -- onethat defeats it entirelyis that it is based on the falsepremise that the U.S. role in the world these past 50 yearshas been nothing more than that of a cop. Any such assertionignores about 90% of what has been the most successful partof U.S. policy, its fostering of more humane and prosperoussocieties, mainly through multi-national alliances. The U.S.not only was the primary designer of postwar democraticalliances but it remains a vital force in holding themtogether. Security was at their roots, but their purposestoday are much broader.   Opportunities for those alliances are even more promisingtoday than in 1945. Many millions of people in such places asthe former U.S.S.R., Albania and Angola finally are getting ashot at democracy. If the U.S. can help their chances, afreer, safer and more prosperous world will be the mostlikely result.   Let's look at some postwar institutions that the U.S. hada central role in creating. The European Community has helpedrestore prosperity and a new spirit of optimism in WesternEurope. The International Monetary Fund, for all its problemstrying to prescribe cures for sick economies, operated asuccessful monetary model for 26 years, one that has beenrevived with great benefit in the European Monetary System.The GATT with its successive rounds of multilateral tradeagreements has dismantled barriers to commerce and made theworld richer.   Security treaties that have linked the U.S. with Japan andSouth Korea have been a central factor in keeping the FarEast relatively peaceful, allowing vigorous economies to growin those two countries and the ASEAN nations. Subic is verymuch a part of that security system. NATO has become far morethan just a Cold War military alliance designed to counterthe Soviet threat. By putting Western Europe's armies,excluding France, under a unified command, it has sharplyreduced the risk of new conflicts among nations that were atone another's throats for centuries and that still havemutual grievances.   But what does any of this have to do with having Americantroops stationed overseas? Only everything. Ben Stein, aHollywood writer and sage, once quoted on these pages a LasVegas sage of lesser stature who uttered these profoundwords: &quot;You can't play if you're not at the table.&quot; Applyingthat wisdom globally, the U.S. can't play its central role inthe alliances that glue the world together without having aphysical presence. A peaceful world requires commitment, aword a lot of Americans of both left and right may haveforgotten.   Neo-isolationist economic arguments are essentiallyspurious. It is said that the U.S. can't &quot;afford&quot; to maintainits overseas presence in the face of its needs at home andexpanding competition in world markets. The first point iseasily demolished. If &quot;needs at home&quot; means U.S. governmentspending on social programs, there is little evidence ofskimping. What is evident is that they often haven't worked.Such problems as crime and social disintegration in thecities have become worse.   As to competitiveness, the U.S. has by far the largesteconomy in the world and one that in terms of total factorproductivity also happens to be the most efficient. It canand does compete in the world, but its competitive abilitieswould serve little purpose if the world began to revert tothe old days of ardent nationalism and protectionism. The PaxAmericana yields more benefits to Americans than to mostother nationalities because the economies of advancedindustrial countries like the U.S. have become increasinglyinterdependent and thus more wedded to the free exchange ofgoods and services.   To understand the adverse effects when the world securitysystem breaks down, recall how oil prices climbed when SaddamHussein made a grab for Kuwait and threatened the massive oilresources of Saudi Arabia. Finally, does anyone reallybelieve that the U.S. Congress, with its mania for subsidiesand other forms of market interference, would do anythingconstructive with what it might save from curbing the U.S.world role? If Japanese competition is the problem, Congresscould best aid U.S. industry by removing such burdens asexcessive government regulation and costly attacks from avast army of lawyers trying to get rich with productliability suits.   How much blame does the Bush administration deserve forneo-isolationism? Certainly some. Had the U.S. finished offSaddam Hussein when it had a chance, there wouldn't be somany doubts about its policeman role. Had it supported theindependence of Slovenia and Croatia, it could have led anallied effort against Serbian Communist Slobodan Milosevicthat might have prevented the Yugoslav war. Had it been moresupportive of democratic movements in the Soviet Union, itwould have reminded Americans that they stand for somethingworth spending and fighting for -- namely, human freedom.   The most important question to ask the neo-isolationistsis this: If the Pax Americana goes by the boards, what do youthink will take its place? The answer might be too unpleasantto contemplate.</TEXT></DOC>