<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910115-0108</DOCNO><DOCID>910115-0108.</DOCID><HL>   Let Iraqi Deserters Win the War for Us   ----   By Laurie Mylroie</HL><DATE>01/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   In all the preparations for war, little has been done todevelop a strategy aimed at Iraqi politics -- exploiting theweaknesses in Saddam Hussein's cruel regime and developingcontacts with those elements that might provide the basis fora new government in Baghdad.   Rarely in modern history has one man, idiosyncratic anddestructive, so dominated and twisted the fate of a nation.Saddam may well force Iraq to fight the one country that hehimself has acknowledged as the world's sole remainingsuperpower. By any dispassionate assessment, Iraq will losethat war. Conflict even carries the threat of Iraq'sdismemberment, as the armies of Turkey, Syria and Iran allstand mobilized on Iraq's borders.</LP><TEXT>   The never easy relations between Saddam and his armyreflect pressures generated by the precarious position inwhich Saddam has placed his country. Early reports of theexecution of more than 100 officers on the day of theinvasion of Kuwait have since been confirmed. (Such eventsare not unknown in Iraq; 254 military personnel wereexecuted, ostensibly for cowardice, in the presence of highparty functionaries in the southern province of Meisan on May25, 1983. In reality they were shot because Saddam believesthat by instilling terror he motivates his troops.)   Over the past two months Saddam has appointed newcommanders to the army's top two posts. The new men, widelyhailed as war heroes, were given too much credit. Neither thenew defense minister, Saadi Tuma Abbas, nor the new chief ofstaff, Hussein Rashid, were involved in the big battlesaround Basra in the last year of the war.   Besides, after eight years of war with Iran, Iraq has manyheroes. The most prominent paid with their lives in the purgeof hundreds of officers Saddam conducted after the August1988 cease-fire aimed at removing all threats, real andpotential, that could come from his suddenly idled generals.Saddam's new commanders know the fate of their predecessors.Loyalty in such a system is impossible.   Moreover, two of the army's seven corps commanders haverecently been replaced. One is the brother of a member of theruling Revolutionary Command Council, Sadun Shakir, who&quot;resigned&quot; early in the crisis and has not been seen since.   Morale among Iraqi forces in Kuwait is low. Between 200and 500 Iraqi soldiers have defected across the Saudi border,at least an additional 200 have defected to Turkey. Iraqisoldiers are ill-fed, obliged to forage, return home forsupplies, or even seek them from Saudi troops. Army officersroutinely take bribes for, among other things, the release ofKuwaiti prisoners.   Tens of thousands of Iraqi deserters fled into the marshesof southern Iraq during the war with Iran. That region islargely inaccessible by land transport and difficult topolice. Still outcasts, their ranks are swelling anew withfresh deserters who hesitate to risk crossing Iraq's borders.   The disparate elements of the Iraqi opposition in exilehave begun to coordinate. They met recently and called for,among other things, Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait. Since thefirst of this year, they have been broadcasting to theircountry on &quot;Radio Free Iraq,&quot; using the airwaves of Egypt,Syria and the Gulf states.   Saddam's hold on his army is brittle. Are there ways thatthe U.S. and its Arab allies could usefully coordinate withthe anti-Saddam Iraqis to separate Saddam from his troops?   Radio Free Iraq relates the horrors that Saddam is aboutto bring on Iraq, reminding the troops in Kuwait that Saddammeans to use them as cannon fodder, and calling on them, inthe name of a higher patriotism, to desert. Why can't thatappeal be bolstered by material inducements, provided by theU.S. and the international coalition? Why can't Iraqi forcesbe offered money and asylum until Saddam's regime is defeatedand they can return home? What if every Iraqi pilot wereoffered $100,000 to come with his plane? (Fifty milliondollars, a drop in the bucket of Desert Shield, would sufficefor the entire Iraqi Air Force.) What is an Iraqi tank worth?What compensation for the foot soldiers, the most abused ofSaddam's troops?   The Gulf states could provide the funds. It may not be aheroic way to fight a war, but it is humane and consistentwith local traditions of riyal-politik. Before fightingbegan, the air force would be the most vulnerable toblandishments, because it is most mobile. Would Saddam beable to trust his pilots aloft?   Once fighting began, it would be difficult to distinguishbetween casualties and deserters, removing one elementinhibiting desertions now -- fear of retaliation againstsoldiers' families. It is not impossible that faced withpunishing air attacks and offered an attractive way out,Iraqi forces would simply collapse, as they did at criticalpoints during the Gulf war, such as the May 1982 battle ofKhorramshar, when the army cracked in two days, losing itslast important positions in Iran.   The Free Iraqis could even announce the formation of anIraqi Liberation Army to rescue their country from Saddam.The impact of such a force would be political. It wouldprovide a focus of loyalty for would-be deserters and helpblunt Saddam's efforts to make any conflict appear as onebetween the Arabs and the West. It would even undermine hisattempts to drag Israel into the fight in order to split theArab coalition.   Defeat in war will likely mean the end of Saddam's regime.But it is almost impossible to judge what will follow him.Cooperation with Iraqi elements now could provide the nucleusfor the emergence of a government that would not be hostileto the West and its Arab allies.   The level of anger inside Iraq at the regime is greaterthan at any time in the past, including during the war withIran. The Iraqi population does not want to fight anotherwar. At peril to themselves, Iraqis seek out Westernjournalists to complain about the regime. The appearance of acredible, organized anti-Saddam force could have unexpectedconsequence within Iraq, perhaps even inducing a sudden,spontaneous repudiation of despotism like that which broughtdown Nicolae Ceausescu.   It has been argued that the killing of Iraqis by Americanswill fuel anti-Western sentiment throughout the Middle East.But the rejection of Saddam's militarism by his own people,along with the anti-Western ideology invoked to justify hispolicies, would have the opposite effect. In an area wherethe point often seems forgotten, it would be a potentreminder that although a man may build himself a throne ofbayonets, he cannot sit on it forever.   ---   Ms. Mylroie is a fellow at Harvard's Center for MiddleEastern Studies.</TEXT></DOC>