<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911114-0002</DOCNO><DOCID>911114-0002.</DOCID><HL>   Margin of Error:   Studies Galore Support   Products and Positions,   But Are They Reliable?   ---   Loaded Questions, Sponsors   With a Vested Interest   Often Skew the Results   ---   The Great Diaper Debates   ----   By Cynthia Crossen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><NS>CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)</NS><LP>   Americans overwhelmingly preferred a Chrysler to a Toyotaafter test-driving both, contends a study sponsored byChrysler. The vast majority of college students picked Levi's501 jeans as the most &quot;in&quot; clothing, says a study sponsoredby Levi's. And in separate studies funded by the cloth-diaperand disposable-diaper industries, guess what: Cloth diaperswere shown to be better for the environment than paper -- andvice versa.   In recent years, research studies like these have becomeone of America's most powerful and popular tools ofpersuasion. Once confined to a small circle of polling andresearch companies and a few universities, the business ofstudying public opinion and consumer habits has exploded inthe past two decades. Today, studies have become vehicles forpolishing corporate images, influencing juries, shapingdebate on public policy, selling shoe polish and satisfyingthe media's -- and the public'svoracious appetite forinformation.</LP><TEXT>   Yet while studies promise a quest for truth, many todayare little more than vehicles for pitching a product oropinion. An examination of hundreds of recent studiesindicates that the business of research has become pervadedby bias and distortion. The result is a corruption of theinformation used every day by America's voters, consumers andleaders.   While described as &quot;independent,&quot; a growing number ofstudies are actually sponsored by companies or groups with areal -- usually financial -- interest in the outcome. Andoften the study question is posed in such a way that theresponse is predictable:   -- When Levi Strauss andamp; Co. asked students which clotheswould be most popular this year, 90% said Levi's 501 jeans.They were the only jeans on the list.   -- A survey for Black Flag said: &quot;A roach disk . . .poisons a roach slowly. The dying roach returns to the nestand after it dies is eaten by other roaches. In turn theseroaches become poisoned and die. How effective do you thinkthis type of product would be in killing roaches?&quot; Notsurprisingly, 79% said effective.   -- A Gallup poll sponsored by the disposable-diaperindustry asked: &quot;It is estimated that disposable diapersaccount for less than 2% of the trash in today's landfills.In contrast, beverage containers, third-class mail and yardwaste are estimated to account for about 21% of the trash inlandfills. Given this, in your opinion, would it be fair toban disposable diapers?&quot; Eighty-four percent said no.   &quot;There's been a slow sliding in ethics,&quot; says Eric Miller,who, as editor of the newsletter Research Alert, reviews some2,000 studies a year. &quot;The scary part is, people makedecisions based on this stuff. It may be an invisible crime,but it's not a victimless one.&quot;   The news media also play a role in disseminating sloppy orbiased research to consumers. Journalists often publicizereports about a study without examining the study'smethodology, or technical index, to see if it was conductedproperly. Statistics are thrown around with abandon, evenwhen sample sizes are so small they're meaningless. The mediathemselves use call-in polls, including one last yearconducted by USA Today showing that Americans love DonaldTrump. A month later, USA Today reported that 5,640 of the7,800 calls came from offices owned by one man, Cincinnatifinancier Carl Lindner. Mr. Lindner won't comment, but aspokesman told USA Today that Mr. Lindner's employees admireMr. Trump. USA Today says its call-in polls aren't meant tobe scientific and are &quot;strictly for fun.&quot;   &quot;A distortion or adulteration has set in in the business,&quot;says Solomon Dutka, chief executive of Audits andamp; Surveys, aNew York research firm. &quot;Every survey done should have toface an attorney across the room.&quot; Recognizing that surveyscan be abused, the Council of American Survey ResearchOrganizations, a trade group, has issued a code of standards,covering such topics as responsibility to the public.   There is still much good research being done, of course.In medicine and other physical sciences, research must bequantifiable and replicable to be taken seriously. Moreover,much consumer research is conducted strictly for internalconsumption, not public distribution; it is therefore in acompany's interest to get it right.   &quot;We will eventually get to a dual standard ofinformation,&quot; says Mr. Miller. &quot;There will be a distinctionmade between research that's done with no hidden agenda, butto create useful information, and research that containsuseful information that was generated for a very specificpurpose.&quot;   In recent years, lean budgets have made everyone who doesresearch, including formerly neutral colleges anduniversities, a little hungrier for work. &quot;A funder willnever come to an academic and say, `I want you to producefinding X and here's a million dollars to do it,'&quot; says PaulLight, associate dean at the Hubert Humphrey Institute at theUniversity of Minnesota. The subtext, he continues, is thatif the researchers produce the right finding, more work --and funding -- will come their way. &quot;Once you're on thattreadmill, it's hard to get off.&quot; Many universities, whichoften get a cut of the fee, don't monitor the outside workdone under their imprimatur.   Shortages of money and time also contribute to diminishingsample sizes in polls. Researchers say that it's best to haveat least 1,000 respondents if you hope to project resultsonto a large population. Yet most of the dozen or morenational polls taken about Clarence Thomas's confirmationinterviewed only 500 to 700 people. When broken intosubgroups, such as women or blacks, the margin of error goesoff the charts -- as high as 12%. So when an ABC-WashingtonPost poll interviewed about 500 adults, roughly half women,and found that more women believed Clarence Thomas (38%) thanbelieved Anita Hill (28%), the opposite could also have beentrue. (Other surveys, however, did bear out the poll'sresults.)   &quot;Those polls reminded me of the gray area between fact andentertainment,&quot; says Mr. Miller, noting that public opinionwas shifting rapidly during those days. &quot;I wanted to readthem, but I knew I had to bring caution to those pages.&quot;   Besides interviewing too few people, there are other waysa survey can be flawed: Those surveyed may not berepresentative of the population, the analysis of the datamay be faulty, or the conclusions may be screened so only thebest are reported. What's more, many studies tackle issuesthat are so complex they are virtually unresolvable. And thenthere are those studies that, though conducted with correctscientific protocol, may have predictable conclusions becausethe researchers hired to do the studies are known to havecome to similar conclusions in the past.   &quot;You can't have an industry study done by that industry be100% objective,&quot; says Carl Lehrburger, who has studied theenvironmental impact of cloth versus disposable diapers forthe cloth-diaper industry. &quot;There are too many judgmentcalls, too many meetings between the sponsor and theorganization doing the study. We're dealing with degrees ofobjectivity and degrees of truth.&quot; He adds, though, that it'sthe researcher's responsibility to get as close to the truthas possible.   There are at least four widely publicized studies ondiapers that explore the issue of whether disposables aredisproportionately responsible for burdening the nation'slandfills and fouling its environment. Of concern arevariables such as how long it takes for disposables todecompose and, if cloth diapers are used, how soap suds fromwashings pollute rivers. Two studies were sponsored by thecloth-diaper industry and conclude that cloth diapers arefriendlier to the world; two others, sponsored by thepaper-diaper industry, conclude the opposite. In studies likethese, assumptions and statistics are crunched by computerbut entered by humans: Put in one slightly differentassumption -- that babies use 65 instead of 85 cloth diapersa week -- and the picture changes.   Last year, Procter andamp; Gamble Co. released a study showingthat &quot;holistically,&quot; cloth diapers take a greater toll onhealth, the economy and the environment than disposables. Thereport was commissioned in response to Mr. Lehrburger'sreport finding cloth diapers more environmentally friendly.&quot;We found it not in our best interest to be directly criticalof the {Lehrburger} report but to say, let's get some peoplewith a track record in this kind of analysis to take a look,&quot;says Scott Stewart, a spokesman for Pandamp;G.   Pandamp;G's study was used by lobbyists in the California statesenate to argue against a bill intended to encourage the useof cloth diapers, written by Sen. Lucy Killea. &quot;The studiesaren't so much given weight in the actual decision making asthey're used to provide political cover for decisions madefor other reasons,&quot; says Craig Reynolds, Sen. Killea's chiefof staff. &quot;No one wants to say, `I opposed this thing becauseI don't want to offend the disposable-diaper industry.' Theysay, `Yes, the environment is important, and I have thisstudy showing that there are some concerns that cloth diaperscould actually increase pollution.'&quot;   But dueling studies can also paralyze decision making.&quot;It's gotten to the point where someone will produce a studythat statistically demonstrates X or Y, and then the otherside will rush out and get an expert to do a study for them,&quot;says Ray Sentes, a professor at the University of Regina inSaskatchewan, Canada, and a critic of many asbestos studiesthat minimize the effects the material has on health. &quot;For 10years we flash studies at each other. If the practicaloutcome of a scientific study ends up being a delay of anyactivity, shouldn't a scientist say, `You don't need thisstudy'?&quot;   One of the fastest-growing areas of research today isso-called advocacy studies. These studies are commissioned bycompanies or industries for public-relations purposes.Simplesse, maker of Simple Pleasures frozen dessert, did astudy last summer showing, among other things, that 44% ofpeople who eat a lot of ice cream are likely to take a tubbath. &quot;It was interesting to a lot of people,&quot; says RussKlettke, a spokesman for Simplesse, part of Monsanto Co. &quot;Wetimed the study for when the media wants to write about icecream, and we have gotten a number of clips back.&quot;   Kiwi Brands, a shoe-polish company, commissioned a studyearlier this year on the correlation between ambition andshiny shoes. The study found that 97% of self-described&quot;ambitious&quot; young men believe polished shoes are important.   &quot;Obviously, these studies are done with the idea ofproducing interesting information that will get a lot of playon radio and TV,&quot; says John Shiffert, vice president ofShaeffer andamp; Associates, a public relations firm working forKiwi. Surveys by Kiwi, a unit of Sara Lee Corp., have foundtheir way onto the Associated Press wire and into papersaround the country.   Public opinion polling began in the 1930s and '40s; marketresearch became popular with the postwar explosion ofconsumer demand. But survey techniques were primitive then.Because early election polls were done face-to-face with asmany as 4,000 people, and the results sent by mail andtabulated by hand, the last polls might be done two to threeweeks before an election -- with plenty of time left foropinion to shift. Partly because of that, the 1948presidential election was a polling debacle, with all themajor pollsters predicting Thomas Dewey, not Harry Truman,would win.   That wasn't as bad as Literary Digest magazine's 1936presidential poll, however. It is widely considered the mostinaccurate polling result in history. The poll, whichdeclared Republican Alf Landon a big winner, sampled onlypeople who had telephones or cars or were subscribers -- alllikely to be affluent.   Today, surveys can be done with astonishing swiftness.With Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing, called CATI,interviewers sitting in booths can see questions flash onto acomputer screen. As each respondent's answer is recorded, thenext question automatically flashes on the screen. &quot;Theanswers are going real-time into the computer, which istabulating them while the interview is still going on,&quot; saysJack Honomichl, who publishes Inside Research, an industrynewsletter. &quot;You could, right now, develop a question, call aresearch company, do 1,000 interviews tonight and have thedata on your desk tomorrow.   &quot;But the research process, if done right, is much moredifficult than people realize,&quot; adds Mr. Honomichl. &quot;It takestime and money. When deadlines and budgets are short, a lotof those niceties go down the tubes.&quot;   The &quot;niceties&quot; include things such as careful wording ofquestions. But even meticulously crafted surveys can getskewed, particularly when they bump up against humanshortcomings, like pride and guilt. &quot;Eighty percent ofAmericans are environmentalists,&quot; says Mr. Miller of ResearchAlert, citing survey results. &quot;Hogwash. Eighty percent ofAmericans are embarrassed to tell a stranger that they're notfor the environment.&quot; The same question can also beinterpreted differently by different people. &quot;Try asking an18-year-old how many children there are in his household,&quot;says Mark Berenson, professor of statistics at New York'sBaruch College.   With the help of sophisticated statistical techniques,finding 1,000 Americans who can speak for 240 million othershas become more reliable. Yet even here there are pitfalls.Poor people and minorities are notoriously underrepresentedin telephone surveys, and in surveys taken in shopping mallsthey are rarely interviewed. What's more, research companiessay that it's getting more difficult to find people willingto spend 15 minutes answering questions. How representativeis a sample of people who will agree to that kind of invasionof privacy, they wonder.   So, in many cases, research simply relies onunrepresentative samples:   -- &quot;There's good news for the 65 million Americanscurrently on a diet,&quot; trumpeted a news release for adiet-products company. Its study showed that people who loseweight can keep it off. The sample: 20 graduates of thecompany's program who endorse it in commercials.   -- The Chrysler study showing its cars were preferred toToyota's included just 100 people in each of two tests. Butmore important, none of the people surveyed owned a foreigncar, so they may well have been predisposed to U.S.-madevehicles. Chrysler says its intent was to survey people whomight buy a foreign car.   -- A study sponsored by American Express Co. and theFrench government tourist office found that old stereotypesabout French unfriendliness weren't true. The respondents:&quot;More than 1,000 Americans who have visited France more thanonce for pleasure over the past two years&quot; -- that is, aselect group of people who are already inclined to travel inFrance. American Express says that it didn't try to hide themakeup of the sample group and that most travelers to Franceare repeat travelers anyway.   The text of questions such as these, along with themethodology used in the studies, should be readily availableto anyone who wants it. But in practice, technical indexesfrequently are not offered, often on the ground that thematerial is proprietary. A survey done for a couponredemption company, Carolina Manufacturer's Service, foundthat a &quot;broad cross-section of Americans find coupons to betrue incentives for purchasing products.&quot; The technical indexwas available only for a price: $2,000.   Still, even with a convincing methodology, studiesconducted by companies or industry groups often have a verypredictable outcome. In September, an asbestos study paid forpartly by the government and partly by three asbestos-relatedindustries -- real estate, insurance and asbestosmanufacturers -- found that breathing in buildings withundisturbed asbestos was the same as breathing outside, aconclusion disputed by asbestos activists. Did that surpriseMr. Sentes of the University of Regina? &quot;I would have had tobe sitting down if they'd come up with any other results,&quot; hesays. &quot;Those guns have been hired for a long time.&quot;   William Nicholson, a professor of community medicine atMt. Sinai School of Medicine, who was one of two dissenterson the asbestos study panel, says many members of the panel&quot;have been widely known for the views they hold that arethose of the industry.&quot; Rashid Shaikh, of Health EffectsInstitute/Asbestos Research, the Cambridge, Mass., group thatorganized the study, says, &quot;We brought together people weknew had varying viewpoints.&quot;   The asbestos study was reported in several majorpublications, including this one. Most of the articlesdescribed the panel of scientists as &quot;independent,&quot; whilenoting that the study was partly financed by asbestos-relatedindustries.   In the end, it's the news media that disseminate thefindings of studies -- both good ones and bad. &quot;Only ifjournalists aren't doing their jobs does the public have aproblem,&quot; says Karen Anderson, public information manager forBattelle Human Affairs Research Centers. &quot;It's thejournalist's problem to look at the report or interview theresearcher.&quot;   But if the journalist doesn't, the consumer of news isoften left in a confusing stew of statistics. Many newspapersinclude explanations of methodology with their polls, butthey can be difficult to understand. &quot;The average consumerdoesn't know what two standard deviations are,&quot; says MarkClements, head of a New York research firm. Yet, theynonetheless seize on surveys and studies of all types.   &quot;We're in a society that deifies science,&quot; says Mr. Sentesof the University of Regina. &quot;The expert has spoken -- end ofdiscussion. If I'm not a scientist, I have to trust them.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>