<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900426-0011</DOCNO><DOCID>900426-0011.</DOCID><HL>   America's Own Fixed-Exchange Model   ----   By Warren E. Weber</HL><DATE>04/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)BANKS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   When the major industrialized countries ended the fixedexchange-rate system 16 years ago, they saw their decision asa triumph for the free market: No longer would exchange ratesbe set by governments and be subject to the vagaries ofpolitical developments. No longer could speculators get richby anticipating, or even precipitating, exchange-rateadjustments. No longer could fiscally irresponsible economiesexport their inflation.   But the costs of floating exchange rates have been fargreater than expected. Trade imbalances have generallywidened since 1974. The advantage of independent monetarypolicy to countries has been small; there is a growingconsensus that stable and predictable policy rules are best.For example, the G-7, the group of the West's and Asia'sseven most industrialized countries, has met several timesover the past five years to coordinate policy. Exchange-ratevolatility has been large and costly to international trade.It is time to consider the return to a fixed-exchange ratesystem. There is even a model for such a system -- themonetary coordination of the various districts of the FederalReserve in the U.S. today.</LP><TEXT>   Those who argue that fixed exchange rates cannot workassume, at least implicitly, that currency is essentially nodifferent from other goods. Since exchange rates are therelative prices of currencies and since standard price theorydemonstrates that it is impossible to fix the relative pricesof goods in the long run, skeptics argue that a fixedexchange rate system is not feasible.   But the conventional argument does not apply to exchangerates because today's currencies are fiat currencies: Theyare intrinsically worthless pieces of paper that arevirtually costless to produce. This means that a governmentcan always avoid depleting the buffer stock of its currencysimply by printing more. Therefore, fixing exchange rates isfeasible, and any rate will work. That fixed exchange ratesare theoretically feasible, however, does not mean they arepolitically acceptable. Under fixed rates, the country withthe fastest growing money supply gets the most seigniorage(revenue) from money creation. More important, some of thisseigniorage is collected from residents of other countriesbecause, with fixed exchange rates, the inflation caused byone country's money growth is experienced by all countries.This outcome is bound to be politically unacceptable to othercountries. A country can prevent another from exportinginflation by letting its own exchange rate appreciate. As aresult, countries will not adhere to fixed rates unless theyare willing to coordinate their monetary policies.   The policy coordination necessary for fixed exchangerates, however, is not that all countries agree to have theirmoney supplies grow at roughly the same rate. Even if thesemoney growth rates were the same and other economicfundamentals unchanged, recent research shows that exchangerates can fluctuate simply because people think they will.   The policy coordination required to fix exchange rates hastwo components:   -- Each country must agree to swap its currency foranother's at the fixed rate in any amount and at any time.   -- Countries must agree on the total growth of money andhow the resulting seigniorage will be distributed among them.   Central banks would have no problem meeting the firstcomponent. If a central bank temporarily ran out of a foreigncurrency, it could always swap its own currency for the otherwith the appropriate foreign central bank. This arrangementprevents exchange rates from fluctuating because ofspeculation, since it guarantees that any amount of acurrency demanded will always be supplied at the fixed price.And if countries meet the second component, they will have noincentive to overissue their moneys.   The Bretton Woods system is usually cited as evidence ofthe fragility of fixed exchange-rate systems. But BrettonWoods is not really a test of whether a fixed exchange-ratesystem will work. A fixed-rate system requires that policycoordination include an agreement among countries about theamount of seigniorage and its distribution. This component ofpolicy coordination was missing from the Bretton Woodssystem, which attempted to fix exchange rates while allowingeach country some control of its own seigniorage.   A proper test of whether fixed exchange rates are feasibleneeds evidence from a system with the two required componentsof policy coordination in place. Such a system exists, and itis running smoothly -- the monetary system of the U.S.   To many, the notion that the U.S. has a fixedexchange-rate system may come as a surprise. The notes issuedby the Federal Reserve System look like and are used as asingle currency. Each note is printed in black and green ink,each has &quot;The United States of America&quot; inscribed on frontand back, and each says it is a &quot;Federal Reserve Note&quot; and&quot;legal tender for all debts, public and private.&quot;Furthermore, the notes exchange at par: a $20 bill swapsone-for-one with any other $20 bill, one-for-two with any $10bills, and so forth.   In what sense, then, does the U.S. have something otherthan a single currency? A closer look reveals that, in fact,each of the 12 district banks in the Federal Reserve Systemissues its own notes. Each note is identified by its districtbank in four ways: First, on the front left is a circle withthe district bank's name written around the inside. Second,in the middle of that circle is a bold, black letterrepresenting the Federal Reserve district of origin -- A forthe first district, B for the second and so forth. Third, theletter symbol is the first character of the serial number.Fourth, the district's number is printed on the front fourtimes.   Granted, these differences among Federal Reserve notes aremuch less distinct than those between, say, U.S. and Italiancurrencies. Nevertheless, in a physical sense, U.S. currencyis not strictly uniform. The importance of these physicaldifferences is that they represent the possibility that theU.S. could choose to have a floating exchange rate systemamong the currencies of the 12 Federal Reserve districts.Instead, the U.S. has chosen a system of fixed exchangerates.   That the U.S. has had no trouble maintaining its fixedexchange rate system demonstrates that such a system isfeasible. Despite changes in economic fundamentals amongFederal Reserve districts, the U.S. has not been forced toadjust the exchange rates between district currencies. Thisis not what the skeptics of fixed rates claim would happen.What if the Ninth District economy were declining while theother district economies were expanding? Or what if the NinthDistrict were running a trade deficit with the rest of thecountry? Then, skeptics claim, there should be some downwardpressure on Ninth District currency. This, of course hasnever happened, nor is it likely.   The reason the U.S. system of fixed exchange rates worksis that it has the two required components of monetary policycoordination: First, the district Federal Reserve banks havean agreement to swap their currencies for any otherdistrict's at the fixed rate in any amount and at any time.Because of this agreement, it's unlikely that many peoplehave ever lost sleep over the exchange value of theirdistrict's notes relative to another's.   Second, district Fed banks also have an agreement on howto set the rate of money growth and how to distribute theresulting seigniorage. Each district bank participates in thepolicy process (at Federal Open Market Committee meetings),and a unified policy action is carried out for all 12districts. No individual district bank can pursue its ownmonetary policy. Furthermore, all seigniorage is pooled anddisbursed by the U.S. Treasury. By design, no district bankcan gain by issuing more of its notes than another. Even ifall notes were issued by, say, the Ninth District, therevenue would still be pooled and disbursed by the Treasury.   This example of the U.S. monetary system shows that whenthe two required components of policy coordination are met, afixed exchange rate system is feasible.   ---   Mr. Weber is manager of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve'smonetary studies section. This is based on a reportco-authored with Arthur J. Rolnick, director of research atthe Minneapolis Fed.</TEXT></DOC>