<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910325-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>910325-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Profit Eludes Bull Under France's Wing   ---   Aid Is Mixed Blessing as   Stiff Foreign Competition Looms   ----   By E.S. Browning   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION</SO><CO>   F.GRB EUROP TCSFY</CO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)AEROSPACE (ARO)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><LP>   PARIS -- Francis Lorentz says that when he saw hiscompany's financial numbers last June, he was &quot;shocked.&quot; TheCie. des Machines Bull chairman discovered that the computermaker, one of Europe's largest, wasn't just going to miss itstarget of breaking even in 1990; it was going to post recordlosses.   Mr. Lorentz realized he had to tell his largest investor,main financier and strategic adviser: The French government.</LP><TEXT>   Bull has been receiving government aid since at least1963, when it nearly collapsed in the face of competitionfrom International Business Machines Corp. Since 1983 alone,the government has pumped in seven billion French francs($1.25 billion) of direct capital, along with hundreds ofmillions of francs for research. It is expected to inject afurther two billion francs this year alone.   Despite such help, Bull hasn't prospered. Its 1990 losses,to be announced Wednesday, could hit a staggering sevenbillion francs, depending on how much it sets aside tofinance massive job cuts, many of them at U.S. factories.   Indeed, Bull's problems affect the U.S. directly. Bullacquired control of Honeywell Inc.'s computer business in1987 and of Zenith Electronics Corp.'s computer business in1989, making Bull a large U.S. computer maker as well.Integrating those ailing businesses is one of Bull's biggestheadaches.   Bull says its current turnaround campaign eventually willmake it one of the world's most successful computercompanies. But it doesn't project significant profits againbefore 1993.   That date will mark three decades of government efforts tosave Bull. And with Europe facing stiff competition fromJapan in sectors from electronics to automobiles, the Bullexperience illustrates the risks Europeans take if they tryto respond to that competition with their own activeindustrial policies.   The French point out that they have had some successeswith their industrial policy, notably the Ariane missile andthe Airbus jetliner. But many aid programs have been troubled-- especially in open, competitive markets, such ascomputers, semiconductors, cars, machine tools and homeelectronics.   Officials in the government and at Bull say they realizenow that some of the billions in past subsidies weren't justwasted but actually hurt Bull, in part by reducing thepressure to be competitive. But the government insists thatit must continue pumping funds not only into Bull but alsointo Thomson S.A.'s unprofitable investments in televisionand semiconductors, in the hope of making France a globaltechnology leader.   Bull today is struggling in the same economic downturnhurting all computer companies, but it is struggling morethan most because of internal weaknesses. That has provokedcontinued government efforts to intervene. When the depth ofBull's 1990 losses became known, some officials privatelyurged that Mr. Lorentz be replaced as chairman and Bull bemerged with Thomson or the state telephone company.Negotiations continue on cooperative links with the telephonecompany, which is being forced to help fund Bull's capitalboost. But officials appear to have ruled out an outrightmerger with another group.   The current plan involves closing seven of Bull's 13factories, cutting production costs 50%, offering newservices and, most important, developing a new basicoperating system for its sometimes poorly coordinatedcomputer lines.   Some analysts are cautiously optimistic now about Bull'ssurvival. &quot;I think Bull has a better chance on a 1995 horizonthan some other companies that haven't recognized the need tochange,&quot; says Daniel Lebourhis, analyst at Dataquest's Parisoffice. But he warns that Bull's success is far fromguaranteed, adding that for years &quot;the French government didthings about as badly as was possible.&quot;   By 1983, Bull was virtually bankrupt and was taken overdirectly by the state. In the mid-1980s, as free-marketprinciples swept France, the government ordered Bull tobecome lean and competitive.   Now, Bull managers have been told they have just two yearsto turn the sluggish company into a fighting machine.Christian Requillart, a former Bull sales supervisor, isdetermined to make Bull a leader in a profitable and highlycompetitive area where it has been practically absent up tonow: service. He has built a new department aimed atdesigning computer systems and making them run right. Thatservice often was offered free, as part of Bull's saleseffort, but now it is charging for it. The change has beenhard.   &quot;Our people were used to giving good service and nothaving it paid for by the customer,&quot; Mr. Requillart says. &quot;Wehad to teach some people what profit centers are, what costis, what motivation is.&quot;   Told to build former sales technicians into a 1,500-manconsulting team in just two months, Mr. Requillart got tough.Last summer, he ordered his people to start filling in timesheets, accounting for every hour. At first, 40% ignored theorder. &quot;So I said that if people didn't report, they would beasked to leave the company,&quot; he recalls. Now, 97% are fillingin time sheets. Bull says revenue in this area quadrupledlast year from meager 1989 levels.   Bull also wants to improve manufacturing processes, andthat is proving even harder. It faces a triple burden: It isclosing half its plants world-wide, while trying to modernizethe rest and absorb Honeywell and Zenith units. Among otherthings, the flux has put Bull weeks behind in somepersonal-computer deliveries.   And despite government cash injections, its managersconsider Bull chronically undercapitalized. One of thedrawbacks of government ownership is that Bull can't issueshares to raise funds; it relies mainly on the government anddebt. &quot;At no point has Bull had the capital means it needs,&quot;gripes one Bull insider. &quot;It has had to finance a largeamount of its U.S. acquisitions through loans.&quot;   Can a company like this really face up to U.S. andJapanese powerhouses? French officials insist they have nochoice but to keep backing Bull. In fact, senior Frenchofficials have become so involved in helping Bull that theynow are conversant in the U.S. laptop-computer market and theproblems of digesting Zenith Data Systems and Honeywell. Theyalso insist that France's aid to Bull is less substantialthan Japanese and U.S. aid to their computer companies --notably through U.S. defense spending.   The government says that if it lets Bull be sold to aforeigner, it would be a big step toward France'stechnological colonization. Already, they note, Francedepends heavily on foreigners for computer printers andsemiconductors. &quot;If we didn't have a large-scale producerlike Bull, we would just end up with a few subcontractorsdependent on foreign orders,&quot; warns a senior official whoasks not to be named.   But over the years, the state's heavy hand has pushed Bulltoward a series of costly errors -- costly to taxpayers andalso to Bull. Perhaps the worst was something called the PlanCalcul, which together with successor plans was aimed atforcing French government agencies to buy equipment from Bulland predecessor companies. Officially, those programs endedaround 1982, but the effects linger.   Bull managers and government officials agree that the PlanCalcul, which cost the state billions of francs, was adisaster. It helped make Bull more sluggish and lessmarket-oriented. And it helped create an anti-Bull bias amongcustomers, who assumed that if Bull needed sales coercion,its equipment must be inferior.   Now, Bull is asking the French government for new capitaland for billions of francs more to help develop a newgeneration of computers that would work easily with oneanother and with those of other makers. Beleagueredgovernment officials, facing tight budget restraints, saythey hope that Bull's new rationalization campaign --including 5,000 job cuts in just over a year -- will make itlastingly profitable. They won't say what they will do ifBull doesn't break even again by 1992.</TEXT></DOC>