<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900808-0011</DOCNO><DOCID>900808-0011.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   National Asbestos Claims Facility Proposed   ----   By Wade Lambert and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/08/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   LABOR U.JSG GDV MVL</CO><IN>BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)HOME CONSTRUCTION (HOM)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   A federal judge in Cleveland issued a court orderproposing that the Manville personal-injury trust be turnedinto a national facility for settling all asbestos cases. Thefacility would use the combined resources of the Manvilletrust, other asbestos defendants and their insurers.   The recommendation by U.S. District Judge Thomas D.Lambros would create a sweeping claims-resolution facilitysupervised by federal and state judges. Judge Lambros saidthe arrangement would be less costly and more efficient thanother proposals to clear court dockets of their backlog ofasbestos cases.</LP><TEXT>   Judge Lambros, who has thousands of asbestos cases pendingbefore him, said the trust should be merged with the Centerfor Claims Resolution in Princeton, N.J., through whichseveral former asbestos makers now resolve some cases.   Judge Lambros said the facility could begin operatingwithin 90 days, initially with the voluntary participation ofasbestos claimants. Several federal judges are meeting Fridayin Washington to discuss possible solutions to the backlog ofasbestos cases, and Judge Lambros said his proposal could beused to implement whatever long-term proposal the judges comeup with.   Although Judge Lambros's plan could get the ball rollingon a national settlement of the asbestos litigation, it putshim at odds with U.S. Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn,N.Y., who has authority over the Manville trust.   Judge Weinstein is pressuring the trust to come up with aplan to restructure its financing by Sept. 6. Judge Lambrosin his order, however, said the trust should be left aloneuntil Nov. 1 &quot;to permit the joint efforts {of the judges whoare meeting Friday} to achieve meaningful results inpromulgating and implementing national solutions.&quot; JudgeLambros and Judge Weinstein are expected to be two of themain players in Friday's meeting.   A spokeswoman for the Manville trust declined to comment.The trust, which is independent of Manville Corp., was thecornerstone of the company's bankruptcy-court reorganizationplan in 1986. The trust, which owns 80% of Manville's stock,was set up to pay asbestos personal-injury claims against theformer asbestos maker. Asbestos, once widely used asinsulation, causes cancer and respiratory illnesses.   Judge Lambros also asked in his order that no decision bemade until Nov. 1 on whether to form a national class actionfor the asbestos claims. Such proposals are pending beforeJudge Lambros, Judge Weinstein and another federal judge inTexas. Judge Lambros has set a hearing for Nov. 1 on theclass-action proposal in his court in Cleveland.   Judge Lambros's order regarding the Manville trust was oneof several proposals discussed yesterday by asbestosplaintiffs' attorneys at a meeting in Washington. Theattorneys' own recommendations on how to handle a nationwideresolution of the cases are expected to be presented to thejudges Friday.   Louis Robles, an attorney from Miami who attended themeeting, said about half a dozen alternatives were proposedby the lawyers. Mr. Robles said Judge Lambros's latestsuggestion &quot;has some serious drawbacks because the {Centerfor Claims Resolution} hasn't settled cases as quickly as wehoped they would.&quot;   Officials and attorneys for the center couldn't be reachedfor comment.   ---   EMPLOYERS HAVE RIGHT to reduce retiree benefits, appealscourt rules.   A federal court ruling allows companies to reduce healthbenefits for retired employees under the federal statuteregulating employee benefits known as the Employee RetirementIncome Security Act of 1974, or ERISA.   The Eleventh U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlantafound that Container Corp. of America, a St. Louismanufacturer of packaging products, hadn't violated ERISAwhen it reduced retiree health insurance benefits andsubstantially increased the amount of money employees mustcontribute to the plan.   &quot;Employers are beginning to take a significant look atcontinuing to foot the bill for retiree health care,&quot; saysColumbus R. Gangemi of the Chicago firm Winston andamp; Strawn, whorepresented the company. &quot;It has become a massive obligationthat employers are no longer in a position to bear.&quot;   The class action suit, filed by retired plant managerRobert N. Alday on behalf of about 1,000 employees, allegedthat Container Corp. violated ERISA because it never informedemployees that the company might change the amount employeesmust contribute to the plan. The defendants also includeJefferson Smurfit Corp., Container's parent company, andSmurfit Pension and Insurance Co., the pension planconsultant. Both are based in St. Louis.   Mr. Alday said that letters sent to retired employeesabout the plan's costs and the company's annual summary ofbenefits led employees to believe that the premiums would notincrease. A similar suit filed by retired union employees ofContainer Corp. is pending.   The appeals panel ruled that the defendants had reservedthe right to change health benefits in a formal writtendocument required under ERISA. Other, more informal documentsallegedly contradicting that right must be ignored, the panelwrote.   The lawyer for the plaintiffs, John MacLennan of theJacksonville, Fla., firm Kattman, Eshelman andamp; MacLennan, saidhe plans to seek a rehearing or review by the U.S. SupremeCourt. But, he adds, Congress ultimately will have to addressthe issue.   &quot;Many of the plaintiffs spent 20, 30, 40 years with thecompany,&quot; says Mr. MacLennan. &quot;Now when they're retired,their entire pension check is being eaten up by thesepremiums.&quot;   ---   GENERAL DEVELOPMENT Corp.'s plea negotiations break down.   The Miami home developer faces a Jan. 7 trial date onconspiracy and fraud charges. The company said it couldn'treach an agreement with the U.S. Attorney overseeing itsprosecution with respect to the amount and terms ofrestitution to be paid to thousands of buyers who allegedlyoverpaid General Development for homes based on inflatedproperty appraisals.   The parties had been trying to reach a revised accordbefore attending a status conference yesterday with U.S.District Judge Lenore Nesbitt. As reported, the judgerejected an earlier plea agreement reached between thecompany and prosecutors, saying it didn't give her adequateflexibility to set a sentence in light of the severity of thecharges.   General Development said it was willing to pay out $100million to buyers upon approval of its plan by the court -- amuch faster pace for restitution than was envisioned underthe earlier pact, which gave the company 25 years to make thepayments.   The company said that prosecutors have insisted it pleadguilty to defrauding all customers who bought homes between1983 and 1989, something it isn't willing to do, and to agreeto a restitution plan that it believes would leave it unableto treat other creditors fairly. General Development filedfor reorganization under Chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcycode last spring.   Diane Cossin, a spokeswoman for the U.S. Attorney, saidthe prosecution has &quot;a great many problems with therestitution plan&quot; proposed by the company.   Thus far the only individuals charged in the case areDavid F. Brown, the former chairman of the company, andRobert F. Ehrling, its former president. But at a hearingyesterday, the prosecution indicated it may seek indictmentsagainst up to seven other former employees of GeneralDevelopment.   ---   ARKANSAS MUST STOP DRILLING in Crater of Diamonds StatePark.   U.S. District Court Judge Susan Webber Wright in LittleRock, Ark., permanently enjoined the state from drilling testholes at the park, which is the only place in the U.S. wheretourists can dig for diamonds. The state had drilled fourtest holes, using $350,000 provided by four private miningcompanies interested in commercially mining the diamonds atthe park.   The state had argued that it wanted to drill up to 30holes in the diamond-bearing &quot;pipe&quot; at the park so that itcould use the information in a park educational program.However, the evidence presented to the court clearlyindicated that the state &quot;had commercial mining as its actualgoal,&quot; the judge ruled.   The judge ruled the park's decision to permit drilling&quot;was arbitrary, capricious and not supported by substantialevidence.&quot; She also ruled that converting the park frompublic use to private use by allowing commercial mining wouldviolate the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965.Under the act, conversion of public lands to private uses isprohibited if the act's funds are used to buy or improve thepublic lands. Arkansas received $700,000 from the fund in1976 to improve the park.   The state parks commission will meet some time in the nexttwo weeks to decide whether to appeal. The mining companiesinvolved declined to comment or didn't return phone calls.   The decision is only the third federal court decision totest the Land and Water Conservation Fund provisions and maybe the first case in Arkansas that applies the public trustdoctrine to state lands, said Jim Stanley, attorney for theSierra Club, which was one of the plaintiffs in the case.   &quot;We can use this decision to help protect other parks fromcommercialization and encroachment by private interests,&quot; hesaid.   ---   JUDGE THROWS OUT ruling against the FDIC.   U.S. District Judge Thomas E. Scott in Miami vacated hisdefault judgment against the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.A default judgment is a ruling in one party's favor when itsopponent fails to meet a requirement of the court. JudgeScott had ruled that the federal agency had missed a deadlinefor responding to a lender liability suit. The FDIC arguedthat as a federal agency it has 60 days to respond instead ofthe 20-day period allotted other litigants.   The plaintiff, Overseas Investment Recovery Corp., claimsthat the FDIC, after taking over Vernon Savings andamp; LoanAssociation in Dallas in 1986, breached its obligations toOverseas as a borrower and reneged on agreements to settlelitigation on several occasions.   Brenda Collier, an attorney for the FDIC, said the agencyis also seeking court costs and sanctions against theOverseas' lawyer for seeking the default.   James F. Gilbride, Overseas' attorney, said, &quot;We'reconfident the court will not impose sanctions.&quot;   ---   U.S. SUPREME COURT Justice John Paul Stevens told lawyersattending the American Bar Association annual convention inChicago that nominees for the High Court should not be askedby Congress to expound on their views on controversialsubjects because their answers won't necessarily indicate howthey will vote in particular cases. &quot;There are some importantvalues at stake in maintaining the independence of thenominee as he or she goes through the confirmation process,&quot;he said. There has been much debate in Congress about whetherJudge David Souter, who is being considered for the HighCourt, should be asked about his views on abortion.   ---   Martha Brannigan and Marj Charlier contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>