<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910110-0061</DOCNO><DOCID>910110-0061.</DOCID><HL>   Countdown to War:   Hope for Peace in Gulf   Falters as Baker, Aziz   Get Nowhere in Talks   ---   Long Session Proves Fruitless;   U.S. Pulls Out Diplomats,   Acts to Mobilize Industry   ---   Combat Still Isn't Inevitable   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Robert S. Greenberger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   The U.S. and Iraq moved closer to war yesterday.   With a hopeful world watching, a somber Secretary of StateJames Baker emerged from lengthy discussions in Geneva withTariq Aziz, the Iraqi foreign minister, and delivered agloomy report. &quot;In over six hours,&quot; he tensely told a pressconference, &quot;I heard nothing that suggested to me any Iraqiflexibility whatsoever in complying with the United NationsSecurity Council resolutions.&quot; The U.N. has called on Iraq topull out of Kuwait by next Tuesday.</LP><TEXT>   President Bush was similarly downbeat. &quot;I am discouraged,&quot;he said at the White House. He said he hasn't given up ondiplomatic efforts, which now will be pursued by the U.N. andpossibly France. But he too charged that Iraq has&quot;demonstrated no flexibility whatsoever.&quot;   The statements abruptly dashed the high hopes for peacethat swept the world as the meeting got under way and thenwore on hour after hour. The expectations drove the Dow JonesIndustrial Average up more than 40 points, and bond pricessimilarly soared. But when Mr. Baker announced that the twosides were as divided as ever, the euphoria evaporated andthe bond and stock markets plunged. In one six-minute period,stocks dropped 54 points; they ended the day down 39.11.   Yet, though the talks between the U.S. and Iraq werestillborn, yesterday's events didn't eliminate all prospectsfor peace. At least two possible scenarios that could preventhostilities remain:   Iraq might have in mind an artful last-minute maneuversuch as a partial withdrawal from Kuwait, keeping only an oilfield and two islands and making it politically harder forthe U.S. to justify an attack. This is something SaddamHussein clearly wouldn't want to announce in Geneva, as if hewere crumbling before U.S. pressure. If he plans such a move,he might want to unveil it in an Arab setting, and thus saveface. Notably, while Mr. Aziz avoided any reference to Kuwaitin his remarks after yesterday's meeting, he did obliquelyindicate Iraq would be willing to address the issue as partof a &quot;regional&quot; effort that also discussed what to do aboutthe conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.   Secondly, the Bush administration yesterday took two newsteps that might, in the end, convince Iraq of U.S. resolve:announcing a legal action allowing it to mobilize Americanindustry for war, and disclosing a plan to extend the duty ofmilitary reservists and possibly to call up more. At the sametime, the administration virtually invited United NationsSecretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to travel toBaghdad for a last-ditch diplomatic effort. Mr. de Cuellarsubsequently announced plans to visit Iraq.   Still, the public posture of Iraq and the U.S. yesterdaydidn't offer much reason for hope.   In fact, there was every indication that Iraq and the U.S.spent six hours talking past each other in their onlydiplomatic discussion since Iraq's Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait.At their press conferences, Mr. Baker and Mr. Aziz droppedone bombshell after another, at one point revealing that Mr.Aziz refused to accept a letter for Saddam Hussein fromPresident Bush because he considered its language too rudefor communication between heads of state.   Mr. Aziz didn't explicitly say Iraq would stay in Kuwait,but he also never pledged to withdraw, even if Iraq's variousdemands were met. Instead, he focused almost entirely on theArab-Israeli dispute. &quot;We had grave, or big, differencesabout the issues we discussed,&quot; Mr. Aziz said. He leveled themost unambiguous threat against Israel so far in the crisis.Asked if Iraq would attack Israel if war breaks out, heresponded bluntly: &quot;Yes, absolutely yes.&quot;   For his part, Mr. Baker said ominously that the U.S. wouldbring home the five American diplomats remaining in Baghdadon Jan. 12.   Hope and expectation earlier in the day was intensified bythe surprise presence of some third-party emissaries inGeneva. Both the foreign minister of Algeria and a seniorPalestine Liberation Organization official reportedly arrivedin the city as the discussions got under way. Thosedevelopments fueled speculation that some deal might be inthe offing -- speculation that Mr. Bush dashed a few hourslater by declaring that there was &quot;no back-channel&quot; diplomacytaking place.   A thin reed of hope that emerged was Mr. Baker'ssuggestion that in the time remaining before the Jan. 15deadline, &quot;perhaps there may be a way the secretary generalof the United Nations could use his good offices&quot; to try toresolve the dispute.   In addition, Mr. Aziz tried to resurrect a plan for him totravel to Washington to meet with President Bush, followed bya trip by Mr. Baker to Baghdad to see Saddam Hussein. But thesecretary of state brushed off the idea as a ploy to pushback the U.N. deadline for an Iraqi withdrawal.   There were other clear signs that a down-to-the-wirediplomatic push is in the offing. Most notably, FrenchPresident Francois Mitterrand pledged that his country &quot;willcontinue discussions all the way up until midnight Tuesday,Jan. 15&quot; with a range of countries involved in the crisis.   France has offered a specific diplomatic formula forresolving the crisis peacefully. It would link a full Iraqiwithdrawal with the convening of one or more internationalconferences on the Middle East to deal with the Palestinianissue that President Hussein insists the world address.France and some of its European partners in the internationalcoalition opposing Iraq hope that the promise of a conferencemight give Mr. Hussein an excuse to claim success and thenwithdraw from Kuwait.   But Mr. Bush doesn't appear interested. &quot;We opposelinkage&quot; between the two issues, he declared. &quot;The coalitionopposes linkage, and the argument with Saddam Hussein isabout Kuwait,&quot; not other issues, he said.   Mr. Mitterrand, who had spoken with President Bush, toldreporters in France yesterday that Mr. Bush agreed that warwouldn't start if an Iraqi withdrawal had begun but wasn'tcompleted by Jan. 15. He also implied that Mr. Bush endorsedthe idea of a U.N.-supervised phased withdrawal beginning onJan. 15.   Yet Mr. Baker also threw some cold water on thephased-withdrawal idea. He said the U.S. wouldn't &quot;walk back&quot;from the Security Council resolutions calling for Iraq towithdraw &quot;immediately and unconditionally&quot; from Kuwait.&quot;There cannot be a negotiation here,&quot; he declared.   Still, Saddam Hussein's efforts to persuade Europe to jointhe idea of an Iraqi withdrawal with a Middle East conferencecould open some fissures in the 28-nation coalition opposingIraq. If the Europeans become convinced that the pledge of anoverall Mideast peace conference could avoid war, they mightbegin to pressure Mr. Bush to ease his stance. At the sametime, Mr. Aziz's emphasis on Israel yesterday may have beendesigned to convince other Arab countries that war againstIraq would, in essence, align those nations with Israelagainst a fellow Arab state.   The stalemate in Geneva had some immediate effects back inthe U.S. It appeared to fortify the administration's alliesin Congress as both houses prepared for a climactic debate onPersian Gulf policy. &quot;If we stand with the president we canavert war,&quot; declared Rep. Toby Roth, a Wisconsin Democrat. AsRepublicans have closed ranks behind him, Mr. Bush has movedto enlist Democratic moderates as well as more dovishliberals sympathetic to Israel.   An administration-backed resolution on the Gulf crisis,which comes before the House Rules Committee this afternoon,would authorize the use of force once the president haddetermined that peaceful, diplomatic alternatives wereexhausted. These determinations would be conveyed to theleadership in Congress before troops were committed tocombat, but the structure gives Mr. Bush broad latitude topursue his policy. Congressional officials said last nightthat the proposed resolution would be in the form of ajoint-resolution of both houses, which the president wouldhave to sign, and that it also would in essence activate theWar Powers Act, which limits a president's freedom to keepforces abroad without additional congressional approval.   Even though expectations were rising in the days leadingup to the Geneva talks, yesterday wasn't the day to expect acompromise to emerge. Saddam Hussein may want to wait untilthe Jan. 15 deadline before taking action of any sort,particularly if he still has doubts about America's will togo to war.   In fact, former defense secretary Harold Brown suggeststhat the Iraqi leader may want to wait until just after thedeadline passes to move. &quot;If I were him I would want todesperately put off any concessions until after Jan. 15 so hecan say, `I defied the Americans, then they negotiated,'&quot; Mr.Brown says.   Still, the Bush administration made clear that itcontinues to prepare for war. Defense Secretary Dick Cheneyannounced that the Pentagon will seek authority to extend theactive service of Army reservists already called to duty from180 days to as long as two years. The active service of someof those reservists otherwise would expire next month.   The provision of law under which the service extensionwould be made also would give the Pentagon authority to callto active duty up to a million reservists, up from the200,000 it now can call. &quot;We have no intention of calling onemillion reservists, but that's the provision that's availablefor me to be able to extend those people in critical skills,&quot;Mr. Cheney said.   In addition, Mr. Baker warned at his press conference thatSaddam Hussein was stumbling into war, and cataloged what hecalled a series of &quot;tragic miscalculations&quot; by the Iraqi. Hesaid Iraq misjudged the international reaction to itsinvasion of Kuwait and its &quot;barbaric policy&quot; of initiallyholding thousands of foreign hostages. He added that effortsto divide the international community also were missteps.   Mr. Aziz countered defiantly that &quot;we have not mademiscalculations. We are very much aware of the situation.&quot; Hesaid Iraq was prepared for war. &quot;If they decide to attack,Iraq will not be surprised,&quot; he said, warning that Baghdadwould defend itself &quot;in a very bold manner.&quot;   Mr. Aziz insisted that it was Iraq -- and other Arabstates -- that have been slighted by the &quot;double standards&quot;of the West. He complained that the U.N. doesn't try toenforce resolutions against Israel, but &quot;you raise the stick&quot;when it comes to Arabs.   Despite the candor at their news conferences, both Mr.Baker and Mr. Aziz went out of their way to note the politetone of their meeting, as if to stress that these wereserious talks.   &quot;The tone of it was good&quot; for the circumstances, Mr. Bakersaid. &quot;We weren't pounding the table and shouting at eachother.&quot; And Mr. Aziz said the tone of Mr. Baker's languagewas &quot;diplomatic and polite&quot; even though the substance wasfull of threats. But, he added, &quot;I didn't find anything newin what Mr. Baker said.&quot;   The two ministers held three sessions yesterday, separatedby breaks. The meetings, in an unadorned meeting room inGeneva's Intercontinental Hotel, began yesterday morning withmembers of both delegations appearing to be in a somber mood.During pre-meeting picture-taking, Mr. Baker was asked byphotographers to shake hands with Mr. Aziz, who was sittingacross the table; Mr. Baker did so without making eye contactwith his Iraqi counterpart.</TEXT></DOC>