<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910521-0053</DOCNO><DOCID>910521-0053.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   Israel Strikes Oil   ----   By Herbert Stein</HL><DATE>05/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)</NS><RE>ISRAEL (ISR)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   Golda Meir, when prime minister of Israel, used tocomplain that Moses had led the Jews around the wildernessfor 40 years before settling them in the only place in theMiddle East with no oil. She seemed to hint that if she hadbeen in his place she would have done better.   But having oil under the ground did not by itself make thenomads of the Arabian Peninsula rich. That did not happen forabout 3,000 years after Moses. Before that could happen a usefor large quantities of oil had to be discovered in theindustrial world, the Arabian oil had to be found,technologies for raising and refining the oil had to bedeveloped, capital had to be applied, and connections had tobe made with world markets.</LP><TEXT>   Now Israel is acquiring an immensely valuable resource ofits own: the human talent incorporated in the large number ofimmigrants arriving from the Soviet Union. Two hundredthousand came in 1990, and the number may mount to onemillion by the end of 1994. This would be an increase of morethan 25% in the Israeli labor force. And the averageeducational attainment and professional skills of theimmigrants exceed those of the pre-existing Israelipopulation -- what Israelis call the veteran population --and those of the U.S. population. About 40% of the immigrantwork force consists of engineers, architects, scientists andhealth workers, compared with about 6% in the Israeli veteranwork force and in the U.S.   Why is this talent going to Israel rather than, forexample, to the U.S. or Canada? It is not because theimmigrants, being Jews, preferred to go to Israel. They aregoing there because other places will not accept them inlarge numbers. And that is because before this talent can bea valuable resource, it involves serious costs.   Unlike oil, this talent is inseparable from human beings,who have to be fed, clothed, housed and oriented, and whowill compete for jobs and space. They will be a burden beforethey are an asset. Others were unwilling to accept thisburden. The Israelis were willing. This was not a calculatedinvestment decision for the Israelis; it was an unusual moralact. The Israelis decided, long ago, that all Jews were theirbrothers, and that they were their brothers' keepers.   To get through this period of costs and to get to theperiod of efficient employment of this talent is obviouslyvery much in the interest of the immigrants, the veteranIsraelis and also, less obviously, the rest of the world.This new resource, liberated from isolation in the SovietUnion, will provide new opportunities for the investment ofthe world's capital and a new economical source of productthis talent can provide to the world.   What is required is mainly capital from the rest of theworld and a connecting of this talent with the technologiesand markets outside Israel. These outside connections areimportant. Even if the Israelis had plenty of capital theycould not live by consuming the product of all thesephysicists and chemists and engineers and doctors andcomputer experts from the Soviet Union. They must be able toexport the goods and services these people can produce inexchange for raw materials, consumer goods and equipment theyneed from the rest of the world.   In the ideal world of the economics textbook theserequirements for capital and connections would be metautomatically and quickly, attracted by nothing more than thepresence in Israel of this resource. But in the real worldthere are many obstacles, of three main kinds:   -- First, political and security conditions impede theflow of capital to Israel. These include the persistence of astate of war by the Arab countries, the boycott and theintifada. They are serious conditions for many reasons, but Ido not think they are critical for the absorption problem.   -- Second, the fact and perception of Israel's economicpolicy are obstacles to the adequate development of relationswith foreign suppliers of capital and entrepreneurship. Forabout six years Israel has been inching its way towardreforms that would make the economy more efficient and moreattractive to foreign investors and businessmen. Theprescription is well-known, in Israel as well as here --restraint of government spending, reduction of marginal taxrates, deregulation, privatization, liberalization of foreigntrade, and stabilization of the price level.   With the flood of immigrants increasing the urgency ofattracting foreign business, the slow pace of reform hasbecome more and more dangerous. Three moves are especiallyimportant. First, there needs to be a political will andprocedure for reaching a consensus on economic policy andsticking to it. Second, there needs to be a credible,long-term budget policy that provides some assurance againsta repetition of Israel's earlier wild inflation. Third, thereneeds to be sufficient flexibility in the determination ofwages so that the wages of high-tech workers in Israel canadjust to a level at which their employment to produce forworld markets is profitable.   This wage adjustment is the key to the whole absorptionprocess. The necessary adjustment would be difficult and slowenough in any economy. It could be especially difficult in aneconomy like Israel's where there is a national trade unionand many contractual, legal and customary linkages among wagerates in different industries and occupations.   Nothing should be said to relieve the government of Israelof its responsibility for economic reform. But there is inthe U.S., and possibly also in Western Europe, an exaggeratedview of the sins and errors of Israeli economic policy. Thecosts and risks of doing business in Israel that areassociated with economic policy are real but limited. Thispolicy did not prevent Israel from developing a desert into amodern economy with by far the highest income in the areaaside from the value of oil pumped out of the ground in thePersian Gulf. Its per-capita income is comparable to that ofSpain and not far below Mississippi. In 1985 the governmentwas able to pull itself together and reduce the inflationrate from more than 400% a year to less than 20%, and keep itthere -- a highly unusual accomplishment. By 1990 economicreforms were beginning to pay off in rising productivity.   Casual observers of Israel's economic policy tend tocategorize it as &quot;socialist&quot; and therefore impossible andincorrigible. But Israel's problems do not have anideological base. They are due to external distractions, toan exceptionally splintered political process, to theshort-sightedness common to all governments and, perhaps, toconfidence that a special Invisible Hand looks after Israel.   Israel is having difficulty absorbing the immigrants, andwill have more, in the form of unemployment, before theprocess is completed. These difficulties will in part beevidence of the inadequacy of policy, but much more they willbe a tribute to the size of the task Israel has undertaken.   Countries with &quot;model&quot; economic policies have experiencedcomparable problems with less cause. Even in the halcyon daysof Queen Margaret, the United Kingdom had an unemploymentrate in excess of 10% -- about today's Israeli rate -- forseven years in a row, 1981 through 1987. And businesslikeGermany is having much trouble absorbing the East Germans,who already have houses, consumer durables, some productiveequipment and speak the common language.   -- A third impediment to the integration of the immigranttalent into the world economy is the information gap. Thescientists and technicians just coming out from behind theIron Curtain do not know what the potential world market fortheir services is. The outside world does not know of thecapabilities of these people, or even of their existence.   The government of Israel is trying to deal with thisinformation gap, but it is unlikely to be any more successfulin this than the U.S. Commerce Department is in promotingU.S. exports. This is not the kind of thing that governmentsdo well. Some private efforts are likely to be moreeffective. For example, next month the American-IsraelEconomic Corporation will hold a conference in New York atwhich a number of the Soviet scientists and engineers whohave recently arrived in Israel will present papers on theirresearch and possible industrial applications.Representatives of American high-tech firms have beeninvited. Out of such exchanges, connections that will beprofitable to both sides may be established.   After World War II there was American interest inpromoting imports from Western Europe because the revival ofthe European economy was considered important to us. Programswere discussed for increasing such imports. But in the endthe problem was solved in the most direct way, by theinitiative of private, profitseeking enterprises.   Big American stores, seeking new and attractivemerchandise for their customers, sent agents to Italy, Franceand other countries to scour workshops and studios and bringback what they could. At that time, many of these countriesseemed politically and economically risky. But there was goodmerchandise, and the deals made were profitable for allconcerned.   American businesses, and possibly others, will learn thatthere is money to be made by using the talent arriving inIsrael. The sooner that happens the better it will be for thebusinesses, the Soviet immigrants, Israel and the world.   ---   A former chairman of the president's Council of EconomicAdvisers, Mr. Stein is an American Enterprise Institutefellow and consultant to the State Department on the economicproblems of Israel.</TEXT></DOC>