<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910611-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>910611-0099.</DOCID><HL>   New `Miracle':   Germans Avoid Slump   With Unusual Tactic:   Subsidizing the East   ---   But the Government Money   Can't Flood in Forever,   And Changes Come Hard   ---   The Worries at a Local Pub   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   G.THY</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)STEEL MANUFACTURERS (STL)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)GERMANY (GE)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   BERLIN -- Germany has found a way to beat a recession:Swallow a smaller neighboring country and then subsidize itso it can buy your products.   Better known as unification, this program allowed theeconomy of western Germany to grow at a remarkable 4.2%annual rate in the first quarter, and 2.5% to 3% growth isexpected for the year. Many economists believe that some 140billion German marks in subsidies to the east this year,increasingly aimed at saving jobs and luring investors, willslow the decline there enough that the overall German economywill show continued growth.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Unification has turned out to be some sort of Keynesianprogram to prevent the recession in Germany,&quot; says HeinerFlassbeck, an economist at the German Economic ResearchInstitute here. &quot;We pay the real income of the easternGermans, and they demand the goods of western Germans.&quot; Hebelieves Germany can thereby emerge from the currentrecessionary pressures better than perhaps any other majorindustrial nation -- if the market doesn't overreact tocontinued bad news from eastern Germany.   By year end, much of eastern Germany's industry will havecollapsed, and nearly half of its work force will beunemployed or underemployed. Yesterday Germany posted itsfirst trade deficit in 10 years, a shift that was expected,but not so quickly. Because of the flat global economy andincreased demand from eastern Germany, unified Germany had atrade gap of 1.4 billion marks in April after a 2.8 billionmark surplus in March.   Yet economists believe that Germany has built up suchgreat capital reserves -- the Germans have one of the highestsavings rates in the world -- that the swing into deficitcould, for a while, be healthy for an economy that had builtup too large a store of unused assets.   However, the new German economic miracle is being fueledby government money, and that can't continue indefinitely.Chancellor Helmut Kohl's decision last July to translateeastern German wages at a 1-to-1 rate made the region'sindustry uncompetitive. Eastern Germans now earn 60% of whattheir western neighbors do while producing only 25% as muchper capita. Because investors weren't coming on their own,the government, instead of allowing the free market todestroy industry in the east, undertook a head-spinning planof government transfers and incentives that next year will betwice the size of the entire Marshall Plan.   West Germany was able to avoid such drastic measuresduring its postwar economic miracle partly because of afavorable fixed exchange rate for the mark, a hidden subsidythat made German products competitive in world markets.   The question now: Will the huge injection of money providea temporary economic lift or permanently reinvigorate easternGerman industry? Germans keep changing their minds about theanswer.   &quot;Germans are either jumping off towers or climbing them,&quot;whispers one banker, careful not to be overheard, in a Berlinrestaurant. &quot;My countrymen are collectively manic-depressive.We have been depressed for a while, so now we are manic.&quot; Thesame economists who a few weeks ago were lamentinginsurmountable problems now are enthusiastically predictingthat eastern Germany will hit bottom late this year and startturning around in early 1992.   &quot;The original belief was that East Germany would be like aspring meadow, where overnight the warmth of the marketeconomy would cause a million crocuses to bloom,&quot; saysWolfgang Roth, the economic spokesman for the SocialDemocrats in the Bundestag. &quot;Now we see that we have to builda bridge to the banks of the market economy from those of thecentrally planned economy, and the state must do thebuilding.&quot;   To see the building effort, drive the Autobahn from Berlinto Dresden. Huge construction trucks, whizzing by abandonedguard towers, carry building materials south. Also going thatdirection are trailers packed with new cars, vans filled withfurniture and chauffeur-driven Mercedes-Benzes and BMWsspeeding executives to negotiations. At rest stops,entrepreneurs have set up refreshment stands. Widening theroad, workers tear up the rough asphalt and replace it withflat concrete slabs.   The overwhelming impression is of frenetic change, andeastern Germans, who have known only central planning for 40years, are having trouble adjusting. Road accidents surgedmore than 75% last year as eastern drivers met fast westerncars. &quot;The Ossis {the nickname for East Germans} overestimatethemselves and underestimate the technology,&quot; says EberhardLange, an automobile-club spokesman.   Yet reports of labor unrest, political demonstrations andincreasingly violent neo-fascist youth gangs give a falseimpression of growing chaos. In fact, most eastern Germansare more worried about how to conform than how to revolt. Notonly construction is rebounding; the service sector isbooming, and hospitals find that some of theirpre-unification problems are easing -- though demands forwestern standards are raising new pressures.   At Dresden's Friedrichstadt Hospital, Martin Link, thehead doctor, recalls the pre-unification period when so manyeastern Germans were moving west that he often didn't haveenough doctors and nurses. Also, nurses didn't want to workthe hospital's irregular shifts and long hours. But now, withmany company and state-owned clinics closed down, he hasenough staffers; they are happy to have jobs.   &quot;Without adding to the number of doctors, we haveincreased the performance of the hospital,&quot; Dr. Link says.&quot;Now, in fact, we are wondering if we have too many doctors.Don't forget, part of the problem under socialism was thatpeople just didn't work up to their potential.&quot;   The hospital is also financing new equipment with somefive million German marks from former Communist Partycoffers. Painters and workmen are everywhere, but Dr. Linkoften finds overwhelming the problems of renovating his oldhospital -- much of which was once a baroque palace. Thegrounds have Neptune fountains, and the administrationbuilding a fine reception hall and an office where Napoleonnegotiated with Metternich.   To Dr. Link, all the history means troublesome oldbuildings. &quot;Broken water pipes are almost as regular anoccurrence here as are seriously ill patients,&quot; he says. Andpatients are no longer as willing to put up withinconveniences they once accepted -- overcrowded rooms, onetoilet to a floor, hallways painted once a decade.   Conforming to new societal rules, however, can beemotionally wrenching for people accustomed to a world whereinitiative was discouraged but personal security was ensured.A 19-year-old patient at the hospital blames her abortion onunification. With free child care, subsidies for singlemothers and assured employment, East German women were morelikely to have babies at an early age without worrying aboutmarriage; more than a third of all East German children wereborn out of wedlock -- three times the rate in the west. Now,however, single motherhood carries a new social stigma andfinancial risk.   &quot;Before all the changes, we definitely would have had thechild,&quot; she says, nodding toward her 21-year-old boyfriend,an accountant. &quot;Now, everything is hanging in the air. Can weget or afford an apartment? Will I be able to finish mystudies? Can I find a job?&quot; She looks forlornly at the dozenempty beds in the maternity ward. The hospital reports 75%fewer births among a population uncertain what tomorrow mightbring.   Yet the Bonn government's major concern now is less how toconvert eastern Germany to the free market than how to dealwith unemployment and other problems while people adjust tochange.   &quot;I would have full understanding for the population if itsimply went to the streets and screamed out in frustration,&quot;says Kurt Biedenkopf, the governor of the federal state ofSaxony, in which Dresden lies. He views his constituents as&quot;turtles without a shell&quot; -- suddenly deprived of socialistsafeguards -- and tries exceptionally hard to protect themfrom the speculators, the carpetbaggers and the arroganceassaulting them from the west. &quot;My greatest concern is thatwe are overburdening people by demanding they achieve toomuch in too short a time,&quot; he says.   When the pressures overburden the steelworkers of Freital,a town of 55,000 near Dresden, they retreat to a pub that hasserved their factory since 1870. It is called Die Vier -- No.4 -- named by workers in the days when they went there afterleaving the three steel furnaces. The plant, which mademunitions for the Third Reich, reopened in 1949 to producehigh-quality steel for consumer products and since then hasprovided the livelihood for nearly a third of Freital'speople.   The workers at Die Vier complain about the biggest blow toeastern German industry, the shrinkage of the Soviet market.Less than half the work force is employed (although many ofthe rest get government payments as short-time workers whilethey sit at home). Exports to the Soviet Union totaled some30 billion German marks ($17 billion) last year but wouldhave almost disappeared if not for a nine billion mark creditgranted the financially strapped Soviets this year oncondition it be used to buy eastern German goods.   A subsidiary of the giant steel company Thyssen AG hasagreed to help distribute Freital's goods, but hasn't yetbought a stake in it. It is negotiating with the governmentover who is going to pay the company's debts and the costs ofenvironmental cleanup.   &quot;Whole families -- the whole area -- is endangered,&quot; saysPeter Welzel, a union leader. &quot;You can't blame Thyssen forwaiting until we are cheaper. We are learning that it is thecapitalist thing to do. But the problems are growing veryfast, and solutions coming only very slowly.&quot;   One machine operator says he comes to Die Vier almostevery evening at about 9:30 o'clock, when his shift ends,even though he works only seven or eight days a month. &quot;Itell my wife I am working all the time so I don't upset her,&quot;he says, downing a beer.   Yet the workers talk enthusiastically about the town'soffer to let them buy their apartments for as little as$2,000. And a local bank says the German predilection forsaving -- the west has one of the world's highest savingsrates -- is taking hold in the east as workers put away moneyfor vacations and cars, for which eastern Germans once had towait 10 years or more.   The talk at Die Vier turns jolly as a worker walks in andsays he has just bought his first car, an eight-year-oldTrabant, the tinny, recently discontinued East German auto.The cost: two cases of beer. Not a good car, he concedes, butnot a bad price. He buys a round for the bar.   As the workers drink, Steffan Foerster, the pub owner,frets that his business is falling along with employment atthe plant. He looks over his shoulder at his latest gimmick,a topless waitress.   &quot;Why a topless waitress?&quot; says Mr. Foerster, amused by thequestion. &quot;To boost business, of course.&quot; His landlord, thestate railway company, wonders whether to allow that in oneof its stations but, swamped with other problems, has delayeda decision. Mr. Foerster isn't worried -- the novelty iswearing off anyway.   For eastern Germany, a major problem is that the sickestcompanies employ the most people. For example, theFlugzeugwerft Dresden G.m.b.H., once East Germany's star inthe aerospace industry, had 2,500 workers, primarilyreconditioning Soviet-made fighters but also making runwayde-icing machines and safety nets to stop planes fromoverrunning landing strips. A couple of employees also builtthe world's premier bobsleds, but only for East Germany'schampion Olympic team; not even the Soviets could buy them.   Times are tough in the fighter business, and more thanhalf the plant's workers are on short time or on layoff. Thebobsled business, however, is booming. Now eight people areworking there, and orders are coming in from the likes ofMonaco's Prince Albert and America's Edwin Moses, the goldmedal hurdler and now bobsledder on the U.S. Olympic team.   Yet the giant adjacent halls, where 25 MiGs often would bereconditioned at any one time, lie empty except for a singleCzechoslovak fighter. &quot;When you see the empty hall, you havea tendency to lose your courage,&quot; says Klaus Hueckel, thecompany's chief, who waits impatiently for the outcome ofnegotiations with Deutsche Aerospace over a possibleacquisition of his company. He has arranged only partialrelief through an agreement with Airbus, which will buildtail parts and the Fokker 100 small plane. But Airbus willemploy only about 350 workers.   Oh yes, 21 Iraqi planes are sitting outside, waiting forsomeone to claim them. &quot;They are finished, but no one wantsto tell us what to do with them,&quot; complains Mr. Hueckel, whosays Saddam Hussein owes him $3 million.</TEXT></DOC>