<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900904-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>900904-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Bush to Bolster   Alliance in Fight   Against Iraqis   ---   U.S. May Forgive Egypt's   Military Debt; Summit   With Gorbachev Is Set   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Robert S. Greenberger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   FREST MDEST FORGN EUROP JAPAN</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)CONGRESS (CNG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush plans an intensive campaignto shore up support in the Soviet Union, Western Europe, Asiaand America's own Congress for the international campaignagainst Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.   The first step is likely to come today or tomorrow, whenthe administration expects to announce a plan to forgive muchof Egypt's nearly $7 billion in military debts to the U.S.Egypt has been America's most stalwart Arab ally in opposingIraq's invasion, and the debt relief is intended as a signalthat the U.S. is prepared to aid those in the Arab world whoendure economic pain by abiding by the trade ban againstIraq.</LP><TEXT>   The second step will come at the end of the week, when Mr.Bush heads for Finland for a one-day summit meeting Sundaywith Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Though the meeting alsowill deal with conventional-arms negotiations, the keyAmerican objective will be to solidify Soviet participationin the international campaign against Iraq.   Such moves to strengthen the anti-Iraq alliance areimportant because it seems increasingly likely that Mr. Bushis headed for a lengthy test of wills with Iraqi leaderSaddam Hussein. And for the moment, that means the PersianGulf crisis is as much a test of America's diplomatic skillsas its military strength.   Weekend talks between United Nations Secretary-GeneralJavier Perez de Cuellar and Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Azizfailed to make any progress toward dislodging Iraq fromKuwait. The only sign of a waver in Iraqi resolve was itsdecision to allow several hundred foreigners to leave in thepast few days.   The State Department said this included 47 Americans, wholanded at Dulles International Airport outside Washingtonthis weekend. The department also said 59 Americans wereamong another group that arrived in Frankfurt, West Germany,early Sunday morning and remained there overnight beforebeginning to make their way back to the U.S. In a statementover the weekend, the department said: &quot;We understand thatthe departure of several individuals was facilitated by theRev. Jesse Jackson.&quot;   Yesterday, Baghdad balked at allowing more airlifts offoreigners, and told nations with citizens trapped in Iraq tosend them food, the Associated Press reported. Separately,the official Iraqi News agency reported that Iraq hadsuspended repaying its foreign debt, which is estimated at$30 billion to $35 billion. Most of the money is owed to theU.S., Britain, France, the Soviet Union, West Germany andJapan.   Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who acknowledged that he hadn't madeany progress in his talks, specifically pointed to theBush-Gorbachev meeting as the next event that could produceprogress toward a diplomatic settlement of the internationalshowdown with Iraq. But U.S. officials are playing down suchsuggestions, and the meeting seems more likely to be anoccasion for coordinating superpower pressure on Baghdad thanone for discussing diplomatic solutions.   Mr. Bush is making it clear that he won't seek for theSoviets to act as mediators between the U.S. and Iraq. &quot;Idon't see a mediating role at all, and I don't think theSoviets see themselves having a mediating role,&quot; Mr. Bushtold reporters before returning to Washington from a longLabor Day weekend at his Maine vacation home. &quot;There are alot of mediators out there trying hard, Secretary-General deCuellar being in the forefront of this.&quot; Mr. Bush also saidthat Yemen appears interested in trying to mediate thedispute with Iraq, but the president again expressed littleoptimism that diplomatic contact can change Iraqi behavior.   The Soviet Union traditionally has been Iraq's mostimportant military ally, and the Kremlin's quick andunequivocal condemnation of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait wasinstrumental in allowing clear United Nations penaltiesagainst Iraq.   But in recent days, there have been hints that Sovietenthusiasm is flagging. Perhaps most importantly, Sovietmilitary officials are beginning to question why the Kremlinseems to be endorsing a big American military buildup inSaudi Arabia, just a few hundred miles from the Sovietborder.   So it may be important to hold a superpower summit now sothat Mr. Bush can directly tell Soviet leaders that, whilethe U.S. would like to leave behind some kind of militarypresence in Saudi Arabia when the Iraq crisis ends, thecurrent buildup of tens of thousands of soldiers istemporary.   It also will become increasingly important that theSoviets continue the embargo on arms supplies to Iraq thatthey imposed immediately after the invasion. The U.S. wouldlike to be sure that the Iraqis don't get the spare parts andsupplies necessary to keep more than 100,000 soldiers on dutyin a sustained occupation of Kuwait, where they must fightsporadic battles against bands of Kuwaiti resistancefighters.   Mr. Bush also may want to get the Soviets to withdrawtheir military advisers from Iraq. The Kremlin says thoseadvisers are staying only because they are under contract,and Soviet officials imply that they are reluctant to callthe advisers home out of fear of reprisals against Sovietcitizens in Iraq and Kuwait.   At the same time, the U.S. will be trying to illustratethat financial compensation will flow from the internationalcommunity to nations that suffer from complying with thetrade embargo against Iraq. The U.S. is in a position to givethe most important possible economic relief to one hard-hitcountry, Egypt, by forgiving that nation's increasinglyonerous burden of debts to the U.S.   Egypt's military and civilian indebtedness to the U.S.totals some $12 billion, and it is $1.2 billion to $1.5billion behind in its repayments. The military portion ofthat debt totals about $6.7 billion, administration officialssay, and the State Department already had scheduled meetingsto discuss debt relief even before the Iraqi invasion ofKuwait.   Mr. Bush can't forgive the debt himself, but he intends toask Congress to agree to do so. The president will have toovercome longstanding congressional resistance to debtforgiveness.   For one thing, despite general gratitude for Egypt's rolein opposing Iraq, there will be worries about what theeffects of forgiving such a large chunk of debt will be onthe federal deficit. The Bush administration is contemplatingways to finesse the deficit problem and still forgive thedebt. For instance, the U.S. might use an accounting gimmickto reduce the budget impact of debt forgiveness, pegging thevalue of the Egyptian loans at so-called current-market valuerather than their face value. Since economically strappedEgypt doesn't appear to be in any shape to pay off its debtnow, the market value of the loans could be counted asbillions less than the face value.   Beyond the budget impact, Congress has been leery offorgiving debts because doing so might open the floodgatesfor other countries, and domestic lobbies such as farmers, todemand similar relief. In particular, Israel would demandsimilar benefits from the U.S.   Most of Egypt's military debts to the U.S. date from 1979to 1983, the years immediately after the Camp David peacetreaties, when the U.S. carefully maintained symmetry in aidto Egypt and Israel as part of an informal understanding.After 1983, military aid was switched from loans to grants.   Israel's supporters will argue that writing off Egypt'sdebt and not Israel's debt would represent the firstasymmetry in dealing with the Camp David partners --something pro-Israel forces will fight vigorously. &quot;Ifthere's going to be debt relief for Egypt, you can be surethat friends of Israel will make a top priority out ofgetting forgiveness for Israel's debt, too,&quot; said onepro-Israel activist. Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy willbe coming to Washington Wednesday for talks with Secretary ofState James Baker, and the debt issue is sure to be high onthe agenda.   As the U.S. moves to help Egypt, a show of support fromAmerican friends such as West Germany, Italy and Japan isimportant if Mr. Bush is to continue persuading Americansthat the campaign against Iraq remains an internationalrather than an American effort. In addition to Egypt,administration officials want such allies to give economicaid to Turkey and Jordan to repay them for the economichardships they will endure for abiding by the internationaltrade ban against Iraq. And the U.S. wants more materialsupport for the American, Arab and European military forcesmassing around Iraq.   Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady will leave early thisweek for a trip to Asia to try to persuade Japan, South Koreaand Singapore to do more. And Mr. Baker leaves for a similarmission to Western Europe and the oil-rich Gulf states laterin the week.</TEXT></DOC>