<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900726-0157</DOCNO><DOCID>900726-0157.</DOCID><HL>   The Minority Majority Will Never Come   ----   By Stephan Thernstrom</HL><DATE>07/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><LP>   Will the U.S. have a &quot;minority majority&quot; by the year 2050?So Time magazine, among others, has said. And if it is truethat before long English-speaking whites will be outnumberedby blacks, Asians and Hispanics, it follows that the ebbingwhite majority must act now to improve the lot of the currentethnic minorities. If whites uplift and empower the newmajority before it takes over, it will be nicer to whitesonce it's in the driver's seat.   To the historian, such talk has a familiar ring. At thebeginning of this century, a great many Americans of nativestock worried that they would be swamped by the massive wavesof European immigration breaking on our shores, and the evenmore massive families they were creating. One worriercalculated that after 200 years 1,000 Harvard men would haveleft only 50 descendants, while 1,000 Romanian immigrantswould have produced 100,000. There goes the neighborhood.These fears of &quot;race suicide&quot; lay behind the legislation tocut off the flow of new immigrants that passed Congress byoverwhelming majorities in the 1920s.</LP><TEXT>   The theory of the emerging minority majority is simply theold race suicide theory with a twist. The old fear-mongeringincited Americans to guard the gates more vigilantly, to keepout the rabble. Now similar population projections aretrotted out as evidence of the need for bigger and bettersocial programs. Don't try to keep Genghis Khan out of thecountry; just make sure his kids are enrolled in Head Start.   If something can be done to integrate minorities intoAmerican life more smoothly, it should surely be done. Butnot on the basis of a theory built on sand. Demographers, itmust be recalled, have never been much good at prediction,and competent ones these days do not profess to be. In the1930s, population experts were unanimous in foreseeing asharply declining population in the U.S. and other industrialsocieties. Not one predicted the postwar Baby Boom or theresumption of mass immigration to these shores. Instead ofdeclining in the past half century, the American populationhas almost doubled. Demographers project future populationson the basis of currently observable patterns of fertility,mortality and migration. The more remote the future, thegreater the possibility that these patterns will change, andthe more susceptible they are to being changed by publicpolicy.   For example, the fertility rate for black women iscurrently about 30% higher than that for white women, with anaverage of 2.3 expected births per woman vs. 1.8 for whites.This differential has been shrinking: It was 33% in the late1950s and 37% as late as 1965. A 30% fertility differentialon the part of a small minority does not result in dramaticchanges in group size, particularly when the group also hasabove-average mortality rates.   As a result, the black share of the population has notgrown fast. It was 9.9% in 1920, 10.0% in 1950, 11.1% in 1970and is expected to be a bit over 12% when the returns of the1990 census are in. (Of course we know that the census-takersare unable to provide a fully accurate count of blacks, butthere is no reason to believe that the undercount was less inearlier enumerations. If anything, the undercount wasprobably smaller in recent censuses, since the problem hasbeen recognized and efforts have made to overcome it.)   The diminution of black-white fertility differentialsreflects the rising educational levels of blacks and thegrowth of a black middle class. The diminution is likely tocontinue if those trends continue. Even if they do not, attheir current growth rate blacks will remain a small fractionof the population even a century hence.   The Asian population of the U.S. has been growing at aspectacular rate since the 1965 immigration reform purged thelaw of the anti-Asian biases that had infected it since theChinese Exclusion Act of 1882. The growth, however, has beenalmost all attributable to immigration: The major Asiangroups in the U.S. -- Chinese, Japanese, Koreans andFilipinos -- are not notably fecund. If the proportion ofAsians in the population did rise so precipitously as toconstitute a great &quot;problem&quot; in the eyes of most Americans,therefore, the solution would be quite simple. The flow couldbe cut back easily, by modifying the immigration law.   The dramatic growth of the Hispanic population over thepast three decades has been the result both of heavyimmigration from Central and South America, Mexico and theCaribbean, and of the generally high fertility of Hispanicimmigrants and their children. There is great diversity amongthe various groups included under the Hispanic label,however. Cubans, for example, have a lower fertility ratethan native American whites do, and many other Hispanicgroups do not have conspicuously large families.   According to the 1980 Census, the most fecund Hispanicgroups -- Mexicans and Puerto Ricans -- had fertility ratesthat exceeded those of whites by 39% and 35% respectively,and those of blacks by 9% and 6%. A significant differential,but hardly an earth-shaking one, far smaller than the gapbetween the fertility of native-born Americans and manyEuropean immigrants groups at the turn of the century.   Anyway, Hispanics born in the U.S. have fewer childrenthan their immigrant parents, and their children have fewerstill. In 1980 the fertility rate of native-born Americanswhose parents were born in Mexico was 15% below that ofMexican immigrants; for Puerto Ricans born on the mainlandthe generational fertility drop was 37%. With rising levelsof education Hispanic distinctiveness diminishes further. Thefertility of second generation Mexican-American high schoolgraduates is only 6% above that of non-Hispanic whites withequal schooling. For those with some college, the differenceis only 1%. Second generation Mexican-Americans with collegedegrees have 7% fewer babies than non-Hispanic white womenwith the same educational attainments.   There are two glaring flaws in the minority-majoritytheory. With assimilation, high fertility immigrant groupsadopt native reproductive patterns. Theorists of &quot;racesuicide&quot; assumed that once a Romanian, always a Romanian,even unto the third and fourth generation. They were utterlywrong, not least because with each passing generation agrowing proportion of the descendants of the immigrantsmarried people of different backgrounds. It continues tohappen. A good many second-generation Hispanics now marry&quot;Anglos,&quot; and an even higher fraction of their children do.   The second fallacy is the assumption that immigration willcontinue at its present levels and will be governed by thesame entry criteria that have produced the current mix ofgroups. Since 1965 U.S. immigration law has givenoverwhelming priority to &quot;family unification&quot;; nine out of 10entrants now come in on that basis. This, in effect, stronglydiscriminates against prospective entrants from countriesthat have been behind the Iron Curtain for a generation, andfavors groups like Mexicans, who have an abundance ofrelatives already on the scene. Giving less priority tofamily considerations and more to the possession of skills inshort supply in the American economy would bring in fewerMexicans and more Czechs and East Germans. That may or not bedesirable. The point is that the system could easily bechanged if there were a will to do so.   Not only could the composition of the current immigrantstream be substantially modified. The size of the total flowcould be greatly reduced if Americans became convinced thatimmigration was producing undesirable changes in their socialorder. The legislation of the 1920s depressed levels of entryfrom Eastern and Southern Europe far below what they wouldhave been had the door remained open. And there is goodevidence that even the fairly mild restraints introduced bythe Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 substantiallycut down the flow of illegal entrants.   If today's immigrants assimilate to American ways asreadily as their predecessors at the turn of the century --as seems to be happening -- there won't be a minoritymajority issue anyway. Whatever their origins, they will havejoined the American majority, which is determined not bybloodlines but by commitment to the principles for which thisnation stands.   ---   Mr. Thernstrom, a professor of history at Harvard, is theeditor of the &quot;Harvard Encyclopedia of Ethnic Groups,&quot;(1980).</TEXT></DOC>