<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910703-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>910703-0089.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Jurors Don't Mind Duty, Survey Finds   ----   By Stephanie Simon and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B3</SO><CO>   AHP BMY LTR WNEWS</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)EUROPE (EU)GERMANY (GE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)RHODE ISLAND (RI)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   People who serve on juries may grumble about theinconvenience but they end up surprisingly satisfied with theexperience, a nationwide survey says.   More than 80% said they came away with a favorable view oftheir service, according to the survey of 8,468 jurors by theNational Center for State Courts. Almost two-thirds of thosesurveyed, who sat on state and federal juries in eightstates, said they would serve again eagerly.</LP><TEXT>   The survey also defied conventional wisdom in finding thatpeople with college educations and responsible jobs do serveon juries in large numbers, even though many attempt to evadejury duty. Jurors with full-time jobs paying more than$25,000 a year, and with at least one year of collegeeducation, fill about half the seats in jury boxes across theU.S., the study found.   &quot;You always hear that the only people who serve as jurorsare those who are too dumb to get off, but that's clearly nottrue,&quot; said Janice T. Munsterman, who directed the survey.She added that many well-educated professionals feel a civicresponsibility to serve.   Although 40% of the jurors said jury duty interfered withtheir work, only 15% called their service a financial burden.About 85% of employers, who also were surveyed, said theypaid full-time workers their salaries during jury duty, andmost also allowed jurors to keep their daily jurors' pay,which ranged from $6 to $50.   &quot;For many jurors, jury duty is one of the few occasions intheir lives when they can take part in government directly,&quot;said Daniel H. Margolis, chair of the American BarAssociation's committee on jury comprehension. &quot;They have alot of power and they are treated with respect. It's not likea two-week vacation at the beach, but they realize thatthey're doing something important and they are generallypleased to serve.&quot;   Despite widespread griping about long waits, inadequateinformation and slow-moving clerks, 65% of the jurors evenagreed with the statement that &quot;the jury system is anefficient process.&quot;   In recent years, many courts have tried to increasecompliance with jury-duty summonses by assigning potentialjurors to two-week telephone standby and asking them to callthe court each morning to see whether they will be needed.Most jurors surveyed said they liked the system, which freesthem from unproductive waits in court. Employers who weresurveyed, however, resented the unpredictability of of thesystem: They said they needed to know in advance whether tohire a temporary replacement for workers summoned to juryduty.   Predictably, employers also criticized the length ofjury-duty terms -- up to a month in some districts -- and therules restricting postponement of service. Almost one-quarterof the employers surveyed said they lost business whenworkers served on jury duty.   ---   DIVORCE NOTICES may be printed in newspapers, court rules.   Rhode Island's highest court decided that the NewportDaily News could publish its monthly listing of couples whowere recently divorced. The listing is based on informationobtained in family-court records.   The suit was brought by two women, using pseudonyms incourt papers, who claimed that the listing violated theirright to privacy. One woman sought to bar the newspaper frompublishing her name and address; the other sought damages forthe alleged harm she suffered after her name appeared in thenewspaper's divorce section.   In its decision upholding a lower court ruling, theappeals court said the state's privacy law doesn't preventpublication of materials from public records, even if thematerial involves personal matters. The court also noted thatin 1975 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a rape victim couldnot sue a newspaper for publishing her name after the namehad appeared in official court records.   After the court decision, David B. Offer, editor of theNewport Daily News, said that &quot;protecting the right to reportabout what is in public records is more important than thewhole question of divorces.&quot; The lawyer for the women was outof the country and couldn't be reached for comment.   While many local newspapers publish lists of people whohave been arrested for crimes, it is far from routine fornewspapers to provide divorce listings, said Gary Hoenig,editor of News Inc., a trade publication based in New York.   ---   LAWYERS FOR LORILLARD sanctioned in tobacco liabilitysuit.   The lawyers were penalized by a federal judge inPhiladelphia for filing what the judge said was a frivolousmotion to dismiss a product-liability suit involvingLorillard Inc.'s Kent brand of cigarettes.   The judge ordered the Lorillard lawyers to pay opposingcounsel's fees and costs under Rule 11 of the Federal Rulesof Civil Procedure, which gives federal courts power topenalize lawyers who tie up courts with frivolous pleadingsand lawsuits. The company's lead lawyer in the case isFranklin Poul, a senior partner at the Philadelphia law firmof Wolf, Block, Schorr andamp; Solis-Cohen. He was unavailable forcomment.   The suit against Lorillard was filed in November by PeterIerardi of Philadelphia, who contends his lung cancer wascaused by asbestos contained in Kent cigarettes he smokedbetween 1951 and 1957. At the time, Kents featured aMicronite filter made with a form of asbestos that Lorillardclaimed helped remove risky tars and nicotine. Lorillard, nowowned by Loews Corp., stopped using the Micronite filter in1957.   Mr. Poul argued that the suit should be dismissed throughsummary judgment -- without a trial -- because it lacked anyfactual basis. Mr. Poul relied on several sworn pretrialstatements by his own defense witnesses but ignoredcontradictory statements by Mr. Ierardi and other witnesses,according to federal Judge Clarence C. Newcomer. Under thosecircumstances, the judge ruled, Mr. Poul had no legal basisto seek dismissal.   &quot;Defendants would have been hard pressed to devise a morefrivolous or patently unmeritorious motion,&quot; the judge saidin his opinion.   Judges are relying increasingly on Rule 11 to rein infrivolous legal pleadings, including those filed by lawyersat large firms, said New York University law professorStephen Gillers, an ethics specialist. Nevertheless, Mr.Gillers said, this is among the first involving a seniorpartner at a major firm.   ---   PATENT DISPUTE over infant formula is settled.   Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and American Home Products Corp.,both of New York, agreed to pay an undisclosed sum to NewYork state and a doctor to settle a patent-infringement suitover taurine, an infant formula additive.   The state and Gerald Gaull, who developed the formula asdirector of pediatric research at an institute currentlyoperated by a state agency, had alleged that the companiesviolated the patent by marketing synthetic infant formulasfortified with taurine. The additive helps prevent abnormalbrain development in premature or low-birth weight infants.   Under the settlement, Bristol-Myers Squibb and AmericanHome Products didn't admit to any wrongdoing. They are nowauthorized to make, use and sell products under the patent,according to Kenneth J. Jurek, a lawyer for Dr. Gaull withthe Chicago law firm Mayer, Brown andamp; Platt.   ---   BREAKUP: Onek, Klein andamp; Farr, a small Washington firm witha big U.S. Supreme Court case load, split up. Two namepartners, Joel Klein and H. Bartow Farr 3d, have joined withtwo of their other partners to form Klein, Farr, Smith andamp;Taranto, and will continue their appellate practice. Theyalready have five Supreme Court cases to argue next term,including representing the tobacco industry in the first highcourt case on whether the federal cigarette warning lawpre-empts personal-injury lawsuits by smokers or theirfamilies. Name partner Joseph Onek and two other partnersmoved their health law practice to Crowell andamp; Moring, which isbased in Washington.   ---   OFFICE MOVES: The 300-attorney firm Rogers andamp; Wells hasopened an office in Frankfurt, Germany. The five-lawyerbranch of the New York firm will specialize in mergers andacquisitions, licensing arrangements, joint ventures and taxissues. . . . The 80-lawyer environmental law firm Beveridgeandamp; Diamond expanded its two-year-old San Francisco office withthe addition of partners Robert Wyatt, James Meeder and DavidCooke, formerly of Brobeck, Phleger andamp; Harrison, SanFrancisco.   ---   NOTED: Chief Justice William Rehnquist picked a new topaide for his nonjudicial activities. Robb M. Jones, a partnerin the Washington office of Nixon, Hargrave, Devans andamp; Doyleof Rochester, N.Y., will serve a two-year term at the highcourt as administrative assistant.</TEXT></DOC>