<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910801-0042</DOCNO><DOCID>910801-0042.</DOCID><HL>   Inflation Hawks:   Fed Banks' Presidents   Hold Private Positions   But Major Public Role   ---   In Contrast to the Governors,   They Show a Penchant   For Tight-Money Policies   ---   A Question of Accountability   ----   By Alan Murray   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   RICHMOND, Va. -- As a chief executive, Robert Black isdoing fine. Just look at his financial statement:   Revenues: $2.04 billion.</LP><TEXT>   Expenses: $0.12 billion.   Net: $1.92 billion.   Mr. Black's business: making money. Literally. Aspresident of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, hestraddles an odd but awesome combination of public andprivate power.   He is paid like a private banker -- $175,600 a year. Hisshareholders are private banks. His board members are privatecitizens. His budget is free of congressional scrutiny. Heworks in a spacious corner office atop a striking skyscraperwith a fine view of the James River.   Once every six weeks, Mr. Black abandons these comfortsand goes to Washington, where he assumes the role of apowerful government official. Mr. Black and his 11 fellowpresidents of Fed district banks join with the seven Fedgovernors in Washington to set interest-rate policies thatprofoundly affect the nation's economy.   &quot;I'm not aware of any other agency,&quot; says Rep. LeeHamilton, an Indiana Democrat, &quot;where such major policydecisions are made by individuals who are not governmentofficials.&quot;   The bifurcated status of the 12 Fed bank presidents hasperiodically set off controversy ever since the central bankwas founded 78 years ago. Advocates of this arrangement arguethat it helps shield the Fed from political pressures. But italso hands enormous power to people who need not answer tothe public or the government.   On the surface, the presidents are strikingly similar.They are all male, all white. Eight hold Ph.D.s in economics.Nine have spent most or all of their careers at the Fed;three are former employees of three others. In short, theyare an inbred group. In what other 12-man group wouldone-third be named Robert?   &quot;It's a bureaucracy,&quot; comments Preston Martin, a formerFed vice chairman. &quot;It may be the finest bureaucracy ingovernment, but it is a bureaucracy. And a bureaucracyperpetuates itself.&quot;   In recent years, the presidents also have becomeincreasingly powerful. Members of the Fed's secretive FederalOpen Market Committee say the presidents, though not alwaysvoting as a bloc, have nonetheless become the Fed's leadinganti-inflation hawks, advocating tight-credit policies thathold up short-term interest rates. Their tight-fisted stancewas partly responsible for the Fed's slow response to therecession last year.   The presidents are &quot;much like the West Germans,&quot; complainsSen. Pete Domenici, a New Mexico Republican. &quot;They have atotal fear of inflation. They write about it. They talk aboutit. Some of them, it seems, would like negative inflation.&quot;   In response to recent publicity of the presidents' risingpower, four influential Democratic legislators will todayintroduce legislation to eliminate the presidents from policymaking. The bill -- sponsored by Rep. Hamilton, Sen. PaulSarbanes of Maryland, Sen. Jim Sasser of Tennessee and Rep.Byron Dorgan of North Dakota -- would give all power overmonetary policy to the board of governors in Washington.   A study to be released today by the congressional JointEconomic Committee, chaired by Sen. Sarbanes, finds that theFed is unique among major industrial nations for the power itgives to central-bank officials who are neither elected norappointed by elected officials. Even the German Bundesbank --often praised for its independence -- has policy makers whoare appointed either by the president or the upper house ofparliament, the study says.   Yet the 12 Fed presidents, despite all their influence,toil in relative obscurity. Who are these quasi-privatepublic-policy makers? Where do they come from? To whom arethey accountable? The answers to these questions are cloudedin the Fed's mystique and arcane traditions.   The district banks perform a wide variety of services forcommercial banks, collecting and clearing checks, providingcurrency and coin, processing savings bonds and transferringmoney by wire. They earn money from the fees they charge forthese services, from loans they make to financialinstitutions, and most important from interest payments onthe large portfolios of government securities they hold.   But the presidents' greatest power comes from theirmembership on the Open Market Committee, which sets targetsfor the federal funds rate -- the rate banks charge oneanother for overnight loans -- and thus influences othershort-term rates.   On the committee, the presidents sit down with the sevenFed governors, who, unlike them, are appointed by the WhiteHouse and confirmed by the Senate. Because only five of thepresidents may vote at each meeting, they normally have aminority of the votes. But all 12 may speak at meetings andthus help shape the consensus. And with two governor seatscurrently vacant, the presidents have had voting parity withthe governors in recent weeks.   Because the committee usually strives for a consensus onpolicy decisions, official dissents by voting members arerelatively rare. But of the 20 tighter-money dissents cast incommittee meetings during Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan'sfour-year tenure, all but two have come from districtpresidents. And of 23 dissents for an easier policy --meaning lower short-term interest rates -- only two came frompresidents.   And dissents tell just part of the story. Mr. Black,though he has never dissented during the Greenspan years, isclearly one of the panel's leading anti-inflation &quot;hawks.&quot; Heand several other presidents have pushed Fed policy towardtighter credit -- sometimes further than Mr. Greenspan, aformidable inflation-fighter himself, has wanted.   The presidents' hawkish views were on display in earlyJuly at the Fed's policy committee meeting, when a majorityof them expressed a desire to reduce the 1992 target rangesfor money supply growth, according to people attending themeeting. They were joined by Fed Governor Wayne Angell. ButMr. Greenspan argued against the change. The committeeultimately agreed to go along with the chairman, but onlyafter being assured the issue would be revisited nextFebruary.   The presidents are named by the private-sector boards ofdirectors of the district Fed banks, subject to the approvalof the Fed board of governors in Washington. Once appointed,they can, in practice, stay in office as long as they choose.And even the district banks' directors say they have littleor no influence over their presidents' actions on interestrates.   Last year, for example, the board of the Dallas Fed votedrepeatedly to recommend cuts in the discount rate. But RobertBoykin, then the Dallas Fed's president, repeatedly went toWashington and argued against his own board's view. &quot;It is avery unhappy position,&quot; says Bobby Inman, former chairman ofthe Dallas board and former deputy director of CentralIntelligence. Mr. Inman is convinced that if the Fed &quot;hadmoved reasonably decisively in April and May&quot; of 1990, ratherthan waiting until late in the year to ease, &quot;we would have,if not avoided the recession, had a shorter and shallowerone.&quot;   Mr. Black denies that the Fed could have blunted therecession. He even rejects the notion that the Fed should tryto ease recessions. &quot;It's more fun to try and fine-tune&quot; theeconomy, he says, &quot;but we're not smart enough to fine-tune.&quot;His views reflect the Fed's experience in the 1970s, whenefforts to fight recession led instead to double-digitinflation. It's better, in his view, for the Fed to focus ona single goal: price stability.   Moreover, many economists warn that persistent efforts topush short-term interest rates artificially low canboomerang: With the bond market fearing higher inflation,long-term rates can actually rise in response, harming theeconomy.   Mr. Black's background provides an interesting, if notaltogether typical, look at the makings of a Fed hawk. Acourtly Southern gentleman, he was born in Hickman, Ky., asmall bluff town along the Mississippi River. His parentswere strict and conservative &quot;in every sense,&quot; he recalls.His father ran a number of small businesses; his mother was ateacher.   Mr. Black remembers sitting on his porch and listening toexcursion boats, with their calliopes playing, on the river.&quot;I always wanted to ride one,&quot; he says, &quot;but my motherthought they were a den of iniquity because they had dancing,and maybe drinking.&quot;   Mr. Black encountered economics while at the University ofVirginia and decided he wanted to teach it. But even beforehe had completed his doctoral dissertation, the RichmondFederal Reserve Bank made its claim on him. &quot;I was making$120 a month teaching,&quot; he recalls. &quot;They offered to pay me$300 a month to do my dissertation for the bank.&quot; Except forone year of teaching at the University of Tennessee, he hasbeen at the Richmond Fed ever since. He became its presidentin 1973.   Today, Mr. Black runs the bank with polite efficiency. Hetravels by elevator down the 24 floors of his building togreet visitors at the door. While walking through the lunchroom, he stops repeatedly to banter with employees.Everything about him speaks of an earlier era. He mocks thevaluable modern art gracing the halls of his building; in acorner of his office he has mounted two large, black stoneson a pedestal, with a plaque reading, &quot;Frog Egg and Tadpole,by Henry Moore.&quot;   But there is little mistaking Mr. Black's hard views aboutmonetary policy. He was one of the first at the Fed to callfor tight control of growth in the money supply, and he got areputation in the late 1970s and early 1980s as the Fed'sleading hawk.   Today, Mr. Black has several competitors for that honor.Chief among them is Cleveland Fed President Lee Hoskins. Butalthough the two men share similar economic views, they are astudy in personal contrasts. Mr. Black is courteous,self-depreciating and eager to find a consensus. Mr. Hoskinsis blunt, uncompromising and frequently dissents. Mr. Blackloyally defends Chairman Greenspan; Mr. Hoskins is said tosometimes irk the chairman. A few years ago, Mr. Hoskins cameclose to open warfare with the chairman and the board when heopposed a board plan to provide back-up funding for failedthrifts.   Also pushing for tight credit are Thomas Melzer, presidentof the St. Louis Fed; Gary Stern of Minneapolis; Robert Parryof San Francisco and occasionally Roger Guffey of KansasCity, Mo. Mr. Boykin, recently retired in Dallas, oftenjoined them. His successor, Robert McTeer, who trained underMr. Black at Richmond, may fall into the hawk camp.   Another group of presidents is less adamant in battlinginflation and more concerned about short-term economicgrowth. They include Richard Syron of the Boston Fed, EdwardBoehne of Philadelphia and Silas Keehn of Chicago. New YorkFed President Gerald Corrigan, the most powerful of thepresidents because of his bank's role in implementingsecurities transactions for the system, is also usuallyplaced in this camp.   In contrast, Robert Forrestal, president of the AtlantaFed, has emerged as the lonesome dove among the presidents.Quiet and unassuming, a lawyer rather than an economist, Mr.Forrestal has made few waves during most of his seven yearsas a Fed policy maker. But in the past year, he has launcheda muted rebellion against the anti-inflation group.   Born in 1931 in Manhattan, the son of Democraticsupporters of the New Deal, he went to parochial schools,singing in the glee club and contemplating a career in music.At St. John's College in New York, he took economics, butonly because it was a requirement. He served as a Navalofficer in the Korean War, and then -- giving up the idea ofa music career -- went to Georgetown Law School and joined asmall law firm in Washington.   Unlike many of his economist colleagues, Mr. Forrestalended up at the Fed by default. He was in constant conflictwith his law firm's managing partner. Hearing that the Fedboard was looking for an attorney, he applied and was hired,planning &quot;to stay two, three or four years and then go backto a private law firm.&quot; Instead, he stayed on, moving to theAtlanta Fed as general counsel in 1969 and rising through theranks until he became president in '83.   Because his Fed work had involved mostly matters such asbank regulation and check-clearing operations, Mr. Forrestalcame to the Open Market Committee unversed in monetarypolicy. His discomfort with the subject shows; at committeemeetings, he frequently appears to be reading his statementsrather than delivering them extemporaneously. And untilrecently, he usually stayed quietly in the mainstream ofpolicy decisions.   But early last year, months before Chairman Greenspanacknowledged the problem, Mr. Forrestal began speaking inmeetings about the difficulties companies faced in gettingcredit. The only other voice then complaining of creditproblems was former Governor Martha Seger.   &quot;By May or June of last year, I began to suspect thedownturn might be more critical than people thought at thetime,&quot; Mr. Forrestal says. &quot;It seemed serious enough, and thedanger of a pronounced policy great enough, that I thought weshould ease policy sooner than the others.&quot; He wasn't avoting member of the policy committee in 1990, but as soon ashe became one, last February, he dissented in favor of aneasier policy.   In some ways, Mr. Forrestal's revolt seemed a reactionagainst his fellow presidents' growing clout and focus oninflation. &quot;While I certainly think inflation is a veryimportant goal,&quot; he says, &quot;there are costs to achieving that.I would have preferred to err on the side of easing.&quot; He addsthat fighting inflation is &quot;a long-term goal, and sometimesyou have to adjust your tactics. I'm not willing to riskexacerbating a recession to get an inflation number in theshort term.&quot; As for Mr. Black's notion that controllinginflation is the sole goal of monetary policy, Mr. Forrestalsays: &quot;I don't agree with that. Economic growth is one of ourgoals.&quot;   In Mr. Forrestal's view, the Fed's policy committee hastoo many economists. &quot;People from other disciplines can bringa good deal of analytical ability&quot; to Fed discussions, hesays. &quot;I think lawyers, businessmen, bankers would help.&quot; Headmits that at times, non-economists are &quot;at a disadvantageif you get into a lot of technical discussion.&quot; But that, hesays, &quot;is what you have a staff for.&quot;   Mr. Forrestal and Mr. Black agree that the presidents'role has changed. Mr. Black argues that their power overpolicy has increased &quot;because they've become morepersuasive.&quot; And Mr. Forrestal notes the presidents &quot;havebecome more outspoken on issues and have gone public onissues more than they used to.&quot;   But neither of them wants to subject Fed presidents topresidential appointment and Senate confirmation. &quot;I think itwould politicize the position,&quot; says Mr. Black, who adds that&quot;no president would ever appoint me to anything.&quot;   In a report earlier this year, four Democrats on theSenate Banking Committee advanced the notion that thepresidents' role in making policy might violate theconstitutional provision requiring that high governmentofficials be appointed by the president and confirmed by theSenate. But a federal court ruled otherwise in 1986, holdingthat the government has the right to delegate certain powers.   Former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker also favors the statusquo. &quot;The organizational characteristics of the FederalReserve are seemingly odd,&quot; he says, &quot;but it somehow, in itspeculiar way, reflects a pretty good balance. You get somecontinuity, professionalism and insulation from politics. Andthe way the presidents are selected contributes to all ofthose things.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>