<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0022</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0022.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   GUNMEN KILLED two U.S. airmen in the Philippines on theeve of base talks.   As the U.S. and the Philippines prepared to opennegotiations today on extending the leases on six Americanmilitary bases, authorities said suspected leftist guerrillaskilled the two servicemen near Clark Air Base, about 50 milesnorth of Manila. The assailants escaped, and there wasn't anyimmediate claim of responsibility. But the area near Clarkhas been a communist stronghold since the 1940s. The AirForce ordered all troops back to base, and those livingoff-base were restricted to quarters.</LP><TEXT>   Eight Americans have been killed in the Philippines since1989. The slayings have been viewed as part of a communistdrive against the U.S. bases.   ---   Kohl's Christian Democrats lost elections in the WestGerman states of North Rhine-Westphalia and neighboring LowerSaxony to the Social Democrats, according to projections. Theballoting in the Christian Democratic strongholds had beenbilled as a test of the chancellor's German unificationpolicy and his chances for re-election.   ---   East and West German experts drafted a plan to merge thecurrencies, economies and social systems of the Germanstates. But decisions on some crucial issues, includingproperty rights, agricultural changes and industrialrestructuring, were deferred for settlement in supplementaryaccords.   ---   Lithuania's premier stopped in Moscow on her return tripto Vilnius and said she had gained &quot;de facto recognition&quot; forher republic from the U.S. and other Western nations during afive-nation, 16-day tour. On Saturday, the leaders ofLithuania, Latvia and Estonia held a one-day meeting andurged talks with Gorbachev on secession.   ---   Soldiers in Madagascar thwarted a coup attempt, routingabout 10 armed dissidents who seized the national radiostation in Antananarivo and declared the government ofPresident Ratsiraka overthrown. Three people were reportedkilled. It was the second such insurrection in two years.   ---   The White House has nominated William Barr, an assistantattorney general, to succeed Donald Ayer, the JusticeDepartment's deputy attorney general, who resigned Friday,two weeks after he was forced to rescind his endorsement oftougher sentencing guidelines for corporate crime. Theselection of Barr requires Senate approval.   ---   Pope John Paul II traveled to Curacao after concluding avisit to Mexico, where he tried to forge warmer ties betweenthe Vatican and the government, which retains curbs on RomanCatholic Church activity. The pontiff's eight-day, 10-citytour included criticism of materialism and birth control.   ---   China's Deng met in Beijing with Egyptian PresidentMubarak, dispelling widespread rumors of the senior Chineseleader's death. The issues discussed at the meeting, Deng'sfirst known engagement in nearly three months, weren'tdisclosed.   ---   The South Lebanon Army's chief said the Israeli-backedmilitia is prepared to swap a &quot;large number&quot; of its 300Moslem prisoners for 16 Western hostages held by pro-IranianShiites. The commander also included in the trade threeIsraeli servicemen and several of his men held by factions inLebanon.   ---   Lebanon's rival Christian forces traded artillery fire inand around eastern Beirut, sending thousands of civiliansinto underground bunkers. About a dozen people were reportedkilled in intermittent weekend clashes, part of athree-month-old war for leadership of the Christiancommunity.   ---   Cyclone survivors in India searched for hundreds, perhapsthousands, of people missing since the storm battered thecountry's eastern coast late last week. More than 400 peoplehave been reported killed.   ---   Authorities in Colombia blamed cocaine traffickers forthree weekend car bombings that left at least 27 people dead.Two of the attacks came in Bogota, and the other in thesouthern city of Cali. As many as 200 people were wounded inthe blasts, officials said.   ---   Chile's government has agreed in principle to paycompensation for the killing of Orlando Letelier, an exileddiplomat who was assassinated in Washington in 1976. Santiagosaid the sum to be paid to the U.S. for Letelier's relativeswould be decided by an international committee of jurists.   ---   Floods prompted thousands of residents of low-lying areasin Texas and Louisiana to evacuate their homes, and countyjail prisoners and volunteers in Arkansas labored toreinforce levees as a steady, heavy rain hit parts of theregion. In Oklahoma, many flood victims began cleanupefforts.   ---   Anti-apartheid leaders criticized a 12-pointmajority-rights plan that was proposed by South Africa'sgovernment. The plan, which Pretoria said was designed toprevent a one-party state or communist dictatorship frombeing imposed by an &quot;unsophisticated majority vote,&quot; wasfaulted by the apartheid foes as perpetuating racialdivisions.</TEXT></DOC>