<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910930-0134</DOCNO><DOCID>910930-0134.</DOCID><HL>   No Field of Dreams, but Bettern than '88   ----   By David Shribman</HL><DATE>09/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Two men join the Democratic presidential race this week.One is Bill Clinton, a relatively obscure Arkansas governorwho is sometimes confused with DeWitt Clinton, the visionaryNew York governor who built the Erie Canal. The other is BobKerrey, a Nebraska senator who is so little known thatnewspaper stories about him often are accompanied by picturesof Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts.   The group of candidates -- which also includes Sen. TomHarkin of Iowa, former Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts andGov. Douglas Wilder of Virginia -- is no field of dreams. Formonths, the Democrats' first team stood up, one by one, andstood down from the race. Jay Rockefeller's not ready, DickGephardt's not inclined, Al Gore's not willing, LloydBentsen's not disposed. The best that can be said for MarioCuomo, the Democrats' best shadowboxer, is that he's notclear.</LP><TEXT>   But candidate for candidate, the Democrats, who had thepresidency within reach four years ago, are fielding a moreinteresting and in many ways stronger group of candidates in1992 than they did in 1988.   Take them by genre:   -- The accomplished governor. Last season's entry, MichaelDukakis, had three terms as governor and trumpeted hissuccess fashioning a Massachusetts Miracle. But that miracle,which even then had the whiff of a mirage about it, wasfueled by the Reagan economic boom if not by the Reagandefense buildup, and it occurred in a state with enormousadvantages that include, to start, the MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, the Harvard Business School, bigbanks, some of the nation's leading medical institutions,scores of high-tech entrepreneurs and hundreds of thousandsof (over)educated workers.   This year's veteran governor is Mr. Clinton, who, like Mr.Dukakis, came back to dominate his state's politics aftervoters rebelled against his first term. But theaccomplishments of Mr. Clinton, who has been cited as anexample by such Republicans as former Gov. Thomas Kean of NewJersey and Gov. Carroll Campbell of South Carolina, are moreenduring.   He's pressed for rural development and battled to win aneducation overhaul that will be paying dividends to Arkansaslong after the public-private partnerships of Mr. Dukakishave vanished. All of this in a state -- poor, crippled bydecades of segregation -- whose constitution shackles thegovernor. Besides, Mr. Clinton, who actually likescampaigning, is a far more natural politician than Mr.Dukakis.   -- The warrior lawmaker. The last Vietnam veteran to seekthe presidency was Al Gore, who had been in the Senate onlybriefly before he entered the race. Serious and sober, hemastered esoteric arguments about the dangers ofchlorofluorocarbons and the potential of fiber-opticnetworks. He talked tough and sensibly on defense and cameclose to breaking through.   His analogue this time is Sen. Kerrey, whose Vietnamexperience is PT-109 without the hype, and more stirring thanMr. Gore's experience as a reporter for the Army. He walkedon an artificial leg to pick up his Congressional Medal ofHonor, and is the first such honoree to sit in the Senatesince the Civil War veterans faded from politics. He matchesMr. Gore's experience in Congress with a term as governor ofNebraska, leaving office in a devoutly Republican state witha 78% approval rating. He has the star quality the somewhatstodgy Mr. Gore lacks; at a fund-raiser for his 1988 Senaterace, as many Nebraskans sought his autograph as WillieNelson's.   -- The fiery populist. Rep. Gephardt swept the Iowacaucuses four years ago with a populist theme that skirtedthe very edge of protectionism, ending his speeches with anexplosive cry: &quot;It's your fight, too.&quot; But that populism wasgrafted onto Mr. Gephardt, who had built a reputation inWashington as an insider with an eye toward accommodation.   Sen. Harkin was born to poverty -- and populism.Throughout his career he's relished the struggle against theestablished and powerful. Unlike Mr. Gephardt, who hasstrolled to re-election, Mr. Harkin has had real battles.   --  The lonely man of ideas. Bruce Babbitt attracted a topstaff and a cult following in 1988 with some unusualproposals: eliminate subsidies to large farmers, distributenational child-care vouchers, curb tax breaks for executives'bonuses.   This time the idea man is Mr. Tsongas. While Mr. Babbittcame to politics reluctantly, Mr. Tsongas grew up with it,serving in local posts and the House before becoming a forcein the Senate, leaving only when faced with cancer. Healready is getting nods of agreement (though precious fewexpressions of support) with a platform that offers an&quot;aggressively&quot; pro-business approach, an end to requirementsthat companies issue quarterly reports, a virgin materialsfee to give recycled commodities a price advantage, and anEnterprise Corps of adults, modeled on the Peace Corps, tohelp the Soviets.   -- The voice of the voiceless. The last two campaigns, theRev. Jesse Jackson proved to be more than an eloquent voicefor the poor and disenfranchised. He emerged as a shrewdstrategist who knows how to set and then dominate thepolitical debate with rhetorical and moral fervor.   But Gov. Wilder has done more than just talk about arainbow coalition. He's put one together, and done so inVirginia, winning more than 40% of the white vote in a statethat a generation ago sought to revive the philosophy of JohnC. Calhoun in a last-ditch effort of &quot;massive resistance&quot; todesegregation. And while Mr. Jackson is often criticized forsupporting big-spending items, Mr. Wilder has positionedhimself as something of a fiscal conservative.   Not that it will be easy to topple Mr. Bush next November.The president's poll ratings are stratospheric and he's sureto reignite the glow of the lightning victory in the PersianGulf. But there are vulnerable spots: the economy, thecontinued rule of Saddam Hussein, a vague sense of uneaseamong the voters that things aren't quite right.   But campaigns aren't always full of heavyweights. Fewpolitical insiders considered Sen. John Kennedy anything buta lightweight in 1959, and only later did Hubert Humphreyattain his solid reputation. In 1975, the field of JimmyCarter, George Wallace, Mo Udall, Henry Jackson, Fred Harrisand Sargent Shriver wasn't noticeably stronger than thisgroup.   And though this may not be the Democrats' starting five,it is no old-timer's game either. Even with a 60-year-oldlike Mr. Wilder in the group, it's a new generation ofcandidates.   Those strangers on the television set may be more suitedfor the times than the familiar faces they're replacing.   ---   Mr. Shribman covers national politics from the Journal'sWashington bureau.</TEXT></DOC>