<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910405-0034</DOCNO><DOCID>910405-0034.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>04/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   YELTSIN WAS AWARDED sweeping legislative powers in theRussian republic.   Riding a wave of popular support and labor unrest,Russia's leader and main rival to Gorbachev won a majorpolitical victory in Russia's legislature. The lawmakersapproved Yeltsin's demands for special powers to implementchange and resolve social conflicts, and the calling of apresidential election for June 12. Meanwhile, there weresigns that the Soviet leadership has failed to halt adamaging month-long walkout by coal miners, despite a Kremlinoffer to double their pay.</LP><TEXT>   The Soviet Parliament warned of impending financialcatastrophe and pledged to take tough measures againstrepublics accused of withholding budget contributions fromcentral authorities.   ---   SEN. HEINZ AND SIX OTHERS DIED in an air collision outsidePhiladelphia.   The 52-year-old three-term Pennsylvania Republican, thelargest individual shareholder of H.J. Heinz Co., was killedwhen a helicopter collided with his plane over a schoolyard.During his career in the Senate, Heinz had concentrated onissues involving the elderly and on efforts to protect steelcompanies from subsidized foreign competition.   A native of Pittsburgh, Heinz was first elected to theSenate in 1976. He was the second-ranking Republican on theSenate's Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee.   ---   As many as 1.5 million refugees headed toward Iran fromIraq, according to the official Iranian news agency. InBaghdad, an Iraqi official said it was &quot;still early&quot; for thegovernment to respond to Wednesday's U.N. resolutiondictating terms for a permanent cease-fire in the Gulf war.   ---   A Los Angeles panel forced the city's police chief, DarylGates, to take a paid 60-day leave of absence pendingcompletion of investigations concerning the videotapedbeating of a black motorist by a group of white officers.Gates vowed to fight the decision by the civilian PoliceCommission.   ---   The earth's ozone layer appears to be thinning twice asfast as scientists had thought, according to the EPA. Theagency said new figures suggest there could be an additional200,000 U.S. deaths from skin cancer over the next 50 yearsbecause of the unexpected depletion of the protective layer.   ---   A New Jersey state judge struck down a key provision inthe state's controversial new family leave law, which isconsidered to be the most generous in the nation toemployees.   ---   The U.S. believes that China is in the process of sellingPakistan a new missile capable of carrying nuclear warheads.Washington has protested to both nations and to other nationsin the region, according to a U.S. official.   ---   Columbia University biologists reported the discovery of afamily of genes that may explain how the nose distinguishessmells. Their report suggests that 100 to 200 genes may beinvolved in the sense of smell.   ---   Bush met with Japan's Kaifu in California and saidafterward that Washington and Tokyo had &quot;made solid progress&quot;on easing trade tensions. The president called for Japan toease trade barriers in auto parts, construction services andother areas.   ---   A California research team has isolated and described thethree-dimensional structure of a key part of the AIDS virusenzyme. The Agouron Pharmaceuticals group said its findingsprovide a target for drugs to attack the disease.   ---   The FAA proposed requiring airlines to provide more spaceat wing exits to allow quicker evacuation after crashes. Theagency suggested that carriers be given two options: eitherto remove a seat next to each window exit, or to widen thespace between rows at such exits.   ---   A cave explorer was rescued in New Mexico following afour-day ordeal that began when a rock fell and broke her legwhile she was on a mapping expedition in the nation's deepestcave in Carlsbad Caverns National Park. Rescuers usedstretchers, ropes and pulleys to transport the 40-year-oldwoman, an experienced spelunker.   ---   New York City's mayor launched a national campaign to urgeBush to allow a banned French abortion pill into the U.S. fortesting. Dinkins said he thought the drug, made by RousselUclaf, might also be useful in treating some seriousdiseases.   ---   Twelve universities have been chosen for financial reviewsas the Bush administration focuses on the way research costsare billed to the federal government.   ---   Archbishop Tutu urged South Africa's anti-apartheidleaders to review the need for sanctions against Pretoria andto discuss whether other nations should be asked to beginlifting the curbs imposed since 1975. He also appealed forgreater efforts to defuse the factional violence that hasclaimed over 1,200 lives since August.   ---   Haitian police arrested the country's former provisionalpresident, Ertha PascalTrouillot, and charged her withparticipating in an unsuccessful Jan. 6 coup staged by aformer Duvalierist minister.   ---   British researchers reported that salt has a greater linkto high blood pressure than previous studies have indicated,and recommended that even those not at risk should cut theirsalt intake by about one-third.   ---   Moscow plans to withdraw 10,000 of its approximately50,000 troops in Poland this year and to leave completely by1993, a Polish general disclosed. He said the pullback wouldbegin Tuesday when a missile unit of 1,200 troops wouldwithdraw from a Soviet complex in northwestern Poland.   ---   Died: Max Frisch, 79, Swiss novelist and playwright, inZurich, of cancer.</TEXT></DOC>