<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900404-0060</DOCNO><DOCID>900404-0060.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   CBS Can Sue in Ziff Magazine-Sale Case   ----   By Arthur S. Hayes and Paul M. Barrett   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   CBS MDEST LATAM FREST</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)</GV><LP>   The New York Court of Appeals ruled that CBS Inc. can sueZiff-Davis Publishing Co. for allegedly providing misleadingfinancial information when CBS bought a dozen of Ziff'smagazines in 1984.   The ruling by the state's highest court partially reversesa decision by a lower court judge, who had dismissed all ofCBS's claims against Ziff, a unit of Ziff Communications Co.,in 1988. The appellate court will let the case proceed on oneof CBS's claims, for breach of warranty.</LP><TEXT>   The decision, which can't be appealed, propels the partiesinto the pretrial fact-finding, or discovery, stage of thecase. No trial date has yet been set to decide the merits ofthe suit, in which CBS seeks $40 million. Spokesmen for bothcommunications companies say there has been no talk ofsettlement.   CBS bought Popular Photography, Car andamp; Driver, Modern Brideand other magazines for $362.5 million in 1984. Even beforeit closed the deal, CBS claimed that Ziff-Davis hadoverstated the magazines' profits by as much as $4 million --thus inflating the selling price by as much as $40 million.CBS said at the time it was reserving the right to challengeZiff's data. But Ziff claimed that by going forward with thedeal at the stated price, CBS showed that it was not relyingon the accuracy of Ziff's data.   After failing to resolve the matter, CBS sued Ziff and itsauditor, Touche Ross andamp; Co., in 1985, alleging fraud,misrepresentation, breach of contract and breach of warranty.Later, CBS joined the new magazines with its own magazinegroup and sold the entire unit for $650 million in 1987.   &quot;CBS was not merely buying identified consumer magazinebusinesses,&quot; Judge Stewart F. Hancock Jr. wrote for a 4-1majority of the appeals court. &quot;It was buying businesseswhich it believed to be of a certain value based oninformation furnished by the seller which the sellerwarranted to be true.&quot;   &quot;We are, of course, delighted that the court reinstatedthe breach-of-warranty claim,&quot; said Douglas P. Jacobs, CBSassociate general counsel.   Ziff's general counsel J. Malcolm Morris described theruling as &quot;a technical point of New York law.&quot; He added, &quot;Wecontinue to believe, as we have since 1985, that there is nobasis whatsoever for any of CBS's remaining claims.&quot;   ---   IRAN-CONTRA JURORS are sequestered after calls fromreporters.   The judge in the Iran-Contra trial of former nationalsecurity adviser John Poindexter sequestered the jury, whichis in deliberations, after two jurors said they werecontacted by reporters. In a hastily called hearing infederal court in Washington yesterday morning, Judge HaroldGreene indicated that he had considered but decided againstdeclaring a mistrial after learning about the contacts, atleast one of which came from a reporter for the WashingtonPost.   The Post's national news editor, Robert Kaiser, said thepaper voluntarily called the judge Monday to apologize forthe actions of its reporter, Nora Boustany. Mr. Kaiser saidthat Ms. Boustany, until recently the newspaper's Beirutcorrespondent, had just arrived in this country and didn'tknow that jurors aren't supposed to be contacted during atrial or deliberations.   Judge Greene said the two jurors had informed him thateach was contacted by telephone Monday by a woman identifyingherself as a reporter. The jurors told the judge atyesterday's hearing that they had hung up as soon as thecallers said they were reporters.   The Post's Mr. Kaiser said Ms. Boustany had been asked tofind out how to contact only one juror after the trial hadended. Ms. Boustany declined to answer any questions. It wasunclear who had called the second juror.   The judge, obviously angry, said, &quot;Some people mightconsider what has gone on an obstruction of justice.&quot; Heindicated that he was still considering seeking penalties asa result of the incident.   The judge could, for example, refer the situation to theU.S. attorney in Washington as a possible case of attemptingto influence a juror, which is a federal crime. But in orderto be found guilty of that crime, a person would have to beshown to have had a &quot;specific intent&quot; to affect the outcomeof a trial.   Mr. Kaiser said Ms. Boustany had no such intent. Instead,she and a number of other Post reporters were each assignedto find out how to contact one member of the jury after thetrial ended, Mr. Kaiser said. &quot;She is a Lebanese who hasnever worked or lived in America,&quot; he added. &quot;We made amistake&quot; by assigning an uninformed reporter to help coverthe trial, Mr. Kaiser said.   Neither the defense nor prosecution objected to thejudge's decision not to declare a mistrial.   The 12-person jury will be sequestered in the evenings ina Washington-area hotel, according to a court staff member.   ---   ANTI-TAKEOVER BILL is passed by Pennsylvania House ofRepresentatives.   The House, in passing one of the most restrictiveanti-takeover bills in the nation by a 182-10 vote, joinedthe state Senate in endorsing the proposal.   Among other provisions, the bill would strip all profitsfrom short-term holders who sell their shares within 18months of making a failed bid for control of the companythrough &quot;any means.&quot; The profits would be turned over to thetarget company, which would be required to invest the fundsin Pennsylvania. A controversial proposal to exemptmanagement from certain existing restrictions on proxy fightswas not included in the final House version of the bill.   While the proposed law must go back to the Senate forapproval of several amendments, the bill is likely to becomelaw, possibly by the end of this month.   The state Senate, committed to enacting some kind ofanti-raider legislation, passed the original version 45-4,and Gov. Robert Casey recently expressed his support for themeasures.   ---   MARCOS CASE begins with defense lawyer's account blamingU.S. officials.   In a bizarre tale involving George Bush, Moammar Gadhafiand a legendary gold treasure allegedly hidden in thePhilippines, Imelda Marcos's lawyer told jurors that theMarcoses secretly hid millions of dollars in the U.S. at theurging of American officials.   Gerry Spence, Mrs. Marcos's chief attorney in the federalracketeering case in Manhattan, said he would prove thatthen-Vice President Bush had encouraged the Marcoses toinvest Philippine assets in the U.S. as a secret &quot;communistsecurity plan&quot; that could be used in the event of a communisttakeover of the Philippines.   Mr. Spence said he wants to call Mr. Bush as a witness toprove that the U.S. knew that millions of dollars were beingheld in secret bank accounts and investments in this country.Mr. Spence said that Mr. Bush made the suggestion in personin 1981 to deter the Marcoses from investing in Libya. Thelawyer said Mrs. Marcos had developed a friendship withLibya's Mr. Gadhafi in the 1970s.   Mr. Spence said Mr. Bush advised the Marcoses to buyManhattan property, which is at the heart of the government'sallegations in the case. Mrs. Marcos is accused of plunderingthe Philippines of more than $160 million and then illegallyconcealing the money through the purchase of threeskyscrapers and a shopping mall in Manhattan.   &quot;The Marcoses, in an attempt to keep the good will of thiscountry, abandoned plans to invest in Libya and began topurchase New York real estate,&quot; Mr. Spence said. He said hewould prove that the Central Intelligence Agency &quot;was awareof every transaction that took place in this case.&quot;   Spokesmen for the White House and the CIA said they don'tcomment on pending trials.   In seeking to turn the prosecutors' case on its head, Mr.Spence said he didn't dispute that ownership of theproperties had been kept secret. Nor did he dispute chargesthat money from the Philippine treasury was used to buy theproperties. Instead, he said the late President Marcos waskeeping the money safe.   &quot;You don't protect funds from a communist takeover unlessyou hide them,&quot; Mr. Spence said. &quot;He went to extreme effortsto hide the funds. Evidence of the hiding is totallyundisputed. It was necessary to do it.&quot;   In seeking to challenge prosecutors' claims that theMarcoses became wealthy off bribes and the skimming ofPhilippine government funds, Mr. Spence told the jury thatthe Marcos wealth was attained when Mr. Marcos discoveredgold allegedly hidden by the Japanese in the Philippines. Hesaid he would call as a witness &quot;an old man&quot; from thePhilippines to testify that Mr. Marcos had taken carloads ofgold, the existence of which is viewed skeptically by manyFilipino historians.   President Marcos, who ruled under martial law for 14years, was overthrown in a revolution in 1986. Afterwards, heand Mrs. Marcos took refuge in Hawaii, where they allegedlycontinued the racketeering enterprise.   Debra Livingston, an assistant U.S. attorney prosecutingthe case, told jurors the government will prove that Mrs.Marcos took an active role in directing the alleged scheme offraud.   &quot;You are going to learn that Imelda Marcos and FerdinandMarcos together were partners in crime,&quot; she said, addingthat Mrs. Marcos &quot;treated the New York branch office of thePhilippines National Bank, which is a government operatedbank, as her own personal piggy bank.&quot;   ---   A NEWSPAPER may depreciate the value of paid subscribersit acquires.   The decision by U.S. District Judge H. Lee Sarokin inNewark, N.J., came in a case brought by Newark Morning LedgerCo., a unit of the Newhouse family's Advance Publications,against the federal government.   Ledger took depreciation deductions with respect to paidsubscribers it obtained as part of its 1977 purchase of BoothNewspapers Inc., a Michigan newspaper chain. The InternalRevenue Service disallowed the deductions, a decision thatwould have cost Ledger millions of dollars. Ledger also ownsthe Newark Star Ledger newspaper.   Albert Turkus, a Washington attorney who representedLedger, said the ruling will likely affect many otherbusinesses that wish to depreciate such intangible assets asa customer base.   Judge Sarokin disagreed with the IRS claim thatsubscribers have indefinite life for tax purposes andtherefore shouldn't be depreciated. Judge Sarokin found thatsubscribers &quot;are not self-regenerating assets,&quot; and that theycan only be replaced at substantial cost and effort.   Donald Robinson, a Newark, N.J., attorney alsorepresenting Ledger, said the company is pleased by thedecision. An IRS spokesman says the government hasn't yetdecided whether it will appeal the decision.   ---   Wade Lambert contributed to this column.</TEXT></DOC>