<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900719-0031</DOCNO><DOCID>900719-0031.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Lutherans Suspend Church Over Lesbians   ----   By R. Gustav Niebuhr and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/19/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   After listening to legal arguments by secular lawyers, aspecial disciplinary committee of the Evangelical LutheranChurch in America suspended a San Francisco congregation forfive years for hiring a lesbian couple as ministers.   In addition, the committee of the nation's third-largestProtestant denomination warned another San Franciscocongregation, which hired a gay man as a minister, that itfaced suspension within 30 days unless it made efforts tocomply with church law.</LP><TEXT>   The ruling yesterday -- unprecedented within the 5.2million-member church -- stopped just short of expelling St.Francis Lutheran Church, which installed Ruth Frost, 42 yearsold, and Phyllis Zillhart, 32, as assistant ministers sixmonths ago. Instead, it revoked the congregation's politicalrights within the church, barring it from voting orintroducing legislation at church assemblies.   The suspension will run until Dec. 31, 1995, after whichthe 130-member congregation will face expulsion from thechurch if it still doesn't comply with church law, saidCharles Ruthroth, assistant to Bishop Lyle Miller, whobrought the charges against the two congregations.   The question of whether homosexuals should be allowed toserve as clergy is becoming a deeply divisive issue withinseveral Protestant denominations. Some church leaders admitto being torn between upholding biblical injunctions againstsex outside marriage and a more modern desire not todiscriminate against a minority group.   Last month, the Central Conference of American Rabbis,head of the of 1.3 million-member Reform branch of Judaism,voted to accept homosexuals into their ranks.   Bishop Miller, head of the Lutheran church's SierraPacific Synod -- a district that includes San Francisco --charged that St. Francis Lutheran, by hiring Ms. Frost andMs. Zillhart, and First United Lutheran Church, by hiringJeff Johnson, 28, had violated the church's constitution.   At hearings before the disclipinary committee earlier thismonth, Bishop Miller said the church -- formed in 1988through the merger of three smaller Lutheran denominations --might collapse if individual congregations were allowed toset their own rules for calling clergy. He charged the twocongregations with violating the church's provision thatministers may be hired only if they are listed on a roster ofclergy candidates.   The roster is compiled by a special committee within eachsynod. A church rule prohibits the listing of anyone who is a&quot;practicing&quot; homosexual. Ms. Frost and Ms. Zillhart werenever approved for the roster; Mr. Johnson was originallylisted, but then dropped after refusing to promise to lead acelibate life.   In the ruling, the disciplinary committee said that if Mr.Johnson reapplied for listing on the clergy roster and wasapproved, charges against First United Lutheran would bedropped.   The attorneys involved in the case found themselves inunfamiliar waters. &quot;From our perspective, it's difficult inthat it involves ultimate issues of life and being,&quot; saidKathleen Kelly, chairwoman of the disciplinary committee anda professor at McGeorge Law School of the University of thePacific in Sacramento, Calif. Tony Tanke, a staff attorneyfor the California Supreme Court, worked with Ms. Kelly inwriting the decision.   Ms. Kelly said she and Mr. Tanke were originally electedto the committee as active lay people in the Lutheran church,rather than as lawyers.   Ms. Kelly said attorneys on both sides attempted to limittheir arguments to church law and theology. However, shesaid, the attorney representing the congregations -- RichardD. Warren of the San Francisco law firm of Landels, Ripley andamp;Diamond -- appealed to the committee to follow the example ofthe U.S. Supreme Court in the 1803 case of Marbury vs.Madison, in which the court asserted the power of judicialreview. The analogy was used to prompt the committee toreview critically the church's law against the hiring ofhomosexual ministers.   ---   SCRAMBLE OVER ASBESTOS class action heats up as judgeissues new order.   U.S. District Judge Robert Parker, who is presiding overasbestos cases in his court in Beaumont, Texas, said a classaction may be necessary to consolidate the hundreds ofthousands of asbestos personal-injury cases in the U.S. Buthe said no action should be taken until all federal judgeshandling major asbestos litigation can meet and agree on howa nationwide class action should be structured. In a typicalclass action, all similar cases are consolidated in a singlecourt and then tried together.   Earlier this week, a federal judge in Cleveland ordered anationwide class action for the cases. Lawyers have said thatthe impact of the Cleveland order was unclear because itallowed cases in many courts to continue separate from theclass-action lawsuit.   &quot;The problem is a national one, and it calls for anational solution,&quot; Judge Parker said. &quot;Courts must set asideregional concerns and become the problem solvers our societyrightly expects.&quot;   He said the judges also will have to determine whetherdefendants in the cases -- former makers and distributors ofasbestos -- lack sufficient funds to continue litigating thecases.   ---   CURBSIDE GARBAGE can't be searched without a warrant,state court rules.   Rejecting precedents set by the U.S. Supreme Court andnearly every state court that has confronted the issue, theNew Jersey Supreme Court ruled that police officers can'tsearch through curbside garbage bags without a searchwarrant. However, the court said that officers can seize thebags as part of a criminal investigation, as long as theyobtain a warrant before examining their contents.   The court said the state's constitution guarantees NewJersey citizens greater protection against unreasonablesearches than does the U.S. Constitution. In 1989, the U.S.Supreme Court ruled that the Fourth Amendment's prohibitionof unreasonable searches and seizures doesn't apply togarbage left for collection in an area accessible to thepublic.   Two of the New Jersey court's seven justices dissentedfrom the opinion, criticizing the majority for departing fromthe U.S. Supreme Court ruling.   ---   STEVEN G. CALABRESI, most recently a speechwriter for VicePresident Quayle and a former special assistant to PresidentReagan for domestic affairs, will join the law faculty atNorthwestern University in the fall. Mr. Calabresi isnational co-chairman and a co-founder of the FederalistSociety, an organization of conservative and libertarianlawyers and law students, many of whom have served as clerksto prominent conservative judges.   ---   Edward Felsenthal contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>