<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900511-0074</DOCNO><DOCID>900511-0074.</DOCID><HL>   MEDICINE andamp; HEALTH (A Special Report): Red Flags   ---   Telltale Heart:   PET Scanners Seem to Represent   A Major Advance in Screening   For Heart Disease; So Why   Aren't They Used More?   ----   By John Koten and Thomas M. Burton</HL><DATE>05/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R9</SO><IN>MEDICAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY (MTC)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><LP>   THE HEART IS an unreliable sentinel, so silent that nodiagnostic tool can safely and reliably screen it fordisease. As many as 60% of the more than one millionheart-attack victims each year have no warning that they aresick.   But imagine a new machine, a breakthrough in diagnosingheart disease. It would be highly reliable. It wouldn'trequire surgery or other invasive procedures. The test wouldtell doctors who has coronary disease and who hasn't, howsick victims are, and what the best treatment methods may be.</LP><TEXT>   According to many cardiologists, such a tool exists. Atest using positron emissions tomography, or PET, scanners,they say, could radically alter the attack on heart disease.   So what's the problem?   Plenty. The PET test faces an enormous battle as it worksits way through the labyrinth of medical economics andgovernment approvals. Heated disputes among cardiologistsalso may slow the process -- as may fights amongmanufacturers. &quot;We could be saving a lot of lives,&quot; says K.Lance Gould, a cardiologist at the University of TexasMedical Center and a leading proponent of the use of PETscanning. &quot;But things move a lot slower than you mightthink.&quot;   Although the basic technology for PET scans has existedfor more than 20 years, it only recently has begun to gaincredibility as a valuable diagnostic tool for cardiologists.Many heart doctors still don't even know it exists.   PET scanners are large, doughnut-shaped machines that takethree-dimensional photographs of blood as it flows throughthe heart. During the test, a doctor gives a patient anintravenous injection of a radioactive tracer. As the tracerdecays, it emits positrons that are picked up by the scannerand transformed by a computer into vivid color pictures ofthe heart.   PET scans allow doctors to precisely measure the metabolicactivity of the heart muscle in addition to the quality ofblood flow through each of the heart's four chambers. Thetest is conducted first with the heart at rest and then understressed conditions -- using a drug that simulates exercise.This gives doctors before-and-after pictures that allow themto assess damage to heart muscles as well as to determinewhether blood flow is being impaired by atherosclerosis. Bybeing able to see exactly what part of the heart is affected,doctors can also figure out which arteries are obstructed andby how much.   Currently, the only procedure that exceeds the PET scan inreliability is coronary angiography. Angiography providesdoctors with vivid X-ray pictures of clogged arteries, butbecause it is an invasive procedure that requires snaking acatheter through the body, it also carries much higher risk.As a result, angiography is used only with patients who havealready had heart attacks or are deemed to be at extremelyhigh risk. Another widely used test, the thallium scan, has alower accuracy rate than PET and isn't popular as a screeningdevice for patients who don't have obvious cardiac-diseasesymptoms.   PET scans, on the other hand, carry virtually no risk andare highly accurate -- replicating the results of angiographyas much as 98% of the time. They also cost roughly half asmuch as a $3,500 angiogram.   &quot;The PET scan has significant potential,&quot; says JohnMazziotta, professor of neurology and radiology at the UCLASchool of Medicine. He notes that, in many diseases, theearliest changes in the body are biochemical. Since this iswhat the PET scan sees, &quot;the ideal way to use this is indetecting disease before people develop symptoms,&quot; he says.PET scans also are accurate in measuring the progress ofpatients who have had bypass operations or other treatmentsfor heart disease, as well as in evaluating candidates forsuch procedures.   But it is the potential for early detection of heartdisease that offers the most exciting benefits -- both interms of saving lives and in reducing the enormous expenseassociated with treating people who have heart attacks. TheAmerican Heart Association estimates that the annual cost ofcardiovascular disease -- including medical and nursing careand lost productivity -- totals $94.5 billion.   Yet as promising as it is, the PET scan faces an uphillbattle in winning acceptance. One of its biggest hurdles isthe Catch-22 of medical economics. With only 50 workingscanners in the U.S., many of them built experimentally, theprocedure is expensive -- costing about $1,800 per test.Though much cheaper than angiography, that is substantiallymore than other current screening devices, such as thetreadmill stress test.   Even though wider application could substantially reducethe cost of PET scans -- some proponents believe a $600 priceis attainable -- neither the government nor insurancecompanies will reimburse PET tests at current levels. Thatleaves hospitals to take a risk few are willing to chance:buy the scanner now in hopes that reimbursement will occurdown the road.   &quot;The current state of medical economics dictates thatgovernment and insurance companies be more conservative thanthey've been in the past,&quot; says Landis Griffeth, assistantprofessor at Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, WashingtonUniversity in St. Louis. At the same time, he adds:&quot;Hospitals have to be fiscally realistic. They can go brokesetting up something they're not going to get paid for.&quot;   The proponents of PET technology also have a running feudwith other doctors. Many cardiologists resist PET testsbecause they stand to lose economically if the test supplantscurrent stress tests. That's because PET tests would probablybe done at major medical centers -- in contrast to stresstests, which can be done in doctors' offices and are thus amajor source of revenue in private practices.   &quot;This is basically a nasty catfight,&quot; says J. MichaelMcGehee, executive director of the Institute for ClinicalPET, which is based in Washington, D.C., and set up mostly tolobby the government on behalf of PET. &quot;You have thousands ofcardiologists every day doing thousands of stress tests.{Some proponents of PET} would stop that. They are advocatingtaking this away from the cardiologists.&quot;   Even the manufacturers of PET scanners are squabblingamong themselves. Some of the equipment only works well withradioactive tracers produced by huge -- and expensive --cyclotrons. The manufacturers who make these scanners,including Siemens Corp. and General Electric Co., generallyfavor more specialized use of PET scanners in heartapplications.   Because their scanners work better in some brain-relatedapplications, they also are promoting PET for that purpose.   But other scanners, made by Positron Corp. of Houston, usea radioactive tracer called rubidium. These don't work wellfor scanning the brain, but rubidium can be produced in asmall machine about the size of a briefcase -- avoiding theneed for a $3 million cyclotron. (The briefcase-sizedmachines are made by Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.) The proponentsof these scanners contend that PET should be widely used as ascreening device for heart disease.   This latter group is currently losing the battle. Thegovernment is considering only whether to approvereimbursements for PET scans in certain limited applications-- some involving the heart and others involving the brain.   The proposal before the government's Health Care FinancingAdministration has been sent to a physicians' panel thatevaluates new health technology. It will then go to thePublic Health Service's Office of Health TechnologyAssessment. Final approval isn't likely until next year, atthe earliest.   Nevertheless, the supporters of wider use for PET remainoptimistic. &quot;The medical establishment aside, we believethere is tremendous demand out there for this sort of test,&quot;says Dr. Gould of the University of Texas. &quot;It's there amonghighstress executives who want to know if they are at risk,it's {there among} people who have had heart problems treatedand want to know how they are progressing, it's {there among}the population at large. There's tremendous fear and concernamong people about their hearts. New technologies like thePET test can either give you peace of mind because you findout you don't have the disease, or tell you for sure thatyou've got a problem and you need to take steps to reversethe problem. Either way, you win.&quot;   ---   Mr. Koten, chief of The Wall Street Journal's Chicagobureau, served as contributing editor of this Wall StreetJournal Report. Mr. Burton is a staff reporter in the Chicagobureau.</TEXT></DOC>