<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900615-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>900615-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Pillaging to Enrich the Few or Courageous Turnaround?</HL><DATE>06/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   SWY LABOR</CO><IN>FOOD RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS, CONVENIENCE STORES (FDR)</IN><LP>   I applaud your willingness to print the Safeway LBOarticle. I am president of a moderate-sized business and havebeen forced to downsize the company, so I have great empathyfor the workers and a fair understanding of businesspressures.   It is plain to me that KKR and its predecessor in thisdeal care little for the fabric that bonds employees to acompany. Mr. Magowan and senior management have earnedeconomic windfalls at great expense to the average, dedicatedemployee. Why must such a cadre of wealthy executives stickit so hard to the employees working in their stores?</LP><TEXT>   George Roberts pontificates that quotas and pressure toperform are facts of life in today's world of globalcompetition. Most surely they are. Yet, while he roams theworld as a wealthy man delivering this message, his employeesare scraping by at lower than pre-buy-out wages. Theirfamilies will never forget his arrogance or the policies thatstretched out severance payments over months to those who canleast afford it. It is simply revolting.   Business can be tough, but it should establish a standardby which it will be judged within the society. Although KKR,Mr. Magowan and a handful of executives will continue to reapfinancial rewards, it has been done in a most shameful way.   Robert C. McNally   President   Landex Corp.   Parsippany, N.J.   ---   Your article is not only the single best I've read in yourpaper, but also the single best argument that unions arenecessary to keep management humane.   Your reporting is as telling as those photographs intextbooks of 10-year-olds who worked 12-hour days in theLowell textile mills earlier in our century.   What employees today trust management to be loyal to them?Very few, I'm afraid, and if so, they are naive or fools.   Warren Owens   Bethel, Conn.   ---   It must be remembered that Safeway was originallyjeopardized by uninvited corporate predators. The defensiveactions that followed were then necessary and appropriate, inmy opinion.   Our relationship with Safeway officials both before andafter the LBO shows no change in their always high regard forother humans. Their responsibilities following the LBO weredifficult. From our vantage point, they went about their taskwith integrity and sensitivity.   Suicide, heart attack and diabetes result from lifetimeproclivities. Your effort to attribute the sole cause toSafeway is uncommonly cruel.   R.L. Hanlin   President   Sunkist Growers Inc.   Van Nuys, Calif.   ---   Your article presents a grim picture. It stands in sharpcontrast to our experience with the management buy-out ofSafeway's Oklahoma division. The division wasn't acquired bya grocery chain.   A company formed by Clayton andamp; Dubilier, along with 33local managers, purchased the division in 1987, keeping all5,624 employees and 106 stores. What we found when we boughtHomeland was a small, neglected part of a larger corporatebureaucracy, starved for capital, and losing market share.   With an ownership interest in the company conferred onfull-time employees through a stock appreciation rightsprogram, Homeland has developed a new entrepreneurial spirit.In addition to growing faster and becoming more productivesince the buy-out, Homeland has added more than 1,200 newjobs, expanded advertising expenditures 25% and, over thepast two years, invested $60 million in new stores and storeremodels compared with the $3.6 million invested by Safewaythe year before the buy-out.   The lesson of the Safeway buy-out is not the unbalancedportrait of despair that we were left with in your article;it is equally a story of the remarkable benefits achievablethrough the organization innovation represented by Homelandand many similar divestiture LBOs. We have seen it manytimes. Free from big-company constraints, managers andemployees who become owners of enterprises are capable ofgreat feats. And this is something American business sorelyneeds to remain globally competitive.   Martin H. Dubilier   Chairman   Clayton andamp; Dubilier Inc.   New York   ---   Messrs. Haft, Kravis, Magowan et al. inflicted moresuffering than if they had ridden through town on horsebackpillaging and plundering, as their spiritual forebears oncedid. We see our society as more civilized now, but some of usstill regard material gain as more valuable than human life.   The deal-makers care little that the costs of thistransaction greatly outweigh the rewards; they have kept thegains while passing on the costs to others. Their lack ofconscience permits them to talk of &quot;efficiency&quot; and&quot;profitability&quot; to justify dumping thousands of loyalemployees, with pitifully meager severance pay, and to treatthe remainder like overworked pack animals, driven by thefear of their own dismissal.   Kelly M. Ranson   San Antonio, Texas   ---   A sound that I could not identify kept me awake lastnight. Perhaps it was Herbert Haft and his son laughing overthe Safeway LBO on their way to the bank.   You are to be commended on your article on Safeway. It isgood that this legalized piracy is exposed to the light ofday, with its shocking loss of employment and even humanlives.   Alan McFarlane   Aberdeen, S.D.   ---   Your story confirms to me once again that when thugs likeKravis and Roberts loot a business it's somehow consideredlegitimate. Yet when the Mafia does the same thing, it'scrime.   The article also confirms how LBOs, with their crushingdebt burdens, turn industry leaders into also-rans withappalling consequences for employees.   John J. Dietsch   Washington   ---   I was appalled and disgusted to read that Steve Dolinka, a25-year Safeway employee, was fired for &quot;theft&quot; after heforgot to pay for soup and toast he ate at the deli. Giventhe circumstances of the man's loss of his teen-age son in abrutal murder, no trivial oversight by him on the job in anyway justifies his dismissal. Business may be business, butwhen simple human compassion is lost to this shocking degreein any firm, the organization and its managers deserve tofail miserably.   Have you no shame, Mr. Magowan? The man whom you firedeven accepted the rationale for his dismissal] I extend mybelated condolences to Mr. Dolinka on the terrible loss ofhis son.   Joseph A. Lazzaro   New Britain, Conn.   ---   For years, I worked as a competitor of the Safeway FoodStores. To respect them as an industry leader was prudent.This was prior to the LBO. I left the industry for a time andreturned as a vendor, supplying services to companies likeSafeway. I am an outsider. The respect I held for the firm inearlier years has grown significantly and I am proud to beassociated with such a fine organization. The &quot;monsters&quot; youattempt to portray exist only within your misguided thoughtprocess.   If the same manner of expose were foisted upon any othermajor company in America, the names would change but thestory would read the same. The '80s were tough on all of us.I know. Twice in my career I have faced a pink slip. Once dueto an LBO. But, you know, life does go on.   Patrick R. Cronin   President   Service Village   Wyckoff, N.J.   ---   Your exhaustively researched and documented (but oh sodepressing) story could serve as a textbook on how thecapitalist system ought not to work. A well-managed andprosperous business that produces and sells real goods isbasically sold as real estate to the great profit of thepaper-pushing deal-makers. Loyal, productive employees arefired by the thousands and those remaining (except at thevery top) are required to do much more for much less. In theaffected communities, competition is reduced as market sharebecomes concentrated in fewer hands. For the consumer, priceincreases are accompanied by service declines as fewerworkers staff the operating units.   The incentive for employees in this atmosphere (&quot;you getto keep your job&quot;) is akin to the employee-motivation methodsused in Stalinist Russia (&quot;you get to continue breathing&quot;).The results are about the same: a lot of poor people, a fewsuicides, and an army of nine-to-fivers whose chief concernis making quota.   James P. Strain   San Diego   ---   You do a masterful job describing how an LBO can enrich afew at the expense of many and, in the process, threaten thelong-term viability of an enterprise that has been a leaderin its field.   In 1889 my grandfather founded a chain of grocery storesin San Diego that Charlie Merrill purchased in 1929 and thatbecame one of Safeway's most successful divisions. About 100years later, Charlie's grandson Peter Magowan found itnecessary to sell the San Diego operation in order to supportthe LBO.   Milton F. Heller Jr.   New Canaan, Conn.   ---   Any jerk in CEO's clothing -- or president's clothing orplant manager's clothing -- can make an operation looksuddenly efficient by firing a quarter of the employees,reducing benefits, deferring maintenance and the rest. Paythe people for a 40-hour week but arrange it so they reallyhave to work 50 hours and the money rolls in like neverbefore.   However, except for the CEO or president, practitioners ofthis art know you must have yourself promoted away from thiskind of highly successful operation because after two orthree years the best people will begin having heart attacks,employee divorces will increase, and employee unhappinesswill become an unrecognized, unquantified drag on profits.   Robert G. Worman   Seminole, Fla.   ---   In March of this year, Safeway and Safeway's employeespresented the second-largest check ever given on the NationalEaster Seal Telethon -- a check for $4.1 million, which wasan increase of $2.5 million over 1989. A company without aheart, a company with disgruntled and unhappy employees couldhardly be expected to perform such a miracle.   Safeway also remains one of the major contributors to foodbanks and feeding programs around the country, and itscorporate office and division offices provide tremendoussupport to charitable groups in the communities where theyoperate.   You unfairly attacked and misrepresented a good companyand its great employees.   Walter A. Spencer Jr.   Chairman   National Easter Seal Society   Chicago   ---   First, it was Nordstrom. Next came Safeway. Who's next?Disneyland?   A thoughtless, left-wing attack on two great Americancompanies on the pages of The Wall Street Journal? Has Pravdabought the Journal?   Howard R. Scouten   Safeway Employee   Pittsburg, Calif.   ---   You tell of the former Safeway trucker who you say &quot;blewhis brains out.&quot; The man went into the bathroom and used his.22-caliber rifle on himself after a year of depression overhis lost job.   I am offended not only by the choice of words used, butalso by the lack of sensitivity for the victims in yourstory. How do you think the widow is going to feel when sheremembers that devastating time by reading such luriddetails. As a former reader, I question your integrity.   Diane Murphy   Edmonds, Wash.   ---   I was struck that this entire affair was one of excesses:Employees and unions overreached and asked too high a wage;management and stockholders wanted too great a profit; thebanks, investment houses and deal-makers eschewed reasonablefees and exacted egregious levies. Hence, any merit this LBOmight claim is overshadowed by the embarrassment of richesenjoyed by some and the tragic losses endured by others.   Some restraint on the part of all would have won big forall. A concern for ethics and morality (there is a place forthese in the business world) might have tempered theattitudes, resulting in a happier outcome. As it was, theconduct and consequences seem more like war than diplomacy,the tools used more like chain saws than pruning shears.   Jon A. Holloway, M.D.   Spokane, Wash.   ---   I read the article with fascinated horror. All I couldthink of was the story of Coriolanus, the Roman patrician whoso hated the common people that he even opposed the freedistribution of corn when the city was in the grip of aterrible famine. Not surprisingly, he was expelled from Rome.He retaliated by gathering up an army of Rome's enemies andmarching on the city.   The women of Rome appealed to his aged mother, Veturia, tointercede. Supported by her daughter-in-law and grandsons,she walked out of the city gates to the enemy camp. Thehistorian Livy describes how seeing his mother, Coriolanusran forward and &quot;would have embraced her had he not beenchecked by her sudden turn to anger. `I would know,' shesaid, `before I accept your kiss, whether I have come to anenemy or a son.'&quot; She then upbraided him in no uncertainterms for his treachery to his own people. Weeping, he fellat her feet and begged forgiveness.   It hardly takes effort to see Coriolanus in Mr. Magowan.But if only his mother bore some resemblance to Veturia]Alas, what might have been a triumphant story is destined forGreek tragedy.   Hallie Black   Faculty   Hopkins Grammar Day Prospect Hill School   New Haven, Conn.   ---   We have been a major supplier to Safeway Stores for morethan 50 years. We have always worked closely with Safeway,particularly during the time when it went through its LBO.   There is no question in our minds that Mr. Magowan and hisassociates have been able to accomplish a complete turnaroundfor the Safeway organization. In our judgment, Safeway wouldnot have made it through the 1980s if it had not restructuredits organization in order to address its competitive positionin the marketplace. Today, Safeway is alive and well and aleader in the industry on a number of key financialmeasurements. This is indeed a remarkable success story and acompany where 100,000 people are still productively employed.   Our free-enterprise system does not work without pain, andwe all know that from time to time difficult decisions mustbe made to stay competitive in a fast-changing market.Safeway made those decisions in the late 1980s and, as aresult, is a strong viable competitor in the retail-grocerybusiness.   W.E. LaMothe   Chairman and CEO   Kellogg Co.   Battle Creek, Mich.</TEXT></DOC>