<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910617-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>910617-0059.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>06/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE U.S. MILITARY BEGAN removing all 20,000 dependentsfrom the Philippines.   U.S. officials initially planned to remove families onlyfrom Clark Air Base, but expanded the evacuation to includethe Subic Bay and Cubi Point facilities because of damagecaused Saturday by falling volcanic ash. Tens of thousands ofFilipinos, meanwhile, fled along ash-clogged roads towardManila to escape Mount Pinatubo's devastation. At least 56people have been killed since the volcano began erupting June9, but scientists said they no longer are expecting acataclysmic explosion in which the mountain would blow itselfapart.</LP><TEXT>   In Japan, a lava-filled dome in the crater of Mount Unzenrose to 230 feet, prompting authorities to warn of anothereruption like the one earlier this month that killed at least39 people.   ---   Sikh militants attacked two trains Saturday near the townof Ludhiana in India's Punjab state, shooting to death 126people, police said. Meanwhile, the Congress (I) Party tookan early lead in parliamentary voting, according topreliminary results.   ---   A biotechnology company announced it had succeeded insplicing the human hemoglobin gene into pigs. The smallPrinceton, N.J., company, DNX Corp., said three of its pigshave human hemoglobin circulating in their bloodstreams.   ---   Gorbachev formally announced his acceptance on Saturday ofan invitation from Britain's Major to meet with leaders ofthe seven top industrialized nations after next month'seconomic summit in London.   ---   Bush said he will consider questions about his health andconcerns of his family in deciding to seek a second term. Inan interview Saturday in Los Angeles, the president said hewould &quot;owe it to the American people&quot; to tell them whetherhis physical condition was good enough to allow him to stayin office another four years.   ---   Mandela warned that the African National Congress wouldtake to the streets in South Africa to press its demand for atransitional government to lead the country to a nonracialdemocracy. He said the ANC insisted that President de Klerkmust step aside to make way for an interim administration anda new constitution.   ---   Kuwait's martial-law court sentenced three men to death inabsentia, bringing to 12 the number of defendants orderedhanged for collaborating with the Iraqis during theoccupation of the emirate. On Saturday, the court sentencedsix journalists to death for their work on an Iraqi-runnewspaper.   ---   Thousands of Kurds marched through the northern Iraqi cityof Dohuk to protest Saturday's withdrawal of remaining U.S.troops there. The demonstrators said U.N. guards aren'tadequate to provide protection from infiltration by Iraq'ssecret police.   ---   An Israeli cabinet minister accused Secretary of StateBaker of meddling in Israel's politics by reportedlycriticizing a hard-line aide to Prime Minister Shamir.Separately, Israelis at the Paris Air Show said Moscowoffered to sell Israel defense systems to counter Soviet-mademissiles of the type deployed by Iraq during the Gulf War.   ---   An international AIDS meeting opened in Italy amid news ofa new combination drug treatment said to prolong an AIDSpatient's immune response, promising an improvement over thecurrent standard drug, AZT.   ---   A Japanese mountain resort was chosen Saturday as the hostof the 1998 Olympics. International Olympic Committeedelegates selected Nagano, northwest of Tokyo, over Salt LakeCity by a vote of 46-42. The Winter Games were last held inAsia in 1972, when Sapporo, Japan, staged the event.   ---   Yildirim Akbulut resigned as Turkey's prime minister afterthe ruling Motherland Party ousted him as chairman,apparently with support from President Turgut Ozal. The partyelected Mesut Yilmaz, a former foreign minister, as itsleader, putting him in line for the premiership.   ---   The Italian government sent home more than 400 Albanianasylum-seekers, marking a shift to a tougher refugee policy.Italy still is trying to absorb over 20,000 Albanians whoarrived at southern ports in March.   ---   Sudan's government approved a U.N. plan to airdrop reliefsupplies to tens of thousands of Sudanese refugees in thesouthern part of the country, a U.S. official said. Therefugees were forced to return home from neighboring Ethiopiaafter the ouster of President Mengistu, who was a backer ofSudanese rebels fighting for autonomy.   ---   Died: A.B. &quot;Happy&quot; Chandler, 92, former Kentucky governor,U.S. senator and baseball commissioner who fought segregationin that sport, Saturday, in Versailles, Ky., of a stroke . .. Peggy Ashcroft, 83, British actress whose career spanned 60years, Friday, in London, after a stroke . . . W. ArthurLewis, 76, Nobel economics laureate, Saturday, in Bridgetown,Barbados.</TEXT></DOC>