<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910325-0106</DOCNO><DOCID>910325-0106.</DOCID><HL>   A Century later,   Sioux Still Struggle,   And Still Are Losing   ---   But `Dances With Wolves'   Has Brought New Pride --   And Maybe Some Tourists   ----   By Judith Valente   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)</IN><LP>   PINE RIDGE, S.D. -- Out here where the winds are grittyand vastness of the prairie makes cattle look like black dotsagainst the rolling landscape, the Lakota Sioux Indians oncelived free.   The tribe has become known to millions through the film&quot;Dances With Wolves.&quot; The Kevin Costner movie depicts theSioux as a proud and hardy people who survived rugged prairielife through a deep understanding of nature, strong sense ofcommunity and rich spiritual life. &quot;Dances With Wolves,&quot;based just after the Civil War, has won widespread praise forits realistic portrayal of Native American Indians. It couldbe a big winner at tonight's Academy Awards.</LP><TEXT>   Little about this arid prairie land has changed in acentury. But for the descendants of the Lakota Sioux, lifetoday is a very different struggle for survival.   Most Sioux Indians were run off their land more than 100years ago into a reservation in the southwestern corner ofSouth Dakota, in Shannon County, far from the pristinegrasslands where much of &quot;Dances With Wolves&quot; was filmed. Itis one of the poorest counties in the nation. And nowhere areconditions worse than on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation,home to 12,000 Sioux.   The grim statistical litany of life on Pine Ridge tellsreams about what has happened to the Sioux in the 100 yearssince the West was won. Sixty percent of youths drop out ofhigh school. Rapid City, the closest urban center, enjoys oneof the lowest unemployment rates in the country, but on thereservation, 87% of adults don't have jobs.   At Pine Ridge's only hospital, one in four babies is borntwitching and shaking with delirium tremens, the result oftheir mothers' drinking during pregnancy; they will sufferlearning disabilities later in life. Pine Ridge's infantmortality rate is 50% higher than that of Cuba, Costa Rica orBulgaria; fetal alcoholism syndrome and poor nutrition arelargely to blame. The incidence of diabetes is five times thenational average, the suicide rate double.   Health care is limited. Last year, the hospital's 11doctors handled an average of 9,636 outpatient visits each.Right now, there's a hepatitis outbreak. &quot;We're worse offthan Kuwait,&quot; says Alex White Plume, a member of theexecutive committee that governs the reservation.   Day after day, a steady stream of the needy visits hiscramped office in the Red Cloud Tribal Center. An elderlywoman with skin like tanned leather asks the tribe for anemergency grant to help her pay the funeral expenses for heryoung daughter who was killed, along with her unborn child,in a car wreck on one of the reservation's unpaved roads. Butall Mr. White Plume can offer is some buffalo meat for thetraditional funeral dinner.   He can't even help his own uncle, who is housing 23 peoplein a two-bedroom home.   Tribal leaders like Mr. White Plume say the Sioux'scurrent problems can't be separated from the past, and theexperience that robbed Indians of their ancestral lands,their spiritual traditions and their dignity. Until 13 yearsago, federal law prohibited the Sioux from practicing manyspiritual rites on the reservation. Children caught speakingthe Lakota language at Catholic mission schools werepunished. &quot;Over time, the Indian people internalized a senseof hopelessness,&quot; says Rene Mills, a 44-year-old Sioux.   The reservation land itself virtually assured that theSioux would languish. Their 1.7 million acres west of theMissouri River are among the toughest in the state on whichto farm or ranch. A large chunk of Pine Ridge includes theBadlands, a moon-like landscape where not even grass willgrow in the alkaline soil.   A vast welfare system gives Pine Ridge's residents littleincentive to break the poverty cycle. &quot;A person would have toearn $7 an hour to do better than welfare pays them,&quot; saysTom Cook, an Indian leader from nearby Chadron, Neb. Thosewho take jobs must pay 30% of their housing costs, whilethose who remain on public assistance live rent-free.   The Sioux and their legendary chief, Sitting Bull, wereamong the last holdouts against white settlers. Pine Ridgeincludes Wounded Knee, where U.S. soldiers killed at least200 Indians in a single day in 1890. Tensions have remainedhigh between the whites and Indians ever since.   Border towns in Nebraska that got rich selling liquor toreservation Indians used to attach signs to work sites thatsaid &quot;No Dogs or Indians.&quot; Mr. Mills, who has a bachelor'sdegree in sociology and a masters in educationadministration, took $5-an-hour construction jobs to supporthimself.   The success of &quot;Dances With Wolves&quot; has stirred deepfeelings. Robert Grey Eagle, a Sioux lawyer, says the film ishelping teach whites that the Indians have much to offer intheir understanding of nature, concern for the environmentand deep inner life. &quot;When I went into the movie theater, Iwas just another insignificant Native American to most of theother people there, one of those grim statistics hangingaround Rapid City,&quot; he says. &quot;When I came out, I felt thatpeople were looking at me in a different light.&quot;   Mr. Grey Eagle and his wife, Jeaneen, are part of a newgeneration of Sioux leaders who believe the Sioux can breakout of the cycle of poverty that has enmeshed them since1889, when their leaders, exhausted by battles withland-hungry settlers and the U.S. military, agreed to movethe tribe onto reservations.   Mr. Cook, for instance, with help from the non-profitChristian Relief Services, is farming the reservation landowned by his wife's family. He is using the Israeli dripsystem of irrigation and Japanese style wind fences to dealwith the two biggest obstacles to farming in the region, lackof water and high winds. Mr. Cook says one reservation farmerearned $16,000 last year farming four acres of cucumbers,cantaloupes and tomatoes. Mr. Cook is trying to get otherIndians interested in joining him in a farming cooperative.   With a private grant and money she saved from working asecretary's job, Mr. Cook's wife, Loretta, opened the firstIndian-owned business in Chadron, a shop that sells Siouxjewelry and artifacts. Mrs. Cook's shop provides work for 107Pine Ridge residents who hand-craft the items she sells.   The reservation has its own radio station now, where mostof the programs are in the Lakota language. Tribal leadersare trying to get approval for a television station to teachIndian youths about their culture and spiritual traditions.   And Mr. Grey Eagle is pushing tribal leaders to seek lightmanufacturing for the reservation. He sees vast untappedpotential in the valuable mineral rights that sit beneathreservation lands. There are natural gas deposits as well as18 billion tons of zeolite, a natural substance used in catlitter.   But there are many obstacles. Few businesses have beenwilling to venture onto the reservations. There are no banks.In fact, there are only 14 private businesses on thereservation: two gas stations, one hairdresser and 11 smallgrocery stores. There are few paved roads.   Just as difficult to overcome is the mistrust many triballeaders feel about doing business with non-Indians. Theyoffer many examples why: There's the meatpacking company thatreceived a federal grant to locate its plant on thereservation and hire Indians, but did neither. And thecompany that South Dakota Sen. Thomas A. Daschle says willpay so little to dump waste on another reservation that hederides the plan as &quot;Dances With Garbage.&quot;   The Sioux were even skeptical of Mr. Costner and hisproduction crew. The first week of location shooting, some ofthe more elderly Indians complained that the $40 a day theyearned as extras wasn't enough, although co-producer JimWilson said it was $5 more than extras normally receive onnon-union films. To keep up good relations, the producersquickly agreed to increase the pay to $55.   Tribal leaders have tried to regain 1.7 million acres inthe Black Hills, the mountains that ring much of the SouthDakota prairie, which they say the government took illegally.The Supreme Court agreed with the Sioux and ordered the tribecompensated, but didn't give back the land. The Indians haverefused to take their $300 million award, opting instead topress their land claim in Congress.   Now some Sioux see an opportunity in tourism. &quot;Dances WithWolves&quot; has sparked interest in the Indian customs portrayedin the movie, many of which are still practiced by the SouthDakota Sioux. Mr. Mills, who is the tribal tourism director,is trying to identify all of the sites in the area withspecial significance, such as Sitting Bull's grave, so he canestablish an Indian history trail ride.   But the reservations are hardly ready to be showcased.Most people live in old trailers or box-like prefabricatedgovernment housing that has fallen into disrepair. There areno hotels. Mounds of tires and piles of rusty car parts spotthe landscape. &quot;How can you justify sending someone in a$50,000 RV down an unpaved road to see the squalor thatexists on the reservation?&quot; asks Deb Cottier, executivedirector of the Chadron Chamber of Commerce.   Instead, the chamber is considering attracting tourists bybuilding a re-creation of an Indian village.</TEXT></DOC>