<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910524-0104</DOCNO><DOCID>910524-0104.</DOCID><HL>   A Vote in Cuba? Why Not in Iraq?   ----   By Albert Wohlstetter</HL><DATE>05/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)</RE><LP>   President Bush marked the 89th anniversary of Cubanindependence Monday by calling for a free press there, theright to organize political parties and free and fairelections under international supervision. He challengedFidel Castro to let Cuba live in peace with its neighbors,promising that if Mr. Castro made such changes, relationsbetween our two countries would &quot;significantly&quot; improve. Hefocused, in short, not on Mr. Castro, but on the need forCubans to pick their leaders by a democratic process.   On the same day, the president said he would oppose thelifting of trade sanctions on Iraq so long as Saddam Husseinwas in power. He did not call for a vote in Iraq. Thepresidential spokesman called attention to a recent speech bydeputy national security adviser, Robert Gates, to theAmerican Society of Newspaper Editors. Mr. Gates also focusedon Saddam, not on ending the Baath dictatorship by givingIraqis a fair chance to pick their leaders.</LP><TEXT>   This seems odd. It is Saddam, not Fidel Castro, who hasbeen calling for democracy. He has agreed to grant the Kurdsautonomy within a looser federal Iraq, and he has stated thatpress freedoms, the rule of law and elections throughout Iraqwould be a more acceptable guarantee of the rights of theopposition than a Western military force or even the U.N.security guard, which he has whittled down to 500 men armedonly with handcuffs. He seems to be responding to the demandsstated two years earlier in London by Iraqi Shiites andKurds, of the right, left and center, for democracy and therule of law as a durable protection of their rights withinthe present boundaries of Iraq; and to the same demandspresented during Operation Desert Shield by 21 politicalparties, including all the major opposition groups.   Last week, Iraqis and non-Iraqis formed the InternationalCommittee for a Free Iraq to promote a democraticnonsectarian government preserving the unity of Iraq withinits present frontiers. The committee stresses, as PresidentBush did in the case of Cuba, that the introduction ofdemocracy is necessary, not only for the stability of Iraq,but for the peace and stability of its neighbors.   The neighbors whose stability has most concerned the U.S.government prefer cultural autonomy for Iraqi Shiites andKurds within the boundaries of a democratic Iraq, to adictatorship in Baghdad that has slaughtered Shiites, Turksand Kurds and driven them in a huge, panicked exodus. TheU.N. Security Council has identified the exodus itself as adirect threat to the stability of the region.   Contrary to the automatic expectations of Western expertson the region, Turkey's President Turgut Ozal has supportedautonomy for the Kurds within a democratic federal Iraq. (TheIraqi National Turkman Party, headquartered for now inAnkara, Turkey, has advanced essentially the same program.)Saudi leaders who have been in contact with dissident IraqiShiites have found they have no interest in stirring uptrouble among Saudi Shiites. The Saudis aren't democrats butthey'd be less menaced by a democratic, federal Iraq than bya radical dictatorship. Some Saudi leaders even proposed inMarch that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia join in supporting theresistance and encouraged the Senate Foreign RelationsCommittee to lobby the administration for that purpose. TheU.S. didn't respond.   Why take seriously Saddam's proposals to the Kurds? Or hisproposals to change the Constitution and guarantee the ruleof law by democratic processes? Saddam's brutal record, andthat of the Baath Party and the preceding Iraqi dictatorshipsshould certainly inspire skepticism. However, the Baathregime is in desperate trouble. It needs the oil revenuesdenied it by the international sanctions President Bushworked hard to bring into being. The sanctions now requirethe vote of the five permanent members of the U.N. SecurityCouncil for change. The coalition has withdrawn most of itsmilitary force from the Gulf. But what it has left and whatit can quickly bring back is formidable support for thecontinuing sanctions.   The U.S. has a great deal more leverage over Saddam thanit has over Mr. Castro. &quot;Improving relations significantlybetween the two countries&quot; is not nearly so shining a rewardas the hard cash Saddam and the Iraqi government might gettheir hands on if the U.S. were to recommend relaxing thesanctions.   The revenues from future Iraqi oil sales would be paidinto a U.N. account. They would be released for specifiedpurposes in support of the Iraqi civilian economy and itsdevelopment. Their release would be conditioned on the U.N.'speriodic certification that the civil rights and democraticprocesses Saddam promises have been put in place and arebeing sustained. The five permanent members of the SecurityCouncil wouldn't need periodically to agree to continue thisarrangement. They would need unanimity to change it.   Such an arrangement would have a payoff not only forIraq's minorities and its dissident Shiite majority, but alsofor the world outside Iraq, which has been threatenedrepeatedly by Iraqi military force. Free communication amongIraqi citizens and between them and the outside world wouldmake genuine some of the nominal restraints on Iraqiresearch, development and production of chemical, biologicaland nuclear weapons and the missiles for delivering them.Otherwise, such restraints might be evaded without adequatewarning.   This arrangement takes seriously the Baath government'sproposal for democracy. It should be more attractive toSaddam than the alternative the U.S. is offering him, namely,his elimination. What is more, Saddam's proposed changes inthe Iraqi political process may bring about something morethan Saddam is bargaining for, something that has beenillustrated again and again in recent times by transitionsfrom dictatorship toward democracy.   Dictators tend to believe their own propaganda -- allthose posters showing children presenting them with flowers,women kissing their hands, men embracing them. Dictatorssurvive by isolating their subjects from each other and theoutside world. But that isolates the dictator, too. He maybelieve the public opinion polls, such as the one taken bythe Washington Post and ABC in Nicaragua before last year'selections. There, poll takers solemnly asked the subjects ofthe Nicaraguan dictator how they expected to vote. Greatsurprise: Nervous subjects told poll takers they preferredtheir dictator. And Daniel Ortega read the polls. At 3o'clock on the morning after the election, as the ballotspoured in, he learned what his people really thought of hisdictatorship. In Romania in 1989, Ceausescu was similarlysurprised. Elsewhere in Eastern Europe, the new leadersMikhail Gorbachev proposed to supplant the old guard incontinuing dictatorships were surprised to discover that thesubjects, now an electorate, wanted none of them.   As these examples show, elections are risky. Still, adictator may prefer them to forcible expulsion, imprisonmentor assassination.   What would the U.S. get out of it? A better chance toleave Iraq in a finite time without abandoning the Kurds andthe Shiites to the unchecked brutality of the Baathdictatorship, and without tarnishing a brilliant militaryvictory. The U.S. encouraged rebellion when it invited theIraqi people &quot;to determine their own leadership&quot; and thendestroyed much but not all of the artillery, tanks, armoredpersonnel carriers and other heavy equipment that the Iraqiarmy had used in performing the primary function it hadserved for 70 years -- repressing rebellion. By turning Iraqtoward democracy, the U.S. could be greatly increasing thechance for stability in this region of immense economicimportance to the U.S. and the rest of the world.   It would be utopian for the U.S. to demand democracyeverywhere. Mr. Bush's democratic challenge to Fidel Castrorecognizes that it is also utopian to support existingdictatorships everywhere.   In the past, when administration spokesmen said that &quot;ourbasic policy toward Iraq remains that Iraq's own populationshould determine its own leadership,&quot; and repeated that theU.S. does not want to interfere in the internal affairs ofIraq, it seemed to many of us that the obvious way to do thatwould be to let the Iraqis vote. However, some high officialskept telling reporters and Senate staffers that our policy is&quot;to get rid of Saddam Hussein, not his regime.&quot;   Trying to preserve an authoritarian regime or adictatorship while just rearranging the personnel a bit isthe most obvious sort of interference in internal affairs.That leaves fingerprints, not to say footprints. But whereit's feasible and in the U.S. interest to encouragedemocracy, that's something else again. That's letting peopletake care of their own internal affairs.   ---   Mr. Wohlstetter is university professor emeritus,University of Chicago, and president of Pan Heuristics, aresearch group in Los Angeles.</TEXT></DOC>