<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910903-0131</DOCNO><DOCID>910903-0131.</DOCID><HL>   Aspiring Nations:   As Independence Nears,   The Baltic States Face   Raft of New Challenges   ---   Control Over State Factories,   Borders, Currency Must   Be Debated With Moscow   ---   The KGB's Late-Night Fire   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   TALLINN, Estonia -- With mischief in his eyes, CentralBank President Rein Otsason tells how for two years hesecretly planned for this moment -- his nation's final rushfor independence.   Eluding the ever-vigilant Soviet KGB, he and othersarranged for millions of Estonian Kroon to be printed abroad.The currency hasn't been used here since the Soviet Unionswallowed Estonia and the two other Baltic nations in 1940.But even now, after the U.S. and much of the West hasrecognized the independence of the Baltics, Mr. Otsason won'treveal details of Estonia's plan to sneak the bills into thecountry past Soviet border guards, or even whether thecurrency is in Estonia yet. &quot;We still have our enemies,&quot; hesays.</LP><TEXT>   All that matters now, adds the 60-year-old economist, isthat Estonians get the currency into circulation as quicklyas possible &quot;in order to defend ourselves&quot; from rubleinflation and the collapsing Soviet economy. &quot;With every weekwe wait, our national worth declines,&quot; he says.   Estonia's effort to introduce its own currency, a moveLatvia and Lithuania will likely follow, shows just howfrantically the three nations are wrestling with the prospectof true independence, something the Soviets have yet to grantdespite their hints that they ultimately will.   &quot;We are like a newborn child who arrived unexpectedly inthe seventh month,&quot; says Marju Lauristin, a member of theEstonian Parliament and one of the founders of itsindependence movement. &quot;We have to do things quickly so thatwe can survive in this new environment.&quot; She expects Estoniamight conclude the legal aspects of its independence in amatter of weeks, but the process of achieving truesovereignty could take five to 10 years.   The easy negotiations come first -- over Estonian controlof customs, borders and its right to issue visas. Moredifficult will be the terms under which 150,000 Soviet troopswill withdraw at a time when Soviet authorities already lackhousing for the 370,000 soldiers coming home from Germany.For that, Estonians will use as a model Hungary's successfulnegotiations with the Soviets. Hungary didn't have to pay forwhat the Soviet military built in the country and themilitary didn't pay for the ecological and physical damage ithad done to the countryside.   The economic settlements will be trickiest of all. TheSoviets will demand a big price for their state-ownedcompanies in Estonia, which still account for more than afourth of the republic's national product. But Estonians willclaim that as a republic of the Soviet Union their budget wasused to invest in virtually every public project in thecountry, including the government buildings in Moscow. &quot;Wewill be willing to drop our claims if the Soviet Union grantsus its property in Estonia through a simple legislative act,&quot;says Mr. Otsason.   Estonian authorities also will refuse Soviet demands thatthe republic pay a fair share of the country's huge debt. &quot;Wewill pay the same percentage that Estonia receives from theSoviet Union in its gold and currency reserves,&quot; says Mr.Otsason.   Yet many problems can't be negotiated away, such as theheavily industrialized northeastern corner of Estonia. Thepopulation of that area's three major industrial cities is90% non-Estonian, a product of Soviet industrial policy thattransformed the region into a collection of huge, state-ownedplants that produce nearly a third of Estonia's industrialgoods, all of its electricity and most of its raw materials,particularly oil shale.   Until a few days ago, city officials and factory managersignored Estonian laws and flew only the Soviet flag. Theyreluctantly lowered their colors and raised the Estonianblue, black, and white tricolor only after the coup attemptin Moscow failed. &quot;It is clear that Moscow has now turnedaway from us,&quot; says Nikolai Kutashov, the director of theV.I. Lenin Oil Chemical Production Association inKohtle-Jarve, Estonia's second-largest city. His plant,employing 5,000 people, is home to one of the few statues ofLenin that remain in the Baltics after a week ofdismantlings.   Like most Russians in Estonia, Mr. Kutashov never saw muchreason to speak the local tongue. His Soviet bosses wereRussian, and so were his workers. But now he wants to makefriends in Tallinn and buy his company from whatever stateorganization takes it over. &quot;Maybe the Russians were onceking, but the emperor has no clothes,&quot; says Mr. Kutashov.   He suggests that Tallinn would be foolish to alienate theRussians for the simple reason that more than 90% of exportsare still shipped to the Soviet Union. The West isn't likelyto swing open its doors to low-quality industrial goods, andEstonia's dairy and beef products will have trouble crackingcrowded and protected markets abroad.   &quot;Don't forget that Finland achieved much of its economicsuccess by trading with the Soviets, and now the Balticstates would be wise to do the same,&quot; he says. &quot;They may wantto look west, but they will have to trade east.&quot; He notesthat his own plant sells 85% of its output to the Soviets andreceives 80% of its raw materials -- natural gas, chemicalsand the like -- from the U.S.S.R.   Yet Estonia hopes it can wean itself from Russia. Indeed,the country's quiet diplomacy and proximity to Finland havehelped it attract foreign investors; Latvia, which has alarger Russian population to balance, and Lithuania, whichpursued a more radical independence drive, haven't done aswell as Estonia on this score. But foreign investment stillmakes up only 3% of Estonia's gross national product.   &quot;The Estonians need the Soviet market more than the Sovietmarket needs the Estonians,&quot; says Mr. Kutashov.   The workers at one of his chemical fertilizer plants saythey were &quot;joyful&quot; on the day of the coup, thinking it mightput food back in their shops and pride back in their Russianhearts. Instead, they now grumble around the water coolerabout their future, taking turns at one grimy glass thatserves them all. &quot;There is a feeling among the working classpeople that Yeltsin has betrayed us -- has sold us off forhis own political goals,&quot; says 34-year-old Sergei Motin.   The workers wonder whether the Estonians will give themfull citizenship rights, and they doubt they can learn thelocal Finno-Ugric language. Most have lived in Estonia for 10or 20 years, and some were born here, but none camevoluntarily; instead, they were part of an elaborate Sovietplan of industrialization and Russification in the Baltics.   &quot;We don't belong in Estonia, but we also don't belonganywhere else,&quot; frowns Yuri Devnchenko. He says that aTallinn shopkeeper recently turned him away when he tried tobuy a new suit, saying that the stock wasn't for Russians. Ahousing shortage back in the Russian republic makes leavingEstonia impractical.   Yet the response of Estonians is predictable: For too longthe Russians here have had special privileges while otherstook the brunt of Soviet policies, the Estonians say.Estonians accounted for 85% of Estonia's population duringits first period of independence, from 1918 to 1940. ButSoviet policy, emigration and the Gulag whittled that down to62% as of 1990. (In 1990, Latvians accounted for 52% of theirrepublic's population, while Lithuanians still made up 80% ofLithuania.)   It is this national plight that shaped each of author JaanKross's novels, which are often parables of a stubbornindividual resisting a greater and less-moral force. At age71, he has been imprisoned by both Hitler and Stalin. Yet Mr.Kross, who has often been considered a Nobel prize candidate,believes Estonian independence has a far greater chance oflasting this time around than it did before World War II.   &quot;Then we were caught geographically -- and internally --between two competing ideologies -- Communism and Fascism,Red and Black,&quot; he says. &quot;Estonians will clearly be centristnow -- these poles no longer exist.&quot;   What worries Mr. Kross is the impact of 50 years of Sovietoccupation on the Estonian soul. &quot;We've lost the quality ofour work and our taste for initiative,&quot; he says. &quot;And many ofthe young people who are active can't be trusted morally.They are merely after a quick profit. After years of hearingthe merchants are swindlers, the new merchants are becomingswindlers. You have to teach people from the beginning,starting with ethics.&quot;   Some of the most promising young Estonians work at theforeign ministry. They have been attracted by the charismaticForeign Minister Lennart Meri, who at 62 is everything theywant to emulate -- intellectual, witty and multilingual.Drawn from a young conservative movement called &quot;The People'sVoice,&quot; this staff is likely to form the new political eliteof the country.   The people on Mr. Meri's team have an average age of 26.His chief aide, who arranges schedules and acts as hispolitical secretary is a 23-year-old Estonian-Canadian, ToivoKlaar. &quot;The minister is wary of people polluted by thesystem,&quot; says Mr. Klaar, speaking over strains of the Beatlesat one of Tallinn's sidewalk cafes.   Mr. Klaar spent the three days of the coup transmittingMr. Yeltsin's messages to the world through the internationalfax of the Estonian foreign ministry. This week he hasfielded the deluge of diplomatic recognitions and requests tovisit the newly independent country. But the Baltics' suddenpopularity has also created some sticky moments, such asexplaining to visiting U.S. Sen. Larry Pressler, a Republicanfrom South Dakota, why no one of any rank had time to meethim. &quot;He saw a member of parliament and ran into the mayor ofTallinn by accident,&quot; says Mr. Klaar. &quot;If he had come acouple of weeks earlier, people would have been falling allover themselves to have dinner with him.&quot;   Before 1940, Estonia was home to 17 foreign embassies and13 consulates. Soviet bombers destroyed the German embassy;many other nations simply rented rooms in the city for theirdelegations. Now, the Russians, for one, want their embassyback. It currently serves as the Interior Ministry. TheVatican also wants its property, which now houses a Sovietnews agency, Novosti. The biggest controversy, however, isthe Latvians' demand to get back a building that now belongsto the Estonian Men's Choir. The choir won't budge. &quot;That'scausing quite a stir,&quot; says Mr. Klaar.   Some of the buildings have a more notorious past. Onenight last week, plumes of smoke swirled from the chimneyabove the unmarked KGB headquarters here. The smell ofburning documents spread through the neighborhood whilemembers of the Estonian home army waited outside helplessly.&quot;We haven't any weapons and there are two dozen KGB soldiersinside with semi-automatics,&quot; shrugged Valev Kruusalu, amember of the home army. &quot;So you see, we are not yet mastersof our own fate.&quot;   Parliamentarians believe the KGB chief, Rein Sillars, wasburning long lists of informants that he refused to turnover. Mr. Sillars says his staff was merely disposing of somepersonal letters and perhaps a few postcards.   Elsewhere in Estonia, though, life is returning to normal.Two flights a day from Helsinki, and more frequent boatshuttles, keep bringing businessmen in -- and takingEstonians out. A large number of Estonians work legally inFinland, where two weeks of picking strawberries or just twodays on a construction site can earn them the equivalent of ayear's salary when translated into rubles on the black marketback home.   The nation's government hopes that in years to come thiseconomic disparity will diminish, and it knows that the firststep toward that goal will be made in the coming negotiationswith Soviet authorities over Estonian independence.Curiously, though, the Estonians aren't in a great hurry toreach settlements on the most ticklish economic disputes,largely because some officials here believe the disputes maysimply fade away if the crumbling Soviet center loses moreauthority.   &quot;If we wait long enough, we might not have any negotiatingpartner left at all,&quot; says Mr. Otsason. &quot;Let us hope thatsoon there won't be anyone with whom to discuss thesematters.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>