<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911030-0029</DOCNO><DOCID>911030-0029.</DOCID><HL>   Talking Peace:   Mideast Antagonists   Mute Their Rhetoric   To Let Meeting Begin   ---   Just Getting Parties Together   May Alter the Chemistry,   Optimists in Madrid Hope   ---   For Lunch, Separate Tables   ----   This article was prepared by   Wall Street Journal staff reporters   Geraldine Brooks, Tony Horwitz   And Gerald F. Seib</HL><DATE>10/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EGYPT (EG)EUROPE (EU)ISRAEL (ISR)JORDAN (JD)LEBANON (LBN)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)SPAIN (SP)SYRIA (SY)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   MADRID -- As the plane carrying the Palestinian delegationto the Middle East peace conference circled here Monday,Albert Aghazarian pondered the space on his landing cardasking for nationality.   &quot;I wrote: `To Be Determined in Madrid,'&quot; says the historyprofessor, shuffling his Jordanian passport, hisIsrael-issued identity card and his West Bank residencepapers.</LP><TEXT>   Like most delegates who are here to open the historicconference today, Mr. Aghazarian seems a little astonished byhis growing expectations for a meeting he never thought wouldhappen. For neighbors who don't share phone links, postalservices, open borders or even air corridors for civilianflights, just sharing a table for three days represents ashattering of taboos that have paralyzed the Middle East for43 years.   A true meeting of minds, and not just of bodies, stillappears elusive. Like practiced hagglers in the bazaar, bothsides have opened the bargaining by trumpeting positions thatseem hopelessly far apart. The Palestinians want anindependent state confederated with Jordan, the Syrians wantthe return of all of the Golan Heights, Lebanon wants Israelitroops to withdraw from its southern lands, and Israel, whileinsisting it has come to the talks with no preconditions, hasmade it clear that it doesn't favor surrendering any land atall. Nonetheless, the restrained behavior of the delegates,who have thus far resisted the temptation to scuttle thetalks over early provocations, suggests that the gathering inMadrid may already be generating its own momentum.   &quot;If we get through the week without a disaster, thenalready something has changed,&quot; says Stephen Cohen, presidentof the Center for Middle East Peace, a Washington-based thinktank.   Such modest hopes are at the heart of U.S. strategy here.President Bush is fond of quoting a Woody Allen adage that90% of life is just showing up. He hopes that the mereopening of talks will create a happy chemical reaction amongsworn enemies, lifting the process past the ceremonialspeechmaking to substantive talks. Says one tired U.S.organizer: &quot;Everybody has burned up too many calories gettingthis far to quit now.&quot;   After three days of largely ceremonial opening statements,the meeting is supposed to break up into bilateral talksbetween Israel and each of its Arab neighbors, not includingEgypt, with which Israel made peace in 1979. A third stage ofthe talks would draw in non-neighboring Arab states todiscuss regional matters such as sharing water resources andlimiting the arms race.   Details that could have stalled preparations -- as theydid at the Vietnam peace talks in Paris, when the two sidesargued for months over the shape of the bargaining table --have been resolved here with relative equanimity. Eatingtogether, for instance, posed potential problems: an awkwardsocial encounter between enemies, a security nightmare forleaders who travel with food tasters, and a dietary minefield (the traditional government banquet in Spain featuresham, shellfish and sherry -- items likely to offend many Jewsand Muslims). The solution: Delegates will break for lunch,but not break bread together.   Spain, a country that 500 years ago expelled both Muslimsand Jews, and where a common surname still is Matamoros, or&quot;Arab killer,&quot; also has made adjustments. Authorities carriedout of the conference hall a statue of a Spanish king drivinga lance through the chest of a demon. &quot;We didn't want anysigns of violence where peace negotiations are taking place,&quot;says a government spokesman.   The Spanish also deployed 10,000 police, many of them menfrom the provinces who had to sleep in buses and even on thesidewalk until their unions complained. At the hotel housingIsrael's delegation, meanwhile, the Israelis gave the chefs acrash course in kosher cooking and posted guards at thekitchen entrance to make sure food wasn't tampered with. Butat the Villa Magna Hotel, which is housing White House staff,locals are taking the additional security in stride. A fewmonths ago, the hotel was host to Madonna's &quot;Blonde Ambition&quot;tour. &quot;That's more trouble than a peace conference, I cantell you,&quot; says Marijke Keuper, the hotel spokeswoman.   It seems that conference organizers already have declaredpeace among members of the Israeli and Arab press, requiringthem to line up together for accreditation and placing Arabicand Hebrew typewriters alongside each other.   The violent rhetoric that has for so long separatedIsraelis and Palestinians also has been muted in Madrid.Israel's refusal to meet with representatives of thePalestine Liberation Organization has pushed a newPalestinian leadership into the limelight, one that mayultimately prove a more formidable force than the guerrillafighters who have dominated the Palestinian struggle for 30years. Instead of the gun-toting, unshaven Yasir Arafat, theface of the Palestinians now is a group of soft-spokenacademics and professional men and women. Although they stillseek an independent Palestinian state, this group isn't givento bluster about pushing Israelis into the sea and is willingto talk about small as well as big demands.   &quot;We need simple things -- a driver's license, an importpermit&quot; -- that are difficult to obtain under the rules ofIsraeli occupation, says Mr. Aghazarian, a rumpled,pipe-smoking professor of Middle Eastern history who tossesHebrew phrases into his conversation and is &quot;au courant&quot; withthe morning's editorials in the Israeli press.   Reflecting the new tone, Israel has agreed to letPalestinians speak at the conference independently of theJordanian delegation with which they are theoreticallylinked. Israel also hasn't used a recent upsurge in violencein the West Bank and southern Lebanon as an excuse to scuttletalks. Another sign of flexibility is the unexpectedagreement by Israel to at least start the second-stage,bilateral meetings in Madrid instead of insisting on movingsuch talks straight to the Middle East.   &quot;The Israelis love Madrid because it's so easy for theirsecurity people to operate here. They can bug anyone theywant,&quot; quips Shimon Shiffer, an Israeli journalist.   The Israelis also have made sure they get their storyacross. Rather than wait for the Spanish to complete a hugepress center to accommodate more than 4,600 journalistscovering the talks, Israel set up its own media room at itshotel, offering lists of &quot;potential interviewees,&quot; beginningwith Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, and helpful handouts onwhere to find the various Arab delegations. &quot;Lots ofbriefings, lots of interviews with the big shots]&quot; says YossiOlmert, head of Israel's Government Press Office.   Just down the road, by contrast, the Syrians arecharacteristically tight-lipped. A single Syrian coordinatorsits in an unmarked room on the second floor of thedelegation's hotel, deflecting requests for interviews --many of them from Israeli reporters. Jordan had hoped to playthe public relations game a little more aggressively,printing 3,000 fact-sheets setting out its case for peace andrushing them to Madrid by air on Monday. The only problem:The plane returned to Amman with the material still aboard.   But if Israel has displayed the most media savvy, it alsohas brought its internal divisions to Madrid. Infiltratingthe battalion of Israeli spokesmen, a West Bank settler beganharanguing journalists about the likelihood of &quot;a Jewishintifada,&quot; modeled on the Palestinian uprising, if anyoccupied territory is returned to the Arabs. An Israeliofficial promptly asked him to leave the government briefingroom. From the lobby, however, the settler complainedbitterly about the American role. &quot;The honest broker isn'tout there anymore,&quot; he said.   Arabs clearly are looking to the Americans to do just whatIsrael fears: step in to arm-twist its ally, or at least tooffer its own solutions when inevitable impasses develop.Some Arabs expect America to buy peace as it did at the 1979Camp David talks between Israel and Egypt, when the U.S.greased the agreement with promises of billions of dollars ofaid for both parties. &quot;We'll take American Express,&quot; saysBilal Kibbe, a Lebanese radio producer.   But U.S. officials caution that such expectations areunrealistic. They are prepared to sit in on bilateralmeetings when asked by both parties. But the U.S. willprobably save its clout for crucial arbitration. &quot;We're nothere to impose a settlement,&quot; President Bush insisted Monday.&quot;We're here to be a catalyst.&quot; U.S. officials know that ifthey enter the talks they will essentially freeze the action;the negotiators will wait reflexively for the U.S. to revealits preferred solution.   Nor is the U.S. in any condition to pay anothermultibillion-dollar reward for peace. However, Americansaren't the only possible moneybags. The European Communityhas a seat at the conference's T-shaped table, in part toremind Israel that Europe could be a source of aid to helpoffset the cost of resettling the thousands of Soviet Jewsemigrating to Israel. And the Arabs' potential paymaster,Saudi Arabia, has made a late and unexpected arrival inMadrid. The Saudis traditionally steer clear of meetings inwhich the outcome is clouded, and their arrival has added tothe air of cautious optimism here.   But symbolism and mood aside, the realities of negotiatinga Middle East peace still seem daunting. Most delegates andanalysts believe the hardest test will be direct talksbetween Israel and Syria. While Israel has a range of issuesto discuss with most other front-line Arabs, talks with Syriawill undoubtedly center on the status of the Golan Heights,which Israel occupied after the Six-Day War in 1967.   Neither side is yet showing much room for compromise. TheIsraelis have repeatedly said they want to trade peace forpeace, not peace for land. The Syrians also are talkingtough, and have said they won't participate in talks overregional issues such as water unless the land issue isresolved.   &quot;This is Syrian territory. We will not accept to give upeven one inch,&quot; Zuhair Janaan, a Syrian spokesman, says ofthe Golan Heights.   But for the Syrians, as for other participants, theimpetus that brought them to Madrid may keep them talking:the high price of failure. Both Israel and its Arab neighborsare broke. Traditional patrons, such as the Soviet Union andGulf Arab states, have tightened their purse strings. Andwithout peace, defense budgets will continue to crippleeconomic development.   The Palestinians appear to have the most at stake, havingraised the hopes of their battered population yet again. Mr.Aghazarian, the Palestinian delegate, likens the peaceconference to an old Arab folk tale in which a caliphdiscovers an impoverished woman boiling a pot of stones andasks her why. She explains that she hopes her children willfall asleep before she has to tell them that there is nofood.   &quot;We don't want to wake up like those children, to find apot of stones,&quot; says Mr. Aghazarian. He hopes instead for thesame happy ending that occurs in the tale: The caliph bestowsplenty of food on the woman and her children.   &quot;We hope,&quot; Mr. Aghazarian says, &quot;that America will be thecaliph.&quot;   ---   Carlta Vitzthum contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>