<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900921-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>900921-0107.</DOCID><HL>   World Business (A Special Report): Eastern Europe   ---   Creeping Toward Capitalism:   A Czechoslovak Town Shows the Strains on the   Road From State Control to Free Enterprise   ----   By Craig Forman</HL><DATE>09/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R10</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   KARLOVY VARY, Czechoslovakia -- Robert Zbiral, an engineerat the Great Sokolov Chemical Works near here, greets avisitor to the five-story plant that is the heart of thissprawling industrial complex.   &quot;You've come to see the museum?&quot; he says sarcastically,pointing to the soot-covered building, which looks abandonedwith its broken windows and peeling cement walls.</LP><TEXT>   Inside, a nightmarish scene unfolds. Dark pipes run into abillboard-sized furnace built in the 1930s. Trudging workersleave footprints in the thick, black dust. There is a roarhigh overhead as coal is dumped from hoppers dangling from afunicular, an obsolete arrangement dating from the plant'sopening in 1917. &quot;All this was fine in its day, but that dayis long past,&quot; says Mr. Zbiral, surrounded by pipes whoseancient insulation has been replaced with aluminum foil keptin place by chicken wire.   Miroslav Krejci, the factory's director, says he &quot;wouldlove to change&quot; to natural-gas fuel for the factory, whichmakes low-tech products like formic acid, as well asacrylics. Such a switch could cut costs by one-third,eliminate three-quarters of the staff in some departments andsharply reduce the highly sulfuric dust emissions that havekilled a quarter of the spruce forests in nearby parts ofBohemia. &quot;But we haven't got the money,&quot; he says, adding thatmodernizing the plant would cost $125 million at currentexchange rates.   Then he adds a more telling caveat: &quot;Such a big decision,affecting many people, would have to be taken by the state.&quot;   Nearly a year after this nation's peaceful overthrow ofCommunist rule, Mr. Krejci's deference to the government'swill in running his factory seems startling. After all, isn'tsuch management freedom part of the reason for last winter'smomentous movement toward liberty across Eastern Europe?Freed from the oppressive constraints of central planning,individuals and companies were supposed to flood economieshere with new ideas for small businesses, higher efficiencyand better production. The revolution was supposed to lead toan entrepreneurial renaissance.   But it hasn't happened yet.   What's slowing Eastern Europe's rush to Western-stylecapitalism? One thing is lack of money. Billions of dollarswill be needed to overcome years of neglect, and largeinjections of foreign capital will be necessary to bring theEastern European economies back to life. Second, thoseeconomies haven't yet fully shaken off the shackles ofcentralization, which creates economic bottlenecks andsubsidizes inefficiencies. And -- perhaps most important --40 years of communism has hardened the attitudinal arteriesof the people, stifling initiative.   Here in Czechoslovakia, there is greater civil andeconomic liberty since last November's so-called VelvetRevolution, yet important elements of daily life persist muchas before. The reformist government of President Vaclav Havelis trying to get rid of central planning and otherrestrictions, but that effort is far from complete. Too manyrules and regulations remain on the books. Too many decisionsare still made by government bureaucracies, which remainlarge and obstructive. And local bureaucrats -- who approvebig spending plans -- still have great power.   Mr. Krejci's chemical factory is plagued by all of theseproblems. It hasn't the money for a total overhaul. Inaddition, it employs fewer workers than the coal minesnearby, so local officials won't allow an investment thatcould drastically reduce demand for local coal. And even asthe government moves to ease such bureaucratic restrictions,the tendency of factory managers is to follow the old rulesand defer to higher, centralized authority.   The last is the most daunting stumbling block. &quot;Ourbiggest challenge still is to convince the man in the streetof the necessity to adapt,&quot; says Jan Tauber, adviser toFinance Minister Vaclav Klaus. &quot;The idea that the free-marketeconomy is a great opportunity for us hasn't been accepted bythe majority of people.&quot;   The lack of acceptance is readily apparent in such townsas Karlovy Vary, the county seat of a 120,000-populationdistrict in Western Bohemia, near the German border. The townused to be called Carlsbad, once famous as a spa that wasfavored by Beethoven, Goethe and European royalty. But thehotels and baths of the spa now are run-down and needhundreds of millions of dollars in investment -- probablyforeign. And for the moment, foreign investors are movingcautiously because of Czechoslovakia's uncertain economicclimate.   High-quality glass and porcelain crafted here sell in suchpricey U.S. stores as Saks Fifth Avenue. But most people areemployed in industry, and the district is surrounded by stripmines, power stations and factories that make it one of theworst-polluted areas of Czechoslovakia. &quot;Before the war, theCzech living standard was as high as America's. Our citieswere beautiful. We made the fastest planes in the world,&quot;says Stan Kment, a Czechoslovak who left after World War IIand now lives in Canada. &quot;Now, there's nothing. People arepoor. They got salaries for doing nothing, and they don'tknow how to work. They don't know where to begin a capitalistsystem.&quot;   Right now the people of Karlovy Vary are caught in a kindof limbo, in a transitional period between strict statecontrol of the economy and Western-style freedom, leavingthem with a feeling of uncertainty about the future. Theyworry about unemployment; it was almost nonexistent under theCommunists, but there are fears it could skyrocket to 15% ormore once state subsidies are ended. Some even worry abouthomelessness, which was unheard of under the old system. Andeven before a free market takes effect, the people areangered by prices, recently they have soared 50% for somemeat and vegetables.   In the local grocery store, in downtown Karlovy Vary,shoppers grumble in the poorly lit aisles. No fresh fruits orvegetables are on display, and the best-selling item appearsto be still-inexpensive Chinese rice. Other products, such asa can of Soviet mackerel whose price recently rose 65%, &quot;wereprobably unsellable even at the old price. Now it'simpossible,&quot; says Milos Vanecek, the store's manager. Thereare thousands of these grocery stores across Czechoslovakia,and they still belong to a state agency that supervises fooddistribution. The higher prices aren't due to a free market.The Havel government is stripping away certain subsidies thatsupported food prices, and the authorities who fix priceshave been permitted to raise them somewhat to offset lostsubsidies. To help defray the higher costs, the governmentgave everyone a one-time handout of 140 korunas -- about $6at the official rate.   Some people, like Blanka Boura, a junior-high-schoolteacher, are getting increasingly restive. They don't see therationale for Czechoslovakia's economic upheaval, for theuncertainty and lack of improvement in their own lives.&quot;People are fed up with the way things are,&quot; she says.&quot;Prices are going up, too high if you ask me. People didn'texpect it would take this long to get results. Most peopledon't understand the point of all this.&quot;   As they see the slow pace of progress, people here arerevising their expectations of how long it will takeCzechoslovakia to rejoin the Free World economic system.Vaclav Tomandl, Karlovy  Vary's leading banker, says: &quot;We arestill at the first mile of a 1,000-mile trip. Czechoslovakiamay make it, but it will take years, not months. Generations,not years.&quot;   Mr. Tomandl is director of the Komercni Banka, a newcommercial-banking venture established earlier this year tohelp finance economic reform in Czechoslovak regions. &quot;Theproblem was and still is there is no dynamism in theeconomy,&quot; he says.   Mr. Tomandl and his wife, Dana, who works in agovernment-owned construction firm, say that perhaps oneperson out of 10 in Karlovy Vary is imbued with the newentrepreneurial spirit. (Local figures show 2,500 registeredsmall-business people.)   Over strong coffee in his office on Engles Boulevard, Mr.Tomandl and his deputy, Pavel Woydich, complain about thelack of reality among their customers. The bank, which wasspun off from Czechoslovakia's central bank under thecountry's new laws, is the biggest source of investmentfinance in town; it has lent eight million korunas ($333,000)to 66 different entrepreneurs in the past six months. Thesesmall-business people range from plumbers to electricians totaxi drivers.   But most people, such as the students who wanted a loan tostage a rock opera, think the bank is a government agency todistribute money, just as the government distributes salariesand benefits. Says Mr. Woydich: &quot;They come in here everyMonday, after a weekend of thinking, and they say, `Give ussome money.' They are surprised when we want to see how theycalculate their potential income. When we say `How do youintend to pay us back?' they look at us as if we're crazy. Noone here knows about any of these things.&quot;   The bankers concede that even they have sometimes beenflying blind when it comes to judging borrowers'credit-worthiness and prospects for success. &quot;It is hard tovalue assets here, beause there is no market for manythings,&quot; says Mr. Tomandl. Accounting standards vary widely.&quot;As the euphoria vanishes and the reality sets in, what weneed most is experience,&quot; he adds. Though the bankers won'tsay it, they don't quibble with estimates that up to half ofthe new entrepreneurs may fail.   Mr. Tomandl and his wife are the closest thingCzechoslovakia has to yuppies these days. They drive a shinyLada, a coveted Soviet car, and are finishing a house on theoutskirts of Karlovy Vary, a Swiss-chalet-style home thatcould house two families -- themselves and anincome-producing tenant.   The story of their house, which has taken more than a yearto build, shows how hard it remains to get things done inCzechoslovakia. Though the construction business is one ofthe prime areas where entrepreneurs are starting, manybuilding materials are still centrally produced anddistributed. That means they are difficult to obtain.Meantime, the customer, not the contractor, is responsiblefor ensuring that bricks, mortar and even scaffolding are onsite as needed.   In Mr. Tomandl's case, that has meant months of bickering,negotiating and arm-twisting to get his job accomplished.Others, though not Mr. Tomandl, cut corners through bribery.&quot;Don't talk to me about the house. It's been a nightmare,&quot;says Mr. Tomandl.   The situation isn't much easier for the entrepreneursthemselves. Though the government is trying to cut thebureaucracy, starting your own business in Czechoslovakiaremains an odyssey requiring dozens of official stamps andmonthlong waits for permits.   &quot;It's incredibly difficult,&quot; says Stanislav Slama, who isKarlovy Vary's first entrepreneur -- a three-year veteran ofprivate enterprise. Mr. Slama repairs cars, specializing inthe Trabant, the East German car that arguably got revolutionin the East Bloc rolling by carrying East Germans acrossWarsaw Pact borders last year.   Before he could start his business, Mr. Slama had to getwritten permission from the state-run car-repair shops intown -- with which he was about to compete. Even now, he getsverbal abuse from some former colleagues at the state repairshop where he worked for 25 years, and some people park theircars to block customers from his workshop.   &quot;I never could do this {go into private business} if Ihadn't been working for a state company for 25 years. Mycontacts are the only reason I can find spare parts,&quot; hesays. Even so, he doesn't always succeed.   For instance, after waiting a year to buy a car jack fromthe single factory in Czechoslovakia that makes the item, Mr.Slama is abandoning hope. He now plans to go across theborder into West Germany, where, he says, every auto-partsstore stocks the item and probably sells it at lower cost.   Nonetheless, Mr. Slama's venture has been a success; hisrepair shop is crowded with half a dozen cars to repair, andhe works weekends to keep up with the business. This year heis earning three times his previous salary, but even so heisn't sure how much he will keep. That's because ofuncertainty about taxes. Although the government is trying toencourage entrepreneurs, its tax policy remains confusing andchangeable, so these business people can't be sure thatworking longer hours will increase their income.   Above all, entrepreneurs fear that lingering publicattitudes from the Communist era may continue to make lifedifficult for them, even in an era of sweeping change. At thesix-month-old Association of Entrepreneurs, whose office isin the former Communist Party headquarters deputy directorIvan Zikes says: &quot;We are fighting a deformation of the humanmind. During 40 years of the totalitarian regime, people haveformed the opinion that all private businessmen are thievestrying to get money without doing any work.&quot;   In Karlovy Vary's baroque town hall, Mayor Jiri Kovariksays such attitudes and regulations &quot;are hampering ourentrepreneurs from developing their activities fully.&quot; Whatthe town needs most, Mr. Kovarik says, is &quot;money, managementand to change the thinking of people.&quot; The last item willtake the most time.   &quot;You come into a restaurant,&quot; Mr. Kovarik says. &quot;Theperson attending you isn't trying to make it agreeable. Henever smiles, he gives no advice. He just wants the customersto leave as soon as possible. Maybe 95% of the people arestill thinking this way. It will require a generation tochange this attitude.&quot;   In the meantime, the mayor adds, &quot;we will have problems ofdisintegration. If a dog tied to a leash for a long time issuddenly released, the first thing it does is run around withno logic. Only after this phase of freedom is gotten used to,does it begin acting logically.&quot;   &quot;Our problem,&quot; says the mayor, &quot;is more in the head thanin the wallet.&quot;   ---   Mr. Forman, a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal'sLondon bureau, reports on Eastern European business.</TEXT></DOC>