<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911226-0024</DOCNO><DOCID>911226-0024.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:   A Washington Scandal, Hollywood-Style   ----   By Mark Hosenball</HL><DATE>12/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><LP>   There are enough real scandals around these days to keeparmies of General Accounting Office auditors andinvestigative reporters busy for years. The BCCI affair alonehas left a paper trail that could repave the interstatehighway system. The fallout from the Sandamp;L disaster has barelybegun to be assessed. So why is so much ink and energy beingexpended on the so-called October Surprise, a tendentioustheory pertaining to events more than a decade old,propounded by demonstrably unreliable sources alleging thatthe 1980 Reagan Campaign cut a secret deal with Iran to delaythe release of the hostages at the American Embassy until itwas too late to help Jimmy Carter's chances for re-election?   One answer is that unraveling the Sandamp;L or BCCI scandalsrequires the kind of serious and unglamorous legwork that toofew investigators seem willing to undertake these days:reading a lot of fine print and maybe doing sums on acalculator. This is much less fun than running around theworld talking to jailed arms dealers and wealthyself-proclaimed secret agents, as the claque touting theOctober Surprise has been doing for many months.</LP><TEXT>   For another thing, the BCCI and thrift messes are equalopportunity fiascos: no neat political morality plays here,with jowly despotic villains in the White House and homespunheroes in Congress to send them packing. In the real scandalsof today, would-be heroes are also potential villains and nopolitical figure comes out clean. By contrast, in the OctoberSurprise scenario, the villains and victims are clearlydefined. In the Black Hats are the Ayatollah Khomeini and agreater or lesser cabal of alleged Republican partymanipulators, including William Casey and Ronald Reagan (and,in the most lurid version, George Bush). The White Hats arePresident Jimmy Carter and the small but fearless coterie ofadvocates who have pursued the October Surprise allegationsdauntlessly in the face of ridicule by skeptics, scorn fromestablishment and devious machinations by Mossad and the CIA.   At bottom, as many of its partisans admit, pursuit of theOctober Surprise is an exercise in political revisionism oreven revanchism, an attempt to demonstrate that the eventthat defined American politics in the 1980s -- the electionof Ronald Reagan -- was the product of fraud, or eventreason-provoked by fears that Jimmy Carter would produce an&quot;October Surprise&quot; to dazzle voters by springing thehostages. In return for Iran's holding the hostages untilafter the election, so the story goes, the Republicanspromised Khomeini massive arms shipments once Ronald Reagantook the presidential oath of office -- and later delivered.   As the top National Security Council expert on Iran in theCarter Administration during the time that the supposedOctober Surprise took place, Gary Sick, a former Navyofficer, was a key White House player when the alleged plotoccurred. Mr. Sick's non-political background, and the factthat he initially dismissed the October Surprise theory at atime when it could have done its promoters some good (duringthe 1988 presidential election campaign for example), suggestthat his subsequent embrace of the conspiracy scenario isdeeper than cheap politics.   But however sincere his interest, Mr. Sick nonethelessadmits up front in his &quot;October Surprise: America's Hostagesin Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan&quot; (TimesBooks/Random House, 277 pages, $23) that he &quot;relied heavilyon the research of others.&quot; His text and source notes confirmthat the foundation, and much of the detail, of his new bookon the subject is based on the use -- uncritical, for themost part -- of both advisors and primary sources whosecredentials and motivation have long been open to question.   You might expect that those who throw about graveaccusations such as electoral fraud or treason would go outof their way to be exceptionally careful about thecredibility of evidence. As recent articles debunking theOctober Surprise scenario in the New Republic and Newsweekhave explained, the principal sources for the allegations areseveral &quot;supersources&quot; who claim to have been eithereyewitnesses or direct participants in alleged pre-electionmeetings between the Reagan and Khomeini camps. The mostimportant of these sources are Jamshid Hashemi, an Iranianarms dealer, and Ari Ben-Menashe, a selfproclaimed Israelimaster-spy. Both these characters have had serious run-inswith American authorities (though Mr. BenMenashe wasacquitted of arms-dealing and Mr. Hashemi never stood trialon charges that he violated the sanctions President Carterimposed on U.S. arms sales to Iran during the hostagecrisis).   Though Mr. Sick reports Mr. Ben-Menashe's claim to havebeen a member of hyper-secret Israeli electronic intelligenceand intelligence liaison units, he does not report Israeligovernment assertions that Mr. Ben-Menashe was no more than alow-level military translator. Mr. Sick does concede that Mr.Hashemi's late brother Cyrus, alleged to be a key OctoberSurprise player (and proven to have been at least a marginalplayer in the 1980 hostage crisis and the Iran-Contra affair)was &quot;not unduly scrupulous&quot;. But he does not cite a CIAcable, now available to all and sundry through the Freedom ofInformation Act, which describes the Hashemi brothers thus:&quot;Cyrus is only slightly less sleazy than his notoriousbrother Jamshid who is con artist par excellence and iscandidate for scam of the month championship.&quot;   To the true conspiratorialist, such governmental calumniesonly further establish these characters' bona fides. But bothjournalists and scholars are supposed to report the kind ofevidence which raises serious credibility questions abouttheir sources.   Mr. Sick can perhaps claim that some of the more damagingevidence shaking the credibility of Messrs. Hashemi and BenMenashe only surfaced after his book was finished. He canmake no such claim regarding another source he treats atleast half-seriously, an Oregon businessman named RichardBrenneke, who claimed to have participated in meetings heldin Paris in October 1980 to close the purported OctoberSurprise deal between the Ayatollah and the Reagan Camp.Serious questions were raised about Mr. Brenneke more thanthree years ago (by me in the the New Republic, and later byinvestigators working for the Democratic majority in theSenate, who concluded Brenneke was a liar). Village Voicewriter and former CIA agent Frank Snepp, who once believedMr. Brenneke was a major fount of knowledge, recentlydiscovered credit card receipts proving that at the time heclaimed he was in Paris, Mr. Brenneke in fact was frequentingcheap motels and restaurants in the Pacific Northwest. Mr.Sick acknowledges that Mr. Brenneke sometimes does appear tofib, even on important issues such as his presence in Paris,and concedes that as a source Mr. Brenneke can be&quot;exasperating.&quot; But he still seems to think Mr. Brenneke hasinformation worth sharing, even though he concedes that hecan't be sure which bits of it are true.   As any self-respecting investigator will confirm, thedevil is in the details. But Mr. Sick glosses over or playsdown details which are inconvenient to his case. This makeshis book another exercise in advocacy, more slickly packagedthan previous work on the subject (such as an earlier bookwith the same title by former Reagan Administration officialand parapsychologist Barbara Honegger, and numerous articlesin such publications as the left-wing &quot;In These Times&quot;), butadding not a great deal more to the scenario's credibility.(And in view of the $500,000 movie contract Mr. Sick isreported to have signed, perhaps the book is best understoodas a screenplay).   On balance, Mr. Sick is behaving more like a True Believerthan the skeptic he still proclaims himself to be. After Iwrote a Washington Post article questioning the New YorkTimes Op-Ed piece which Mr. Sick used last spring to launchthe October Surprise into the media big leagues, Mr. Sicktelephoned demanding to know my hidden agenda. He seemeddissatisfied by my explanation that treason charges againstformer and sitting presidents are too serious to be based onthe assertions of a platoon of demonstrable dissemblers.   ---   Mr. Hosenball is a producer for NBC News.</TEXT></DOC>