<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910503-0026</DOCNO><DOCID>910503-0026.</DOCID><HL>   Mideast Mess:   How Miscalculations   Spawned U.S. Policy   Toward Postwar Iraq   ---   In Secret Briefings, the Allies   Predicted Saddam's Fall,   Urged Return of Troops   ---   A Big Surprise: the Refugees   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>EGYPT (EG)FRANCE (FR)IRAQ (IZ)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- In early February, as the war to drive Iraqitroops out of Kuwait was raging, President Bush invited agroup of academics to the Oval Office to discuss what thepostwar Middle East would look like.   As the discussion unfolded, Mr. Bush and his top aidesseemed especially troubled by one question: What if SaddamHussein survived the war? Eventually, one participantrecalls, Mr. Bush revealed his own hope: a Ceausescu-styleend to the Saddam Hussein problem.</LP><TEXT>   But Saddam Hussein is no Nicolae Ceausescu.   Unlike the Romanian dictator, who was executed in December1989, the Iraqi strong man didn't succumb to a brief, violentrevolt. And although the visitors to the White House didn'tknow it, Mr. Bush and his advisers by February already hadsecretly considered, and rejected, the idea of somehow tryingto remove Saddam Hussein directly. Going it alone afterdictators wasn't the way the U.S. intended to operate in Mr.Bush's &quot;new world order.&quot;   Those two factors -- an overestimation of Saddam Hussein'svulnerability and a decision about the limits of U.S.intervention -- go a long way toward explaining why today,two months after the wildly successful war ended, the peaceis proving so hard and messy.   The seeds for the Bush administration's postwar strategywere sown even before the fighting started, in a series ofinternal debates about war aims in December and January.Administration thinking was reinforced by poor advice fromArab allies, particularly the Saudis, Kuwaitis and Egyptians,who predicted Saddam Hussein's quick demise. And, at acrucial juncture, American policy was influenced by therestiveness of French and British leaders, who also didn'tanticipate a burgeoning refugee crisis and were even moreeager than Mr. Bush to declare victory and bug out of thePersian Gulf.   Now, despite its own misgivings, the U.S. finds itselfentangled in an internal Iraqi muddle not amenable to any&quot;short-term fix,&quot; says Zbigniew Brzezinski, a former nationalsecurity adviser who opposed the war.   The peril for both the Kurds and Mr. Bush will linger onfor weeks. If the hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Kurdsuprooted by the war's aftermath remain isolated onmountainside encampments for fear of Saddam Hussein, morewill die -- and Mr. Bush will be partly blamed. If therefugees move into new American-made tent cities, the U.S.must either guard them or turn them over to the uncertaintyof United Nations protection. And if the Kurds do acceptSaddam Hussein's new offer of more autonomy and drift home,the Iraqi dictator might simply wait until U.S. troops leaveand then turn on them. Mr. Bush would suffer enormouspolitical damage.   Meanwhile, the Iraqi leader seems sure to hang on for atleast some months longer. &quot;I think he will survive hismilitary defeat&quot; for now, says Nuzhet Kandemir, Turkey'sambassador to the U.S. and one of Washington's savviestIraq-watchers. Mr. Bush's only real remaining tool forforcing out Saddam Hussein is the blunt instrument ofeconomic sanctions, which the U.S. months ago dismissed asinsufficient to expel him from Kuwait.   What's more, the mess in Iraq casts shadows beyond theMideast and across the entire &quot;new world order&quot; that Mr. Bushis trying to craft out of the end of the Cold War as well asthe defeat of Iraq. Mr. Bush says he envisions a world inwhich a vigilant, American-led world community keeps &quot;thedangers of disorder at bay&quot; by ensuring that one countrydoesn't interfere with another.   The first priority in that new world is the stability andsanctity of existing states. That creates a vexing problem,administration aides acknowledge: What to do for Kurds andother oppressed groups who don't think they have got a fairshake? Under the administration's vision, the U.S. can't domuch more than hope that current states can be pressured intoforming more enlightened and democratic governments thatsatisfy restive minorities.   Some worry that this concept of the post-Cold War worldfalls short. &quot;If there's going to be a new world order, ithas to be not only a renewal of the sanctity of existingborders and a renunciation of aggression,&quot; says Rep. StephenSolarz, the New York Democrat who strongly supported the waragainst Iraq. &quot;Part of the world order is the protection ofhuman rights of individuals as well as upholding the sanctityof states.&quot; The stakes here are larger than they appear atfirst glance: The administration's handling of the Kurdishissue could set precedents for American policy towardsimilarly dissatisfied ethnic groups in such nations as theSoviet Union, Yugoslavia and even Canada.   The reasons this peace has turned out to be so hard goback to December and January, when Mr. Bush and others in the&quot;Big Eight,&quot; the top aides who formed Mr. Bush's war cabinet,debated how deeply to get involved in Iraq itself. Sometimesin the formality of the Oval Office, sometimes with chairscasually pulled around a table in the White House residentialquarters, they privately wrestled with the question ofwhether war aims should be expanded to include an expliciteffort to dislodge Saddam Hussein.   The answer, senior officials say, was a strong, unanimousno -- and the reasoning behind that decision has shapedAmerican thinking ever since. The practical reason was theworry that the international coalition supporting the warwould abandon Mr. Bush if he crossed the Euphrates River anddrove deep into Iraq. The broader reason was a belief that ifthe U.S. got involved in trying to change the Iraqigovernment, American credibility would require sticking withthe task until it was completed, no matter what the cost. TheU.S. would be &quot;forced to succeed,&quot; one Bush aide says.   Once set, that wary rationale was to guide administrationdecisions about the degree of support extended to the Shiiteand Kurdish rebellions that began in early March, after thewar ended.   In a sense, the rebels were to become the newest victimsof a lingering Vietnam syndrome. One aspect of that malaise,selfdoubt about American military proficiency, was put torest by the swift victory in the Gulf. Yet administrationofficials and others still worry about being sucked intoanother aspect of the Vietnam nightmare. That fear hasrepeatedly been invoked by Mr. Bush, who said a few weeksago, for example, that &quot;the United States isn't going tointervene militarily in Iraq's internal affairs and riskbeing drawn into a Vietnam-style quagmire.&quot;   At first, American officials thought direct U.S.involvement wouldn't be necessary to topple Saddam Hussein.They calculated that tens of thousands of disenchanted Iraqisoldiers returning from the rout at the front would helpspark a drive by either army officers or members of theruling Baath party to ditch a leadership that had failed inboth the Iran-Iraq war and the war over Kuwait.   &quot;They have been applying Western logic, and logically themilitary would have ousted him after such a defeat,&quot; says Mr.Kandemir, the Turkish ambassador. &quot;But Western logic doesn'talways apply in our countries.&quot;   In addition, the Bush administration got bum advice fromits Arab allies. Early in the war, one sympathetic Arabforeign minister asserted in Washington: &quot;My analysis is thatSaddam Hussein is finished.&quot; The Saudi Arabian government,U.S. officials suggest, seemed confident from its owncontacts with Iraqi dissidents that the Iraqi military wouldturn on Saddam Hussein. All Arab allies warned repeatedlyagainst any intervention that might break up Iraq.   So, as the war was ending, Mr. Bush and his aides embarkedon a strategy of simply trying to roil Iraq enough to helpthe existing anti-Saddam forces. Mr. Bush called on Iraqis toget rid of Saddam Hussein. A secret radio station, launchedlast fall with the help of the Central Intelligence Agencyand operated by Iraqi exiles, urged an overthrow. Theadministration framed its rhetoric to make clear that Iraqwould remain in an international economic vise until SaddamHussein was gone, hoping to give army officers and others inthe existing power structure the rationale they needed tomove.   In pursuing such a strategy, the administration made acrucial calculation. It decided that direct U.S. involvementin Iraqi affairs could short-circuit any move to dump SaddamHussein, who could rally internal enemies to his side byciting the foreign threat.   All those factors combined to create a mindset: The wisestcourse was also the most politically popular course. The U.S.should end the war and get its soldiers out immediately. Mr.Bush did so, and when he addressed a joint session ofCongress on March 6, a week after the war ended, there wasn'tyet a refugee problem to mention.   That fast-exit policy was strengthened by two meetings Mr.Bush then held in the Caribbean with French PresidentFrancois Mitterrand and British Prime Minister John Major.Both were equally eager to get their troops out and avoidmessy entanglements, U.S. officials say.   Mr. Mitterrand, especially, was ready to move on, U.S. andFrench officials say. When he sat down privately with Mr.Bush on Martinique one day in mid-March, Mr. Mitterrand hadon his mind subjects other than the Mideast. At one point, hetried to engage Mr. Bush in a discussion of an obscuremessage that U.S. diplomats in Europe had circulated and thatobjected to new West European defense plans that seemed todiminish the role of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.Mr. Bush, riveted on the Mideast for months, hadn't evenheard of the message.   Just then, a unifying threat to the Iraqi ruling classemerged -- exactly what the U.S. was trying to avoid. Theinsurrection of the Kurds and Shiites persuaded Iraq's armyand Sunni Muslim rulers to put aside their misgivings aboutSaddam Hussein and stand together.   The U.S. didn't intend to specifically incite Iraq's Kurdsand Shiites to rebel. And U.S. officials say they neverthought those groups alone could topple Saddam Hussein. Infact, by stressing that the U.S. wanted to avoid the breakupof Iraq, the administration thought it had signaled that itwouldn't aid factional fighting. Officials now argue that theuprisings may actually have rescued Saddam Hussein at hishour of greatest peril.   A new staff report by the Senate Foreign RelationsCommittee asserts that the passive American attitude towardthe Kurdish and Shiite rebellions prompted some Iraqi armyofficers to drop plans to defect to the rebels' side. Thereport, written by an aide to committee chairman ClaibornePell, a Rhode Island Democrat, asserts that the army officersapproached exiled Iraqi dissidents in March but were put offby the American &quot;snub&quot; of the Kurds and other oppositionleaders. A White House spokesman yesterday denied theassertion.   Certainly nobody in the U.S. government anticipatedanything approaching the Kurdish refugee crisis that soonexploded, senior administration aides acknowledge. At onepoint, planners in the J-5, the code name for the JointChiefs of Staffs' planning office in the Pentagon,distributed a memorandum about postwar refugee problems. Theadministration moved some refugee supplies close to Iraq'sborders. But the U.S. was calculating that the refugees wouldbe fleeing war damage caused by the allies, not civil war.   In late March, Mr. Bush and his advisers met again in theWhite House and reaffirmed their decision to rapidly withdrawAmerican troops and to stay out of the Iraqi turmoil. VicePresident Quayle fleetingly asked whether the U.S. should domore for the rebels but didn't press the point, officialssay. And Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefsof Staff, pointed to sticky military problems associated withany decision to help the rebels, administration aides say.Because Mr. Bush and his aides agreed so strongly not to getinvolved, officials concede, they were slow to react to therefugee problem and thereby squandered some of Mr. Bush'spolitical gain from the war.   But within two weeks, public opinion -- initially inWestern Europe and then here -- forced Mr. Bush and hiscoalition partners to recalculate. Finally, Mr. Bush spent aharried mid-April day telephoning President Mitterrand, PrimeMinister Major, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, TurkishPresident Turgut Ozal and UN Secretary General Javier Perezde Cuellar.   By day's end, an extremely reluctant Mr. Bush and hisallies had decided to reverse their hands-off strategy.Swallowing misgivings, they agreed to go back into Iraq bybuilding and guarding enormous refugee camps for Kurds. Theplan was patched together so hastily that it wasn't clearuntil about 4 p.m. on April 16 that White House aides couldschedule a news conference for that evening for Mr. Bush toannounce it.   Now, senior U.S. officials worry that they may be slidinginto the quagmire they thought they had avoided. It isn'tclear, they concede, how the U.S. will untangle itself. &quot;Ican't even tell you right at the moment that we won't end upwith something like the Palestinian refugee camps,&quot; says oneglum administration official.</TEXT></DOC>