<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911018-0014</DOCNO><DOCID>911018-0014.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>10/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE HOUSE REJECTED a proposed prohibition on assaultweapons.   The lawmakers voted 247-177 against the proposed ban,contained in an anti-crime bill, one day after 22 people wereslain by a gunman in Killeen, Texas. The vote was a victoryfor the gun lobby, which had complained that the measure wasan unfair infringement on the right to bear arms. Gun-controladvocates had described the proposed ban as a common-senseway of reducing the kind of carnage that occurred in Killeen.</LP><TEXT>   The provision would have made it illegal to own or sell 13domestically made semiautomatic weapons, as well as thelarge-capacity ammunition-feeding devices they use.   ---   NATO CHIEFS REACHED a landmark decision slashing theirnuclear arsenal.   The alliance's defense ministers agreed to immediately cuttheir nuclear stockpile in Europe by 80%, the largestreduction in NATO's 42-year history. The action will ridWestern Europe of more than 2,000 nuclear artillery shellsand short-range missiles and about 700 gravity bombs droppedfrom planes. Ministers cited the easing of concern about asurprise attack by the Soviet Union. Cuts in NATO trooplevels are expected to follow.   NATO began building up its nuclear stockpile in the early1950s, amid heightened East-West tensions. The arsenalreached its peak in the 1970s.   ---   THE UKRAINE SAID it won't sign a Soviet economic accordwith other republics.   Leaders of the Soviet Union's second most populousrepublic announced that they wouldn't initial the accord thatGorbachev hoped would be a key step toward stabilizing thecountry. Ten republics, including the Ukraine, had beenexpected to sign the agreement today. It isn't clear whetherthe other republics will go ahead without the Ukraine, orwhether there will be further negotiations.   The Ukraine's deputy Parliament chairman argued that theeconomic accord, as drafted, didn't provide the republic withenough independence.   ---   The PLO approved a plan for Palestinian participation in aMideast peace conference, sources said. Earlier, Baker failedin talks in Jerusalem to persuade Israel's Shamir to give hisfinal approval to a conference, and officials said the mainobstacle was who would represent Palestinians in the disputedterritories. They are to meet again today.   ---   Bush said the Senate Judiciary Committee should havereviewed sexual harassment charges against Supreme Courtnominee Thomas in a closed-door session rather than intelevised hearings. The president said, though, that the&quot;messy situation&quot; raised people's awareness of sexualharassment.   ---   Gates's candidacy for CIA chief won the backing of SenateIntelligence Committee Chairman Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat,in an apparent bid to overcome reservations among seniorDemocrats on the panel.   ---   Fires swept across thousands of acres in Washington,Idaho, Montana and Oregon, killing five people and destroyingmore than 100 homes. Most of the fires were ignited Wednesdayby power lines that were brought down in a fierce windstorm.   ---   Yugoslavia's federal army launched an all-out onslaught onparts of Croatia, and thousands of Croat fighters andcivilians fled strongholds in the secessionist republic.Warplanes bombed a marina on the outskirts of the resort cityof Dubrovnik, the Yugoslav news agency Tanjug said.   ---   British Prime Minister Major plans to unilaterally sponsora plan to slash the debt of the world's poorest countries.Under the initiative, Britain, and any other lender nationsthat go along with it, would write off two-thirds of the debtowed by 20 nations.   ---   The Navy sent a letter of regret to the family of agunner's mate who had been accused of causing the 1989explosion on the battleship Iowa. Navy officials alsoapologized to the families of 47 sailors killed in theexplosion for having no certain answer regarding the cause ofthe blast.   ---   Suspected Sikh separatists killed 41 people in twobombings in India's northern state of Uttar Pradesh, policesaid. More than 140 people were injured in the explosions --one at a Hindu festival and the second shortly afterwardoutside a hospital.   ---   Federal health authorities said it's too early to tell howbad the winter flu season will be, but they urged olderpeople and others at high risk to be vaccinated soon, just incase. Flu researchers at the Centers for Disease Control inAtlanta said only 30% of Americans at highest risk for flucomplications have received the shots.   ---   Sixteen people were killed and 62 injured when a passengertrain on an overnight trip from the Riviera to Paris smashedhead-on into a freight train, French authorities said. Thecrash occurred near Melun, 30 miles southeast of the Frenchcapital.   ---   China blocked a public rebuke by the U.N. of the KhymerRouge for the rebel group's planned repatriation of Cambodianrefugees to guerrilla-held territory. But the Communistrebels are backing down anyway under U.N. pressure, diplomatssaid.   ---   Died: Tennessee Ernie Ford, 72, known for his recording of&quot;Sixteen Tons&quot; and his TV variety shows in the 1950s and1960s, in Reston, Va., of a liver ailment . . . Richard J.Flamson III, 62, former chairman of Security Pacific, inCorona del Mar, Calif., from complications arising fromleukemia . . . Nestor J. MacDonald, 95, ex-chairman of Thomasandamp; Betts Corp., in Linville, N.C.</TEXT></DOC>