<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901231-0152</DOCNO><DOCID>901231-0152.</DOCID><HL>   Asian Banks Continue to Show Strength   ---   But Competition, Slower   Growth Clouds Outlook   ----   By Cynthia Owens   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 11A</SO><CO>   FREST H.HKS</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   As banks in many parts of the world struggle with bigloan-loss provisions and declining profits, banks in much ofAsia continue to show strong earnings and even are expanding.But they, too, may soon face a shakeout.   Earnings of domestic banks in the newly industrialized andrapidly industrializing countries of Asia remain relativelyrobust. And partly because they concentrate on domesticbusiness, which is underpinned by strong economic growth,these banks aren't facing the crisis now hobbling theircounterparts in industrialized countries, where sluggisheconomies are pinching business.</LP><TEXT>   Further ahead, though, the Asian outlook clouds. &quot;Overall,banking is not going to be a very profitable business in thenext few years,&quot; says Philippe F. Delhaise, general managerof Capital Information Services, an Asia-based rating agency.   Asian banking markets aren't uniform: Regulations varygreatly, and in most countries there is a wide gap between afew dominant banks and many smaller institutions. Butgenerally, increased competition is narrowing profit margins,and slower economic growth may expose problem loans just whenAsian banks need to start improving their balance sheets tomeet new international capital rules set by the Bank forInternational Settlements.   Thus, some analysts say, some banks won't be able tosurvive the next few years, making an eventual consolidationin Asia's banking industry likely. &quot;With slower growthanticipated and tighter monetary policy, you have to look atthe banks in the region with caution,&quot; says Robert Rountree,managing director of ChinTung Research Ltd. of Hong Kong.   Prospects for banks in many of Asia's rapidly growingnations aren't nearly as bleak as they are in the U.S. andJapan. Many Asian banks, like Asian economies, will continueto outperform the rest of the world, though economic growthin the region will likely slow in 1991.   Even the battered Philippine economy is forecast to grow2.8% next year, while growth in other countries in the regionis expected to range from 3.5% to nearly 9%.   In Malaysia, growth next year is projected at between 8%and 8.5%, after a projected 10% expansion this year. &quot;Banks(in Malaysia) are poised to benefit from the broad-basedgrowth of the economy,&quot; says James Bax, research director forBaring Securities (Singapore) Pte. Ltd.   Continued economic growth also may help support Asianproperty markets, though some analysts are concerned thatloans made to finance property purchases at inflated pricesmay sour now that certain markets have topped out.   Some real estate loans are likely to falter, analysts say.But rapid growth and speculation have pushed land prices inregional capitals so high that even if prices soften, theylikely will remain above levels of a couple of years ago.   Many Asian banks also benefit by focusing on theirdomestic markets. Hongkong andamp; Shanghai Banking Corp. -- Asia'slargest non-Japanese bank -- is the exception. In the pastdecade, it launched a massive global expansion that is nowcosting dearly; the bank reported a 21% drop in profit forthe first half of 1990 because of losses on its operations inAustralia and the U.S. and on its 14.9% stake in Britain'sMidland Bank PLC. Those losses dwarfed a strong performancecloser to home; analysts say Hongkong Bank continued toprofit handsomely in Asia during the period.   Some analysts say the best protection Asian banks have isthat many already went through a crisis in the mid-1980s,when several regional economies suffered recessions. Thosehard times helped to clear banks' balance sheets of some badloans and cleaned up the books of borrowers.   In recent years, corporations in the region have madeincreasing use of equity markets to raise capital, ratherthan straight borrowings. That has left both creditors andborrowers better off than they were at the start of the1980s.   Still, higher interest rates and an unexpected creditcrunch resulting from an abrupt retreat by Japanese banks mayslow economic growth more than analysts are now forecasting,raising myriad questions about the health of Asian banks.   For one, analysts aren't sure of the credit quality ofsome loans. Although banks were able to remove some bad loansfrom their books in the mid-1980s, credit demand soared inrecent years, and once again, some major bank borrowers havebecome highly leveraged, these analysts say.   The personal character of traditional bankingrelationships in Asia frequently means that banks make loansto their longtime customers without completely understandingor ascertaining how the money will be used. In many cases, ithas been used to speculate in stock and property markets, atleast until share prices began to slide this year. Added tothat, accounting practices in some countries are relativelylax, making it more difficult for banks to know when loansare souring.   Tighter credit conditions are also a problem. Interestrates around the region are rising. &quot;Higher interest rateswill put pressure on (profit) margins as growth in loandemand slows,&quot; says William R. Ebsworth, director of researchfor Fidelity Investments Management (H.K.) Ltd.   Competition among Asian banks in their domestic markets isalso taking a toll. Profit margins from retail banking --long a major source of cheap funding for banks -- areshrinking. Consumers are no longer content to deposit theirmoney at meager interest rates. That is forcing banks tomodernize by spending a lot to introduce new technology andworking to expand fee-based business.   The changes brought on by competition heighten the gulfbetween the few dominant banks in most Asian countries andthe many smaller ones. In Thailand, for example, the fourlargest banks control 68% of assets in the banking system.   &quot;If one of the big banks has a couple of projects go bust,they can withstand it, but if a smaller bank has two or threeprojects go belly-up, it will have a dramatic impact on theirprofitability,&quot; says a foreign analyst in Bangkok.   Governments around the region are keeping a protective eyeon their banks and aren't likely to allow any majorcollapses. They may, however, shepherd weaker banks intomergers. Just last month, the Indonesian government rescuedBank Umum Majapahit Jaya, a small, private bank, and is nowseeking new investors for it.   Jakarta's action may be the start of a period ofconsolidation in Indonesia's banking sector. Deregulation hasspawned hefty increases in business volume and profits,though the process also has created worries about thestability of the country's financial system. The creation ofnearly 50 new domestic banks in the past two years hasresulted in intense competition for professional staff. Somerapidly growing banks could find their portfolios containingpoor assets stemming from their hurry to dispense creditwithout proper evaluation.   In Indonesia, shaky accounting practices make it difficultto assess banks. This worry was highlighted in September by ascandal at P.T. Bank Duta, the nation's fifth-largest privatebank. The entire board and management were replaced and thebank eventually announced it had suffered foreign-exchangetrading losses of $420 million. But those losses didn't showup in the first accounts published by the bank after the losswas disclosed. Foreign bankers reckon that if such problemscan occur at Bank Duta, there may be serious problems atother banks.   The many analysts who predict a regionwide bankingconsolidation say that though the end result will be fewerbanks, they will be better capitalized than before. Largerbanks in the region are likely to survive any shakeout andbecome even stronger, analysts say. &quot;There will be fewer,better-capitalized banks,&quot; says a banking analyst in HongKong. &quot;We will definitely see that in the U.S., and we willsee that in Asia.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>