<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900522-0056</DOCNO><DOCID>900522-0056.</DOCID><HL>   Reverse Exodus:   Middle-Class Blacks   Quit Northern Cities   And Settle in the South   ---   Many Cite Isolation, Racism   As Reasons for Moving   To Places Like Atlanta   ---   A 3-Year-Old's Self-Esteem   ----   By James S. Hirsch and Suzanne Alexander   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   PITTSBURGH -- Justin L. Johnson had the name, thecredentials and the talent to write his own ticket inPittsburgh. The problem was that his hometown never felt likehome.   He attended an elite local prep school and the Universityof Chicago. After he graduated from Harvard Law School, hereturned to Pittsburgh, where both his father and uncle arejudges. The mayor appointed him to the civil servicecommission. A local newspaper named him &quot;one of 20 people towatch&quot; in 1988.</LP><TEXT>   But Mr. Johnson wasn't happy here. As a successful youngblack with a privileged background, he saw himself caughtbetween two worlds: a white corporate establishment and astruggling black working class. He felt isolated as the onlyblack lawyer at his firm. He felt guilty and frustrated whenhe drove through poor black neighborhoods, and he believedthat residents there resented his champagne-colored NissanMaxima, his Brooks Brothers suits and silk ties. He had fewpeers.   So the 27-year-old Mr. Johnson moved to Atlanta, a citywith a thriving, self-assured black professional class. &quot;Ihad every advantage in Pittsburgh, but I really feel muchmore comfortable here,&quot; he says over a steak dinner at adowntown club, above the cooing of a jazz singer on stage.&quot;In Pittsburgh I was always in a white environment, and I hadthe feeling of isolation. Down here, you see successfulblacks, and you feel a sense of well-being and pride.&quot;   Mr. Johnson's move is part of a historical reversal:Northern blacks are continuing to return to the South thattheir parents or grandparents had fled in an exodus fromoppression and economic hardship.   Since 1970, Atlanta, with its strong black politicalleadership and high-profile black colleges, has become amagnet for professional blacks in the North. Other Southerncities, among them Birmingham, Ala., Little Rock, Ark., andRaleigh, N.C., and even parts of the rural South, are alsoattracting Northern blacks. For the first time in more than acentury, according to the Census Bureau, the proportion ofblack Americans living in the South has risen; 56% of themlived in the region in 1988, up from 52% in 1980.   Northern cities with large populations of middle-classblack people, such as New York and Chicago, have experiencedno huge exodus. But census figures tell a different story inother cities -- Milwaukee, Detroit, St. Louis, Buffalo,Pittsburgh and San Francisco. The data show that more blackresidents moved away than moved in during the 1980s, saysJames Johnson, a geography professor at the University ofCalifornia at Los Angeles.   For years, black residents of Northern cities have beenmoving to the suburbs for better housing and to escapeinner-city crime and deprivation. Others have joined thewhite migration to the Sun Belt for largely economic reasons.But among black professionals already established in theircareers -- lawyers, executives, accountants, bankers andothers -- moving South seems often motivated by a desire tobecome part of a larger community of successful blackresidents with a richer cultural and social life than theyhad experienced in the North.   Few harbor any illusion that racism has disappeared in theSouth, even in Atlanta. &quot;Blacks have lost that sense of naivedreaming that either the North or the South is perfect,&quot; saysReagan Charles Wilson, a professor at the University ofMississippi and author of the Encyclopedia of SouthernCulture. While few blacks may have been so naive, about 6.5million blacks left the South to settle in Northern citiesbetween 1910 and 1970.   To some black residents, racial tensions in the North seemwider than before. Anne Maria Hardeman, an engineer andartist who lived in Boston, still recalls the fear sheexperienced in an incident in 1984 when she was jeered at,called &quot;nigger&quot; and pushed to the ground by a group of whitesas she was walking through the parking lot at Fenway Park oneevening. &quot;{White} people were walking on the sidewalk nearme. They just kept walking,&quot; says Ms. Hardeman, who has sincemoved to San Jose, Calif.   Edward Barnette, also from the Boston area, is in theprocess of transferring to Atlanta for the sake of hisdaughter. While in the Boston area, Mr. Barnette lived in aspacious house on a six-acre lot in suburban Boston, earned asix-figure salary for a large corporation, employed a nannyfor his three-year-old daughter, Camille. She has attended aprivate suburban preschool, where she has been one of only ahandful of black children.   When Mr. Barnette recently complimented Camille for anaccomplishment, she replied, &quot;I'm not smart, Daddy. Don't sayI am.&quot; Mr. Barnette was stunned. He believes she had pickedup signals that she wasn't as intelligent as her whiteclassmates. &quot;If all the people she comes in contact with arewhite, she won't have an appreciation for her own people,&quot; hesays. &quot;Camille is somewhat standoffish when she's aroundblack people. It absolutely crushes me.&quot;   Eric Thompson quit his job last year at a Mellon Bankoffice in Pittsburgh, where, he says, he was the only blackin a 60-employee division, and he took a job in Atlanta. The29-year-old accountant previously had worked at PriceWaterhouse in Pittsburgh, where he was the only black among300 employees, he says. (Price Waterhouse says there wereactually five blacks among 275 employees when Mr. Thompsonleft in 1986.) Mr. Thompson says he visited many companies inthe area when he worked for Price Waterhouse, &quot;and I neversaw any blacks. I saw one in Dayton, Ohio, and she was asecretary.&quot;   At Mellon, Mr. Thompson rarely joined his colleagues forhappy hours. For one thing, he doesn't drink. But he alsofelt awkward as the only black customer in bars that playedcountry and Western or rock music. He prefers jazz.   His evenings and weekends weren't much better. There isn'tmuch nightlife that appeals to black professionals inPittsburgh. One of the few nightclubs catering to them is 15miles outside the city. Singles often have a hard timefinding one another.   The soft-spoken Mr. Thompson would roam shopping malls byhimself to kill time. Or he would go to movies. &quot;That wasprime time on my calendar,&quot; he says. Then there was midnightbowling with a friend or two. But since he moved to Atlantalast year, he has been so busy with jazz concerts, churchevents and other activities that he hasn't been to the lanes.   Before he moved to Atlanta, Mr. Thompson had to overcomehis childhood impressions of the South as hostile towardsblacks. Growing up in Washington, D.C., he saw televisonfootage of blacks succumbing to husky sheriffs andwhite-robed racists. Each summer, when his family drovethrough rural Alabama to visit his grandparents, he sawwooden, paint-flecked houses with tin roofs, shoelesschildren sitting on dilapidated front porches and the swirlof dust from dirt roads.   &quot;Every child after high school graduation wanted to goNorth,&quot; recalls his mother, Vera Thompson, who grew up inBeatrice, Ala., and moved to Washington after she married.&quot;They wanted freedom; they wanted a job. There was nothing(in Beatrice) except work in the field.&quot;   Mr. Thompson found a very different South when he walkedinto the Coca-Cola Co. headquarters last year for a jobinterview. His first impression: the throng of blackprofessionals in the building. During the interview, he askedwhat positions high-ranking blacks filled. Back at Mellon, hesays, he was dismayed that blacks didn't work inrevenue-generating jobs. While Mellon can't provide numbers,the bank says the notion that no blacks work inrevenue-producing jobs is absurd.   In any case, Mr. Thompson says that at Coke &quot;you seeblacks in positions where they have an effect on the bottomline.&quot; And in Atlanta, there is comfort in numbers. Thecity's black population has increased by 24%, to 605,000,since 1980.   At Coke, Mr. Thompson is one of six blacks in a 30-memberdepartment, which also includes Hispanics and otherminorities. The corporate culture gets high marks all around;the cafeteria, Mr. Thompson says, serves Southern food --fried chicken and greens.   Mr. Thompson met his girlfriend in the company's legaldepartment. He lives in a luxury apartment with a swimmingpool and tennis courts. Dressed in a dark suit, he sipscranberry juice in Mr. V's, an elegant and very crowdednightclub that attracts mostly black patrons. &quot;I would havehad to be a pioneer in Pittsburgh to make a mark,&quot; he saysabove the din of rhythm and blues music, &quot;but in Atlanta,there were some doors that were already wide open.&quot;   Says Willie Thornton, an assistant professor at EmoryUniversity, who recently moved to Atlanta after receiving aPh.D. in finance at Harvard University: &quot;In Atlanta there isa very visible black middle class. When someone sees you onthe street, you could be a city councilman just as easily asa mugger. In Boston, people are less quick to think of you asa professional.&quot;   Some see a danger in the migration of black professionalsfrom Northern cities. &quot;My greatest despair is to see thosewho see racism and flee,&quot; says Harry Johnson, manager ofcorporate communications at Polaroid Corp. in Cambridge,Mass. &quot;If Boston is as impoverished of black professionals asthey say, then we need them . . . to bring new ideas, newcommitment and passion.&quot;   Lawyer Justin Johnson's decision to leave Pittsburghbewildered his father, state Judge Justin M. Johnson, whofelt the Johnson name would have opened many doors inPittsburgh. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, Mr. Johnson neverfelt he had to leave the city for a better life, and hedoesn't understand his son's captivation with Atlanta'ssocial scene.   &quot;I was brought up to understand that the greatest valuewas in doing hard work and doing a good job, and if you gotpleasure, that was incidental,&quot; he says from his office, thewalls lined with family photos. &quot;I can't imagine moving fromone community to the next because there's not a lot of peoplefrom a particular group to have quality relaxation time.&quot;   Nonetheless, he knows that times have changed. He has seenpictures of his son laughing with friends on a boat in alake. Those experiences are important, he says, &quot;but I neverhad that.&quot;   For his part, the younger Mr. Johnson, who works forAlston andamp; Bird, one of Atlanta's largest law firms, knows heis taking a professional risk. &quot;When I came back toPittsburgh (from law school), there was all this good will Icould draw on,&quot; he says, &quot;but the city still couldn't make mehappy.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>