<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900912-0069</DOCNO><DOCID>900912-0069.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   New York Challenges RTC's Bid   To Oust Renters at Seized Building   ----   By Mitchell Pacelle and Richard Koenig   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   MTC TIC BGL MO AMB</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)INSURANCE (INS)FULL LINE INSURANCE (INF)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   New York's attorney general challenged an effort by thefederal thrift-bailout agency to evict eight renters from aManhattan condominium building seized by the government froman insolvent savings and loan.   In a strongly worded letter to Resolution Trust Corp.'sexecutive director, David C. Cooke, state Attorney GeneralRobert Abrams said the tenants were entitled under thestate's rent control and stabilization laws to occupy theapartments for as long as they wished.</LP><TEXT>   The RTC said that the New York case is the first case inwhich they have sought evictions, but that the agency wasprepared to do so whenever it was necessary to minimizelosses to U.S. taxpayers.   The federal government is receiving roughly $9,000 permonth from the midtown apartments, while they are costing thegovernment about $27,000 per month, according to RTCspokesman Stephen Katsanos.   &quot;Public protection shouldn't include throwing people outof their homes,&quot; countered Richard Barr, a spokesman for theattorney general.   In August the RTC informed the eight tenants that the 1989legislation creating the bailout agency gave the governmentthe right to repudiate their leases. The RTC then offered tosell the apartments to the tenants.   The apartments in question were foreclosed on by NassauFederal Savings andamp; Loan Association when the developer whoconverted them into condominiums defaulted on his loan. TheRTC was appointed receiver of the thrift last March.   In his letter, Mr. Abrams said that New York's Martin Actbars owners from evicting renters when buildings areconverted to condominiums.   &quot;RTC should not reap windfall profits by transformingoccupied residential apartments into more valuable vacantapartments by the draconian measure of evicting thelongstanding tenants of those apartments in violation of NewYork law,&quot; Abrams wrote.   Although the attorney general suggested that governmentshould sell the condominiums as occupied units, the marketfor such units was nearly wiped out by the Tax Reform Act of1986.   John Jeffries Jr., a professor of constitutional law atVirginia School of Law, said that although federal lawoverrides state law, it is arguable whether Congress intendedto give the RTC the right to take such action.   Mr. Abrams's office said that it hopes to persuade the RTCto reverse its action, but that it was up to the tenantsinvolved to challenge the action in court.   &quot;No judge in New York is going to allow this,&quot; predictedErrol Brett of New York's Schwartzseld, Ganfer andamp; Shore, whichrepresents hundreds of tenants associations. &quot;The {federal}statute doesn't apply to such situations at all.&quot;   ---   INSURERS' TACTICS condemned by judge in toxic-wasteliability dispute.   Investigators working on behalf of insurance companiesmisled former employees of Monsanto Co. about theinvestigators' identities and purposes, a state judge inDelaware ruled.   In the continuing litigation, the insurers argue that theyaren't liable for certain cleanup costs incurred by Monsanto,a St. Louis chemicals company. The investigators were seekingany information about Monsanto's operating practices thatmight prove damaging to the company.   Judge Vincent J. Poppiti ordered Travelers Corp., one ofMonsanto's primary insurers, based in Hartford, Conn., toprovide Monsanto with any former employees' statementsobtained by investigators. He said that evidence won't beadmissible at trial, scheduled to begin in September 1992.Judge Poppiti didn't specifically blame Travelers for thealleged misrepresentation.   The judge also provided a script to be used byinvestigators and lawyers when they initiate futureinterviews of former Monsanto employees. Among other things,the script requires the investigators to make clear thatMonsanto and the insurers are in litigation.   Such high-stakes battles are increasingly common betweencompanies and their insurers over who should pay for theburgeoning cost of cleaning up toxic waste allegedly releasedby the companies. And insurers believe that interviews withformer employees can be effective in exposing wrongdoing bythe companies that might release the insurers from anyobligation to pay.   In the Monsanto case, Judge Poppiti noted affidavits bythe former employees stating that, in some instances, theinvestigators didn't disclose they represented the insurers.For example, one former Monsanto employee was allegedly toldthat an investigator &quot;worked for a firm in New Orleans whichhad been commissioned by the chemical industry to look intowhich companies were polluting,&quot; according to the judge'sopinion. Two others were allegedly told that investigatorswere &quot;compiling a book&quot; about a company plant, the judgewrote.   The judge acknowledged that some statements by the formeremployees were contradicted by the affidavits ofinvestigators, but he still found evidence to conclude thatformer employees were misled.   The judge used strong language to condemn any dissembling.&quot;There is no vice that doth so cover a man with shame as tobe found false and perfidious,&quot; he wrote, quoting the17th-century philosopher Francis Bacon.   His order doesn't specify individual blame formisrepresentation among the three dozen or so insurancecompanies named by Monsanto as defendants, their outsidelawyers and independent investigators. It wasn't immediatelyclear who, if anyone, coordinated the investigators' work.   Travelers said in a statement that it didn't supervise theinvestigators, nor did Travelers' outside lawyers supervisethem. Travelers also said it believes &quot;parties to the casewill seek to clarify this point with the court.&quot;   Judge Poppiti said the lawyers are accountable for theinvestigators they retained, and he ordered the lawyers, nottheir clients, to pay certain court costs of Monsanto.   ---   DRUG-CASE DEFENDANTS could lose federal benefits under newrules.   People convicted of drug-related crimes, includingpossession, may be denied such federal benefits as studentfinancial aid and small-business loans under sentencingregulations that took effect yesterday.   The main purpose of the policy, which Congress mandated inNovember 1988, is to provide judges with the authority toimpose sanctions less severe than incarceration in an effortto deter illegal drug use. Inhibited by crowded prisons andcourt dockets, judges rarely sentence people to jail for thecrime of possessing illegal drugs, as opposed to sellingthem.   The new authority applies to both federal and statejudges, who will have broad discretion to deny hundreds oftypes of federal benefits. Other benefits that could bewithheld include Federal Communications Commission licensesand access to various federally run training programs. Anumber of major federal programs aren't covered by thepolicy, including Social Security, health, disability andveterans' benefits. The policy provides for eventualrestoration of denied benefits to people who successfullycomplete drug-rehabilitation programs.   Many of the benefits that judges may deny are enjoyedprimarily by people in middle- or upper-income brackets. Butthe White House drug czar, William Bennett, noted at a newsconference in Washington that the federal governmentsubsidizes roughly three million student loans and said, &quot;Youare talking about real impact here.&quot; A central thrust of Mr.Bennett's anti-drug strategy is to toughen punishment of whathe calls &quot;casual&quot; drug use.   Kevin Zeese, a drug-case defense lawyer in Virginia,criticized the new form of punishment as &quot;a policy based ondesperation . . . because the prisons and jails are soovercrowded.&quot;   The new sanctions apply to people convicted after Sept. 1,1989, for crimes committed on or after Nov. 18, 1988.   ---   TOBACCO-LIABILITY RULINGS appealed by plaintiff inAmerican Tobacco case.   In March, a federal jury in Boston cleared AmericanTobacco Co. of liability in the death of Joanne Kotler'shusband, George, who had begun smoking at age 11 and died in1986 at the age of 55. Stock analysts have said that the juryverdict in that case helped lift the cloud of liability suitsfrom the tobacco industry.   In her appeal, lawyers for Mrs. Kotler asked a federalappeals court to overturn court rulings that eliminated twoother tobacco companies, Liggett Group Inc. and Philip MorrisCos., from the original suit.   They also asked the court to re-examine whether Congressmeant cigarette-pack warnings to protect tobacco companiesfrom product-liability lawsuits and whether a jury should beallowed to determine whether cigarettes are a defectiveproduct or present a risk that outweighs smoking's &quot;socialutility.&quot;   ---   Paul M. Barrett contributed to this column.</TEXT></DOC>