<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911113-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>911113-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Money Supply Foreshadows Deeper Recession   ----   By Kurt Richebacher</HL><DATE>11/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FORECASTS andamp; ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   When early this year all the U.S. money aggregates beganto spurt, there was an instantaneous consensus that this wasfurther conclusive evidence of an impending economicrecovery. It was clear, money mattered.   Just as suddenly, growth of the broader aggregates stoppeddead in its tracks. M2, measuring currency in circulation anddemand and savings deposits, is no higher than in Februaryand the broader M4 no higher than in December 1990. For a fewmonths, U.S. economic analysts simply registered disbelief.Later, the unbelievable and impossible provoked a spate ofarticles asserting that money supply had lost much of itsformer importance. Suddenly, money didn't matter.</LP><TEXT>   The favorite explanation is the massive exodus out oflow-yielding deposits and short-term assets, counted as moneysupply, into higher-yielding alternative financialinvestments outside the money supply, such as bonds, bondfunds or initial equity offerings. Statistically, such moneymovements show up in falling money supply, but accelerating&quot;velocity,&quot; or usage of the existing supply. Conclusion: noreason to worry. The money is still there. It just worksharder.   This last explanation would have some validity if, infact, there was evidence that velocity had risen. But thereis no such evidence. Something more interesting, and moreserious, than a mere shift of portfolio preferences isaffecting the U.S. monetary system, and, hence, the capacityof the U.S. economy to grow. It threatens the U.S. with arenewed recession.   What in fact is happening is that the ability of theFederal Reserve to run a pro-growth monetary policy has beenseriously damaged by laws designed to bail out depositors infailing savings and loan associations and banks. Atparticular fault, for reasons I will explain below, is theResolution Trust Corp., created by Congress in 1989 to takeover insolvent thrifts and liquidate their assets.   But first, it is necessary to eliminate the argument thatportfolio shifts have increased velocity and are offsettingthe lack of growth in the money supply. Or, in other words,that assets and lending are being shifted to non-banks, suchas insurance companies and pension funds, from banks.   A look at the available statistics, in particular theFed's flow of funds account, makes it blatantly obvious thatsuch &quot;compensatory&quot; lending outside the banking system andthe money supply is not taking place. To the contrary,non-bank lending has collapsed equally. Contraction hasspread from group to group. New credit is plunging all aroundbecause all institutions are struggling with the same loanproblems, the declining value of loan collateral and erosionof their capital. First the Sandamp;Ls, then the banks, nowinsurance companies, finance companies and commercial paperpurchasers.   The figures speak a clear story: Total net new privatenon-bank lending rose by an annual rate of $75.9 billion inthe second quarter of 1991 and $51.6 billion in the firstquarter. That compares with a peak of $406 billion in 1988,followed by $333.8 billion in 1989 and $275.9 billion in1990.   In reality, there is a very simple way to cut through allthese asset and lending shifts which distort the moneypicture: Just go straight to the aggregate figures ofprivate-sector borrowing and lending. It immediatelydisperses the statistical fog. Overall private debt growth,from bank lending to bond issues, has dived precipitously toabout 2.7% from almost 14% in 1984-85. That and nothing elseis the crucial fact behind the weak U.S. economy and its weakmoney supply. Taking inflation and interest rates intoaccount, that's a veritable credit contraction. In short, thecollapse of money growth reflects a collapse in privatecredit growth.   Money-supply growth would be much weaker yet had notanother source of money creation jumped into action: soaringbank investments. Loan expansion is not the only way themoney supply increases. The same deposit-creating effectoccurs when banks expand their investments, mainly governmentbonds, and that is happening on a large scale. Year-on-yearbank investments have increased by $72 billion or 16%. It isall the more ominous that money-supply growth has collapseddespite this massive money creation through monetization ofpublic debt.   Could the problem of the extremely sluggish U.S. moneygrowth solve itself through an acceleration of velocity, asmany people hope and believe? Earlier it was possible to say&quot;yes&quot; in theory, providing lending outside the banking systemtakes up the slack. But given the collapse in non-bank creditgrowth, the answer is a definite no. The evidence isirrefutable: the ailing money supply is not a dream. It isreal. There will be no velocity miracle.   Some people find comfort in attributing the banks' lendingrestraint to the higher capital requirements applied by theFederal Reserve in 1988 in compliance with an internationalbanking regulation agreement. Instead of being a reason forcomfort, however, it is a reason for all the greater anxietybecause it implies that the Fed's instruments, reserves andinterest rates, are blunted by a fragile financial structure.   Besides, the truth is rather more discomforting. What'sreally strangling bank lending is not so much the new capitalrequirements but a colossal shrinkage in the value of loancollateral, particularly through a decline in propertyvalues. Small safety margins on their loans force them toabsorb a large part of their customers' losses. They areunable to build assets because they have to rebuild capital,and that means a helpless Fed.   All this leaves us with the most important of allquestions: Are those influences that are driving this processof credit and money contraction abating or, even possiblyreversing themselves? There is a complacent notion that incontrast to the 1930s, Sandamp;L and bank failures don't matterbecause the government takes care of them. That, after all,is what the Resolution Trust Corp., with its massiveborrowings, and the bank insurance fund were put in place todo.   Nothing could be further from the truth. The governmenttakes care of the depositors but nobody and nothing else. Theadverse effects of the financial crisis are chiefly of fourkinds:   (1) shrinkage of deposits;   (2) shrinkage of money supply;   (3) shrinkage of bank reserve demand;   (4) shrinkage of bank asset values and the equitycapital-to-asset ratio.   Depositors are the one and only party that loses nothing,because the government bails them out. However, as thegovernment issues bonds for this purpose, the financialservices system as a whole suffers a corresponding decreasein the money supply. Purchases of these bonds siphon offexisting deposits. That in turn reduces bank demands forreserves. And because the Fed, in its money-supplymanagement, targets the federal funds rate -- which rises orfalls with bank demand for reserves -- it mops up reserveseven while money supply growth is stagnant.   The net effect on the financial markets is less money andmore government bonds. In short, the RTC operation is akin toa massive contractionary open market operation.   Even more damaging is still another effect on thefinancial system, namely, the shrinking asset values. Whilethe depositors get new deposits, the Sandamp;Ls or banks and theirdefaulting debtors don't get new assets. The whoppingdestruction of asset value and capital continues unhampered,impairing the system's ability to create new loans. What'sleft are more and more undercapitalized banks unable to lend.In sum, the bailout is no bailout for the system, only forthe depositors. Indeed, it is compounding the problems.   One of the first equations that a student of economicslearns is that MV equals the growth of nominal GNP. It'selementary, and MV means money supply (M) times velocity (V).Anybody who asserts that the persistent M weakness doesn'tmatter ought to explain why he is so sure of rising moneyvelocity. He cannot.   When we look at M2, M3 and M4, we see more than just moneysupply. Under the surface, we see the virtual collapse incredit-financed private expenditures; we see a ferociousincome, profit and cash flow squeeze; we see a vast value andcapital destruction centered so far in commercial real estateand hitting the whole range of financial institutions; we seefinancial structures that are weak and vulnerable as neverbefore. Given these conditions, money supply matters morethan ever.   The conclusion is that the extremely weak money aggregatesdo signal a deepening U.S. recession.   ---   Mr. Richebacher is editor of Currencies and CreditMarkets, an international newsletter published in CaistorCentre, Ontario.</TEXT></DOC>