<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911205-0112</DOCNO><DOCID>911205-0112.</DOCID><HL>   From Pearl Harbor to the Gulf: When to Worry   ----   By Roberta Wohlstetter</HL><DATE>12/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Fifty years. And so a flood of books, articles and TVspecials about the sudden military disaster that hit us atPearl Harbor, Guam and Manila, and struck the British fromSingapore to Hong Kong.   In recent months Frederick Parker, an able NationalSecurity Agency analyst, has provided new details aboutJapanese coded naval messages in the last days before theattack on Pearl Harbor. James Rusbridger has constructed onemore conspiracy theory based on these messages, claiming theywould have revealed all unequivocally to the theatercommanders if Churchill had not withheld them.</LP><TEXT>   The new flood tells us very little about why we and theBritish were caught napping or what actions we might havetaken to deter or frustrate or minimize the disaster. Or whatwe should do today to handle future surprises. It responds tothe calendar rather than to any new discoveries about themeaning and relevance of Pearl Harbor.   The savagery of some of the current accusations againstthe commanders in the Hawaiian theater suggests a generalizedsense of grievance. This is associated with the apparentlyincurable belief that the information provided by U.S.intelligence services provides unambiguous warning well inadvance of any potential disaster. If that were so, onlyneglect or incompetence or betrayal in high places couldexplain why we are ever caught by surprise.   Mr. Rusbridger, for example, argues that the British Codeand Cipher School was decrypting Japanese naval messages andsupplying them daily to Churchill, who must therefore haveknown that the Japanese were planning to attack Pearl Harboron Dec. 7. He concludes &quot;inescapably&quot; that &quot;Churchilldeliberately withheld&quot; this vital intelligence from Britain'sclose ally.   However, the U.S. Navy's OP-20-G was also interceptingJapanese naval messages (over 7,000 a month between July andDecember 1941), decrypting some and fully translating a muchsmaller number. In 1941 the small staff was focusing urgentlyon decrypting German messages on the deployment of submarinesand high-level diplomatic messages suggesting Japaneseintentions. It was only after the war that OP-20-G had thetime, from March 1946 to August 1947, to look for secretsabout Pearl Harbor hidden in these naval messages.   The British also had more urgent priorities in 1941,including the German submarines in the Atlantic and overtJapanese movements against British bases in Asia. There is noevidence that anyone in British Intelligence knew that PearlHarbor would be attacked on Dec. 7 -- still less thatChurchill would have had time to infer anything on thatsubject from a flood of deciphered messages supplied to himdaily, covering activities world-wide.   After the war, according to Frederick Parker, OP-20-Gfound that of the original 26,581 decryptions only 2,413 wereworth translating fully, and of these only 188 were relevantto Pearl Harbor. Mr. Parker feels that if decision makers hadseen the messages about a northern operation of the Japanesefleet and some information about adapting torpedoes toshallow waters, they would have recognized Pearl Harbor asthe object of attack.   But even this is far from clear. The Japanese might havebeen preparing to move north and west to attack Russia. Thisis what Richard Sorge, Stalin's brilliant and well-informeddouble agent, believed Japan would do in July 1941 and againin September. And so did Adm. R.K. Turner, head of Navy warplans, until one week before Pearl Harbor. In any case, theinformation was not available.   Nonetheless, the belief that intelligence can alwayssupply unambiguous warning of a coming danger seems immune tocontrary evidence. All the cases I've examined dissolve underscrutiny. One signal often taken as unmistakable is a messageabout Japanese plans to attack Pearl Harbor forwarded by U.S.Ambassador Joseph C. Grew from Tokyo in January 1941 -- thevery month (we know now) that Adm. Isoroku Yamamoto began hisplanning. Some sober historians conclude the message leakedhis plan.   But Grew's source was the Peruvian ambassador, and thePeruvian's source was his Japanese cook -- an &quot;avid reader ofthe penny thrillers depicting a Japan-American war which hadbeen current for at least twenty years before 1941,&quot;according to U.S. Naval Intelligence. In these popularthrillers, Japan always started the war with a surpriseattack on the U.S. fleet at Pearl Harbor or San Francisco orSan Pedro, or in transit through the Panama Canal. And Japanalways won because the effete Americans wouldn't support anoffensive in the Far East.   Popular novels published yearly for decades revealedsomething about Japanese attitudes toward surprise attack andtheir contempt for American resolve. But the cook's readingmatter hardly justified going on alert for 11 months in 1941.   To understand the decisions that led to Pearl Harbor --and to draw lessons from it for today's risky and uncertainworldone has to forget the last chapter of the real PearlHarbor detective story, in which all outcomes are known.Suspend memory of how it ended and remember how it looked in1941 to Japanese, British and American intelligence analystsand decision makers, when fragments of information pointingin various directions, much of it false, were dispersedunevenly throughout various sections of various governments.   Japanese decisions on when, where, how and whether toattack risked disaster. But so did American and Britishdecisions on whether to decrypt and translate Japanese navalmessages rather than Japanese diplomatic traffic or Germanmessages about submarines. And so did American decisions onwhether to disperse planes and reduce their vulnerability toair attack, or to put them close together to preventsabotage.   Conspiracy theorists know that Roosevelt and Churchillwanted America's full might brought to bear in support ofEngland's battle for the Atlantic and Europe. They know thatafter the Japanese attacks in the Pacific, Hitler declaredwar on the U.S. and dragged it into the war for the Atlantic.But Roosevelt and Churchill couldn't anticipate that blunder,Hitler's greatest. These tales of betrayal look plausibleonly if we've read the last chapter. Without knowing Hitler'sfuture blunder, to engage the U.S. in Pacific disasters wouldhave been an extraordinarily risky, farfetched way of turningits principal efforts to a war in the Atlantic and Europe.   To recognize that strategic warning always has ambiguitiesdoesn't mean we can never act nor that all responses toambiguous signs are equally effective or ineffective. If ourpurpose in recalling Pearl Harbor is to draw &quot;lessons,&quot; themain point is that we can work out useful ways of respondingto signs of great danger that may (or may not) turn out to befalse alarms. And we can do it at reasonable political andeconomic cost.   For instance, a higher alert at Pearl Harbor in December1941 -- for which the Japanese were listening -- would haveled them to call off the attack. That was their contingencyplan. Similarly, given the uncertain dangers associated withthe spreading technical and political revolutions today, somelow-cost responses may deter a rogue government bent onattack by showing that the prospective victim is not soundasleep but ready to spoil the attack or reduce its intendedeffects.   Caspar Weinberger once proposed that NATO adopt low-costrepeatable responses to ambiguous warnings. Such responsesare even more relevant today to reduce the risks in a worldthat is likely to include more then one country hostile toour purposes and equipped with chemical, biological andnuclear weapons.   Take the recent Gulf War. Few observers see our answer toIraq's devastation of Kuwait as a disaster. Yet it'simportant to remember that U.S. intelligence believed at theend of the Iran-Iraq War that Iraq would &quot;continue&quot; towardmoderation and cooperation with its neighbors, especiallyKuwait. It's also important to remember that Americanresponses to cumulating signs of Iraqi aggression in the Gulfwere not flawless. We started carriers, cruisers and maritimepre-positioning ships on their way to the Red and NorthArabian seas only after the aggression against Kuwait wasunmistakable. Their arrival in the theater, and the arrivalof an airborne division, may have deterred Iraq from invadingSaudi Arabia.   But tension about Iraq's forces gathering near the Kuwaitiborder rose high long before that. The United Arab Emirates,nervous about Iraqi movements and verbal threats, asked forhelp that resulted in an exercise with the Joint Task ForceMiddle East on July 23. We could have started the navalassets moving then (although we could not have deployed ourairborne division until the Saudis gave us permission toland). Many of these naval assets were designed precisely tohover in international waters. If they had been sent aboutthe time the UAE called for help, they would have arrivedmuch earlier, and might have deterred the Iraqi invasion anddevastation of Kuwait.   That may be a lesson for the future.   ---   Mrs. Wohlstetter's &quot;Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision&quot;(Stanford University Press) won the Bancroft Prize forHistory in 1963. Her continuing research is about the role ofsurprise during and after the Cold War.</TEXT></DOC>