<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900502-0057</DOCNO><DOCID>900502-0057.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Minority Holders in CSX Dispute   Are Stung by Appraisal of Shares   ----   By Wayne E. Green and Beatrice E. Garcia   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   FREST ASH MDEST ITT FFC S CI XRX TIC AET CSX</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)INSURANCE (INS)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   A Maryland judge delivered a costly defeat to a group ofminority shareholders who contended they weren't treatedfairly in a CSX Corp. restructuring plan.   Squeezed out in the 1987 reorganization, the minorityholders of Baltimore andamp; Ohio Railroad Co. had contended theyweren't offered fair value for their shares. But StateCircuit Court Judge Joseph H.H. Kaplan in Baltimoredisagreed, upholding an unusual appraisers' report thatconcluded the CSX offer was too generous and that minoritystockholders deserved even less.</LP><TEXT>   Legal experts say similar cases involving valuation ofminority stock usually end up either affirming company offersor else awarding the holders additional money. &quot;This is sortof a man-biting-the-dog situation,&quot; says Richard Magid, anattorney in Baltimore with Whiteford, Taylor andamp; Preston,counsel for CSX. &quot;I've never heard of appraisers coming inbelow what a company had offered.&quot;   The suit grew out of a plan in which CSX decided to mergeits Chesapeake andamp; Ohio Railway Co. unit with the Bandamp;O road. Atthe time, Bandamp;O was about 95%-owned by the Candamp;O Railway. CSXoffered to pay the minority holders $124 a share for theirholdings. Roughly one-third of the minority holders acceptedthe offer, but others went to court, alleging that the fairvalue of the stock was $412.17 a share.   Last month, a panel of three court-appointed appraisersdetermined that the fair value of the stock was $112.44 ashare, $11.56 less than CSX had offered and $299.73 less thanthe plaintiffs had been seeking. Based on some 80,000minority shares Mr. Magid said were represented in the suit,the price differential would amount to about $1 million lessthan CSX had offered, and about $24 million less thanplaintiffs were seeking.   &quot;In sum, we think the defendants overpaid,&quot; the appraisersconcluded. In their report, the appraisers observed that CSXmay have chosen to &quot;err toward generosity&quot; in an attempt toavoid litigation. But they added that the definition of &quot;fairvalue&quot; doesn't encompass any &quot;largess&quot; that might have beenincluded in the merger price. Judge Kaplan didn't issue awritten opinion when he approved the report Monday.   William Klein II, a New York attorney for several of theminority holders, said that the decision was a &quot;shock&quot; butthat it probably wouldn't be appealed. &quot;I think it's wrong,but it's American now to say, to hell with shareholders,&quot;said Mr. Klein, an attorney with Tenzer, Greenblatt, Fallon andamp;Kaplan.   ---   AETNA CHALLENGES state law controlling its exit from autoinsurance market.   Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co. has filed suit in federal courtin Boston attacking the constitutionality of twoMassachusetts laws that dictate how an insurer can withdrawfrom the state's auto insurance market.   Aetna and several other insurers, including TravelersInc., Xerox Corp.'s Crum andamp; Forster unit and Cigna Corp., haveannounced plans to cut back on their auto insurance businessnationwide or drop out entirely because they face mountinglosses.   The suit challenges one Massachusetts statute that forcesinsurers to pay a yearly assessement for eight years to thestate's pool for high-risk drivers, which is shunned byconventional insurers. Payment of the fee would allow Aetnato withdraw from the Massachusetts auto insurance market butretain its licenses to sell other insurance. The companyestimates that paying this fee for eight years could amountto well over $200 million.   The other law contested in the suit gives the insurancecommissioner the power to revoke all of an insurer's licensesif the company pulls out of the car insurance market.   The Massachusetts laws would force an insurer &quot;to pay anextortionate tax or give up its valuable property,&quot; saysStephen Deutsch, an attorney with Foley, Hoag andamp; Eliot,counsel to Aetna.   Fund American Cos. and Allstate Insurance Co., a unit ofSears, Roebuck andamp; Co., have decided to give up all insurancelicenses in Massachusetts. But Aetna, the state'ssecond-largest insurer behind Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.,does not want to do that.   Timothy Gailey, Massachusetts's insurance commissioner,believes that if Aetna wins its suit, a state's ability tocontrol its markets would be reduced. &quot;A state should be ableto say which companies can go or stay under reasonableconditions.&quot;   If the Massachusetts regulations are struck down in court,&quot;other states won't try to use this extortionate device as ameans of trapping companies into their local economies,&quot; saysLaurence Tribe, a constitutional law professor at HarvardUniversity who is working with Aetna's attorneys.   Earlier this year in California, Travelers successfullychallenged a provision of the state's Proposition 103 thatwould have made it impossible for a company to withdraw froma segment of the insurance market.   In New Jersey, an insurer can be asked to turn in all ofits licenses if it plans to quit the personal insurancebusiness, although the decision is made at the discretion ofthe insurance commissioner.   New Jersey's insurance department has won a preliminaryinjunction against Twin Cities Insurance Co., a unit of ITTHartford Group, keeping the company from leaving the statewithout developing an orderly plan of withdrawal.   ---   TWO SENATORS FACING ETHICS inquiries set up legal defensefunds.   Sen. David Durenberger, who is being investigated by theSenate Ethics Committee for questionable financialtransactions involving a book promotion arrangement and realestate dealings, has hired GOP fund-raiser Steven Gordon tohelp fatten his legal fund, which was set up in March.   A spokesman for the Minnesota Republican said yesterdaythat Sen. Durenberger owes more than $100,000 to the two lawfirms that are representing him in the ethics investigation,Washington's Olwine, Connelly, Chase, O'Donnell andamp; Weyher andMinneapolis's Popham, Haik, Schnindbrich, Kaufman andamp; Doty.   The head of the Durenberger Legal Expense Trust Fund,Minnesota businessman Wheelock Whitney, said the committeewould accept contributions only from individuals. UnderSenate rules, individuals and political action committees cangive a maximum of $10,000 a year to such legal funds.   Sen. Durenberger hasn't yet disclosed any of thecontributors to the fund and isn't required to do so untilJuly. Mr. Gordon declined to comment on who he wassoliciting.   Sen. Alan Cranston, one of five senators facing an ethicsinquiry into their ties to thrift executive Charles Keating,reported last month that he has raised $105,510 for his legaldefense fund during the first three months of 1990. Amongthose giving the maximum $10,000 contribution were thefashion designer Liz Claiborne and her husband, ArthurOrtenberg. Former Commerce Secretary Philip Klutznick gave$2,000. Sen. Cranston, a California Democrat, also received$10,000 from a political action committee sponsored by thesheet metal workers union.   Sen. Cranston has paid two Washington law firms, Powell,Goldstein, Frazer andamp; Murphy and Zuckerman, Spaeder, Goldstein,Taylor andamp; Kolker $97,575 from his legal fund.   Five other senators are facing ethics inquiries, but theyare paying their legal bills out of personal funds orcampaign funds.   ---   LAWYER IS TRIED ON CHARGES of helping sell Ashland Oilsecrets to Iran.   Charles Barnett, of Palm Beach, Fla., is accused of fraudin a scheme to sell confidential Ashland Oil Co. documents tothe Iranian national oil company. Federal prosecutors allegethat Iran planned to use the documents in a suit againstAshland, and that Mr. Barnett, in return, would have receiveda cut of any damages Iran won. The case also involves formerAshland Chairman Orin Atkins, who last year pleaded guilty totwo counts of conspiracy and wire fraud for his role in thescheme. Mr. Atkins is expected to testify against Mr.Barnett.   The U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan has charged thatMr. Atkins, who will be sentenced this summer, initiated theplan in 1982 after being forced to resign his executiveposts. But in his opening arguments this week, Assistant U.S.Attorney Herve Gouraige said Mr. Barnett was instrumental ingetting the Iranians to agree to the alleged scheme.   Mr. Barnett, 38 years old, &quot;thoroughly familiarizedhimself with the contents of the stolen Ashland documents sothat he could explain their usefulness to the Iranians,&quot; Mr.Gouraige said. Iran sued Ashland in 1985 for $780 million fornot paying for oil delivered in 1979. Ashland settled thecase last year by agreeing to pay $325 million.   Mr. Barnett's attorney, Marvin Segal, said in his openingstatement to the jury that Mr. Barnett's efforts were part ofa &quot;legal enterprise to help the Iranian oil company collectthe money it avowedly was owed.&quot;   An Ashland attorney, the first witness in the case,testified that the company had refused to pay Iran for theoil because it believed Iran had breached the contract.   ---   JUDGE ORDERS BREAK in Marcos trial while defenseinterviews witnesses in the Philippines.   Federal Judge John Keenan said he will recess ImeldaMarcos's racketeering trial for two weeks in June so thatdefense attorneys can take depositions from at least twowitnesses -- including one who claims he helped FerdinandMarcos recover a mysterious hoard of gold. Mrs. Marcos'sattorneys say the witnesses are unable to leave thePhilippines.   Mrs. Marcos, who fled the Philippines with her husband in1986, is charged with stealing more than $160 million fromthe Philippines and secretly hiding the assets in the U.S.Mr. Marcos, who ruled the Philippines for 20 years, died inSeptember.   Attorneys for Mrs. Marcos say Orlando Dulay, anex-military officer, will testify that he transported largeamounts of the gold to the Marcos home. They say thediscovery of the gold, supposedly hidden in the Philippinesby a Japanese general during World War II, accounts for theMarcoses' immense wealth. Prosecutors say the couple amassedmillions by plundering the Philippines treasury. Mr. Dulay isin jail on charges of killing campaign workers for PhilippinePresident Corazon Aquino.   Judge Keenan refused to lift Mrs. Marcos's bailrestrictions to allow her to return to the Philippines forthe depositions.   He also rejected a request that a deposition be taken fromMrs. Aquino, who succeeded Mr. Marcos as president.   ---   AN EXPERIMENTAL PRO BONO program that would be voluntaryfor lawyers has been endorsed by New York State's highestjudge. Chief Judge Sol Wachtler of the Court of Appeals madethe announcement in response to a proposal that the state's80,000 lawyers be required to perform a minimum of 40 hoursof public service work every two years. The recommendationwas made earlier this week by a committee appointed by JudgeWachtler. He said that if a voluntary program fails, he willpropose that the courts force lawyers to provide free legalserivces to the poor.   ---   Wade Lambert in New York contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>