<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901221-0180</DOCNO><DOCID>901221-0180.</DOCID><HL>   Foreign Insight:   European Community's Recent Actions   Contradict Plans for Economic Unity   ----   By Craig Forman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7C</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   LONDON -- Beyond the recent rhetoric, the EuropeanCommunity looks less like an international trade bloc than ablock to international trade.   With Europe's magic 1992 date for unity about to drawanother year closer, this is the time when steps towards aliberated, open marketplace of 320 million consumers shouldbe increasingly apparent. In Rome recently, the heads of theEC's 12 national governments looked beyond reality to an evenmore lofty and distant goal for the future: creating abustling political federation with a single currency andmonetary policy.</LP><TEXT>   But the EC's actions have been counter to thefreer-markets and deregulation goals at the nucleus of the1992 project. This unfortunate development is the source ofincreasing worry for thousands of companies -- especiallyAmerican and Japanese multinationals -- that hope to expandin an increasingly open Europe.   As the politicians embellish lofty visions, Europe slippedbackward into old habits of increasing state control of theeconomy, clubbish cronyism and egotistical self-obsession.   Several recent business examples highlight the trend. Theycome against the backdrop of the recent failure of theGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to make importantchanges that would have further reduced commercial barriersin over 100 countries.   The EC caused the breakdown by insisting on protecting itsfarmers and failing to grapple with its money-losing -- andeventually unaffordable -- state subsidies for agriculture.   The stakes resulting from such indifference run high.Carla Hills, U.S. trade representative, told a conference ofAmerican state legislators that the kind of globalcooperation shown in the Persian Gulf crisis might not bepossible in the future.   Many of Europe's savviest businessmen realize that thisprotectionist bent -- if continued -- could boomerang andjeopardize Europe's unprecedented post-World War II economicprosperity as well.   Consider Air France's ability to acquire control of 97% ofthe domestic airline market, apparently proving thatmonopolies are going to fly high in the friendly skies of thenew Europe. Earlier this year, the state-owned French airlineagreed to buy its main private-sector competitor L'Union desTransports Aeriens. The deal also gave Air France control ofthe nation's main domestic carrier, UTA's 36%-owned Air Interunit.   One might think that Sir Leon Brittan, the EC's antitrustcommissioner, would scupper such a flagrant violation of ECrules, ensuring more-open access to markets. He tried -- sortof. Though some EC commissioners agreed the Air Francetransaction appeared to run counter to EC antitrust rules,Air France has managed to get its way in return for somepromised route concessions.   Why? Because in Europe, what counts isn't what you say tobut whom you know. In Air France's case, political powertrumped liberal economic principles. Air France's chairman isBernard Attali, brother of trusted Mitterrand governmentadviser Jacques -- himself the head of the new Bank forEuropean Reconstruction andamp; Development. And EC CommissionPresident Jacques Delors, whom many believe hopes to becomeFrance's next president, also backed the deal.   Italy is increasing state control of the economy andindustry. And thus far, anyway, Brussels doesn't seem to haveraised a peep of protest.   Last month, the government acquired control of chemicalgiant Enimont S.p.A. for an estimated $2.7 billion from itsprivate-sector owners -- thus increasing the state'salready-important role in industry. For an EC that's supposedto be concerned about state subsidies, its inability to doanything in the Enimont saga is a cautionary tale.   Enimont was supposed to marry the public-sector muscle ofstate-owned energy company Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi and theprivate-sector entrepreneurship of high-flying businessmanRaul Gardini, head of the Ferruzzi financial and agricultureempire. Instead, the venture quickly fell apart in a disputeover goals and tactics.   Mr. Gardini accepted the Italian government's offer to buyhis 40% stake. The deal leaves the Italian government lesslikely to succeed in its plan to create a fast-footednational chemicals champion able to compete in the globalmarket.   As a result of such situations, London stockbrokers UBSPhillips andamp; Drew expect Italy to fall short of itsonce-upon-a-time target of six trillion lira inprivatizations this year and next.   Also last month, the EC Commission -- despite Sir Leon'sobjections -- cleared the merger of two big Dutch coffeemakers. The decision exposes the biggest loophole inBrussels' merger-control plans: National governments canstill trump the EC when they feel their so-called nationalinterest at stake.   For the Dutch, coffee is the national interest. At issuewas Douwe Egberts, a Sara Lee unit, combination with rivalVan Nelle, which gave the firms 70% of the Benelux coffeemarket. Never mind, the EC commissioners from Holland andBelgium argued when the EC Commission initially objected tothe deal: This matters primarily in our home markets, and ourlocal arbiters should decide. Though the market is small, thedecision underscored the fact that politics, not economics,at times is running the merger-control process. That raisessome worrying questions in the minds of EC mergerpractitioners.   Such examples may be just a taste of what's to come. Forexample, the European auto industry -- pushed largely by suchfirms as Peugeot -- seems headed for further restrictions ofJapanese competition through voluntary quotas. And wouldAirbus Industrie be such an increasingly potent commercialrival to Boeing Co. if its heavy government subsidies weresuddenly stopped?   But initial enthusiasm is giving way to dangerous habits.Unless Europe takes its head out of the clouds, and puts itsfeet on the ground it is on the road to becoming a fortressto block trade, instead of a trade bloc.</TEXT></DOC>