<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910312-0031</DOCNO><DOCID>910312-0031.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>03/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   BAKER DISCUSSED Mideast peace prospects with Israeliofficials.   The secretary of state, on a two-day visit to Israel,arrived in Jerusalem against a backdrop of deepeningArab-Israeli violence. The Israeli army reported it hadkilled six Arab infiltrators from Jordan one day after fourJewish women were stabbed to death by a Palestinian. Bakerscheduled a meeting with a Palestinian delegation today,while carefully ruling out a renewal of U.S. talks with thePalestine Liberation Organization. In Beirut, meanwhile, 23Iraqi opposition factions opened talks and agreed to seek theouster of Saddam Hussein and the establishment of democracyin Iraq.</LP><TEXT>   Pro-democracy activists in Kuwait demanded that thegovernment set a date for parliamentary elections and saidthe ruling al-Sabah family should be forced to relax its gripon power.   ---   South Africa imposed curfews on three townships andconfined more than 2.5 million blacks to their homes in a bidto curb factional fighting that has killed at least 40 peoplesince Saturday. The government said Soweto, Alexandra andTembisa had been designated &quot;unrest areas.&quot;   ---   The EPA discovered accidentally what it believes is a safeand inexpensive way to destroy toxic PCBs by using quicklime,a common mineral. However, officials said much work is neededto determine with certainty that quicklime is an effectivetreatment.   ---   Louisiana's Roemer switched from the Democratic to theRepublican Party as part of his fight to win re-election thisyear. The governor, a former member of Congress, has beencriticized for raising taxes and for vetoing a stringentanti-abortion bill during his first gubernatorial term.   ---   Turkey is seeking emergency U.S. aid through a lobbyingcampaign built on Ankara's strong ties to SenateAppropriations Committee Chairman Byrd and the Bushadministration's previous concessions to Israel.   ---   The State Department lifted its seven-week-old warning toAmerican travelers abroad to be on the alert for terroristactivities. Meanwhile, the deputy administrator of the FAAsaid anti-terrorist measures imposed on U.S. airports arelikely to remain in effect for some time.   ---   A group of 21 private colleges canceled meetings theytraditionally had held to share financial information oncommon applicants, thereby opening their financial-aid awardsto competitive forces for the first time in about 35 years.The meetings have been under federal antitrust investigation.   ---   Italian authorities began relocating thousands of Albanianrefugees to camps throughout Italy, relieving the burden onthe port of Brindisi, where Albanians had camped on thedocks. Albanian officials said the exodus to Italy --involving about 20,000 asylum-seekers in the past two weeks-- has abated.   ---   Soviet coal miners voted on whether to call a generalstrike for higher wages and better conditions. The vote byminers in the Soviet Union's two main coal regions came asother miners continued a 10-day strike.   ---   Eight people were hurt in new clashes in Belgrade betweenpolice officers and anti-Communist demonstrators. But tens ofthousands of Communists and opposition protesters later heldseparate, peaceful rallies in Yugoslavia's capital.   ---   El Salvador's ruling rightist party won Sunday'slegislative and mayoral contests, according to unofficialresults. However, leftist parties tripled their share of thevote compared with the 1989 elections.   ---   Bush reintroduced anti-crime legislation that Congressrejected last year and he appealed for its swift approval.The president's package includes a call for restoration ofthe death penalty under federal law, a toughening of criminalappeals procedures, and stiffer penalties for crimes thatinvolve the use of firearms.   ---   Papandreou's trial opened in Athens as Greek prosecutorsaccused the ex-premier of taking bribes in return forordering state companies to deposit money in a troubledprivate bank. Papandreou and three members of his 1981-89Socialist regime are charged with aiding the former owner ofthe Bank of Crete in embezzling $210 million.   ---   The German president demanded that Berlin again become thenation's seat of government. Weizsaecker's remarks reigniteda feud within Chancellor Kohl's coalition as well as amongthe opposition. Although Bonn lost its capital status toBerlin on Oct. 3, Kohl has delayed deciding whether to movethe government there.   ---   A New York congressman went on trial for allegedly takingmoney from his church, depositing it in his own accounts andfailing to report it on his tax return. Floyd Flake, a QueensDemocrat who heads the Allen African Methodist EpiscopalChurch, has pleaded innocent to the charges.   ---   Slovak separatists rallied in Bratislava to press theirdemands for independence from Czechoslovakia's federation.The demonstrators called for the formation of a Slovak stateand voiced support for a declaration of sovereignty that wasput forward last week by nationalist organizations.   ---   The Romanian government has given preliminary approval toproposals that could send journalists to jail for up to fiveyears if they are found guilty of insulting authorities.Opposition leaders charged that the proposed legislationcasts doubt on Romania's commitment to a free press.</TEXT></DOC>