<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920128-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>920128-0070.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Plaintiffs in Heart-Valve Lawsuits   Skeptical of Pfizer Settlement Plan   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Robert J. Brennan   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/28/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   GM HON J.MNO LABOR MXS PFE</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)ENERGY (ENE)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)OIL-SECONDARY (OIS)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><NS>CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)JOINT VENTURES (JVN)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE RATES (MOR)PATENTS (PAT)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)</NS><RE>EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)MICHIGAN (MI)MINNESOTA (MN)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Many of the heart-valve recipients with lawsuits pendingagainst Pfizer Inc. are expected to reject a proposedsettlement that would free the health-product company fromlitigation over the device, according to lawyers in the case.   &quot;From a preliminary look, it would appear that we will optout of the settlement,&quot; said Bruce Finzen, a productsliability specialist in Minneapolis whose law firm, Robins,Kaplan, Miller andamp; Ciresi, represents 375 plaintiffsnationwide. &quot;We think our people would be better served bycontinuing to litigate.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   The development could jeopardize Pfizer's plan, announcedFriday, to settle all suits and claims resulting from thecontroversial Bjork-Shiley heart valve. Pfizer's subsidiary,Shiley Inc., made the device in Irvine, Ca., until it waspulled from the market in the mid-1980s.   On Friday, Pfizer said it took a $300 million pretaxcharge against fourth-quarter earnings to cover the cost ofsettling all future suits resulting from defective valves. Inaddition, Pfizer said it would provide $205 million to settleclaims from recipients who are experiencing anxiety overpossible defects. The settlement will have to be approved bya federal judge in Cincinnati after a formal hearing,scheduled for June.   Yesterday, however, Pfizer general counsel Paul Millerreiterated the company's right under the proposed settlementto &quot;terminate its involvement if a substantial number ofvalve recipients elect not to participate in the program.&quot; Hedeclined to elaborate on what constitutes a &quot;substantialnumber.&quot;   About 460 of the 85,000 Bjork-Shiley valves implantedworld-wide have fractured because of structural problems,resulting in about 310 deaths. Plaintiffs' lawyers haveestimated that Pfizer has settled about 100 suits fromfamilies of people who have died because of defective valves.But Pfizer still faces hundreds of other suits filed by usersconcerned about the safety of the device.   A Food and Drug Administration task force in Septembercharged that the Bjork-Shiley valve was &quot;defective&quot; when itwon FDA approval in 1979. The report claimed that Shileyschemed to thwart the agency's regulatory efforts to prolongits sales, allegations that Pfizer strongly denies. But iftrue, Pfizer also could face stiff punitive damages, whicharen't covered under most corporate liability insurancepolicies.   Mr. Finzen and his firm represent 375 of the 400 valverecipients with suits pending who allege that theirapprehension over the safety of the product entitles them todamages, even though their valves seem to work safely. Some55 similar suits nationwide have been dismissed or werewithdrawn in 11 separate court jurisdictions. But theCalifornia Supreme Court ruled in May 1990 that a plaintiffcan sue for anxiety concerns. All of Mr. Finzen's suits arefiled in California, and all seek punitive damages.   Stanley Chesley, a product liability expert in Cincinnatiwho represents about two dozen valve recipients inanxiety-related suits, negotiated the proposed settlementagreement on behalf of all 55,000 current valve usersworld-wide.   Despite Mr. Finzen's reservations, other product-liabilityspecialists said the proposal was a generous and innovativeapproach to settling mass tort claims. Under the terms,Pfizer would pay claimants $500,000 to $2 million each,depending on family circumstances, in compensation for valvesthat break and cause an illness or death.   In addition, the company would spend $80 million to $130million to make one-time payments of $4,000 each to coveranxiety-related medical expenses for each of 55,000 valverecipients.   The proposed agreement's centerpiece would set aside a $75million research fund to develop early detection methods forfaulty valves and pay for their replacement.   The proposal has advantages for both sides, saidproduct-liability specialist Victor Schwartz, of theWashington, D.C. law firm of Crowell andamp; Moring. It botheliminates the uncertainty of litigation while providing forfair compensation, he said.   &quot;Eliminating uncertainty had to be a goal for them,&quot; saidMr. Schwartz, &quot;and this is a very imaginative approach.&quot;   ---   GMAC MORTGAGE TO PAY an estimated $100 million in escrowsettlement.   The settlement, in a case in federal court in Manhattan,was announced by attorneys general of 12 states, who suedGMAC Mortgage Corp., a unit of General Motors Corp., inDecember 1990. The states accused GMAC Mortgage of violatingfederal and state laws, as well as its own mortgagecontracts, by requiring homeowners to place more money thanwas necessary in escrow accounts.   New York's attorney general, Robert Abrams, said thesettlement would provide for payments to almost every one ofGMAC's 380,000 mortgage holders in the U.S. The averageholder would receive about $275 in both refunds and reducedmonthly payments, but New Yorkers, whose taxes are higherthan the national average, would receive benefits averaging$600, Mr. Abrams's office said.   Most mortgage lenders require homeowners to pay intomortgage escrow accounts to ensure that payments for realestate taxes, insurance and other costs are made. But a 1975federal law for real estate transactions created a formulathat determines the maximum amount a mortgage lender canforce a customer to keep in escrow at a given time.   GMAC said it believes its escrow procedures are&quot;substantially similar to the procedures used by the rest ofthe industry&quot; Richard A. Gillespie, GMAC's vice president,also said the $100 million estimate of the settlement's valueis too high.   The suit stemmed from an investigation by the states ofGMAC Mortgage and three other large mortgage lenders:Citicorp's Citibank, Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc.'sFleet Mortgage Corp., and Lomas Financial Corp. The otherthree lenders weren't sued, but state officials said theyexpect the GMAC case to prompt changes in escrow practicesindustrywide.   ---   ANTI-JAPANESE SENTIMENT concerns Minolta as patent casedraws to a close.   The four-month trial in federal court in Newark, N.J.,pitting Honeywell Inc. against Minolta Camera Co., is a fightover technology allegedly used to develop Minolta's line ofMaxxum cameras.   Honeywell, a Minneapolis-based maker of control equipment,says Minolta owes it $174 million in royalties, plus tripledamages, for intentionally infringing on its patent forautofocus circuitry. The circuitry is used in single lensreflex cameras that have earned $1 billion in sales forMinolta, a Japanese camera and copier company.   Honeywell filed its suit four years ago, alleging thatMinolta infringed on four patents and breached an agreementsigned in 1979 to keep Honeywell's technology secret. Thetrial's outcome is likely to depend on whether thenine-member jury believes that Honeywell's technology wasunique and essential for the development of autofocustechnology and that the Maxxum camera wouldn't have been assuccessful without it.   Hard feelings against Japanese businesses may also play arole in the jury's deliberations. In closing arguments,Minolta's lawyer, Frederick G. Michaud Jr., a partner withthe Alexandria, Va., law firm of Burns, Doane, Swecker andamp;Mathis, told the jury he was confident that they would ignorethe recent anniversary of Pearl Harbor, President GeorgeBush's trip to Japan, the trade-deficit dispute andHoneywell's use of an Asian actor to read Minolta executives'depositions in court.   During recess, Michael Ciresi, a lawyer representingHoneywell, called Mr. Michaud's comment a &quot;despicableimplication.&quot; Mr. Ciresi is expected to deliver closingarguments today.   ---   EC REVIEWS new rules easing the way for companies' jointventures.   The draft rules could help companies cut through some ofthe European Community Commission's red tape and make iteasier to obtain approval to start such ventures. The draftrules have been circulating confidentially in recent daysamong EC legal specialists.   The guidelines, scheduled to be published later this year,clarify how the commission will treat joint ventures underthe EC's founding charter.   &quot;The guidelines provide an excellent gathering up offormer case law and a good indication of where the commissionintends to go in the future,&quot; said Stephen Walzer, head ofinternational legal affairs at British Petroleum Co.   The guidelines are expected to smooth the approval ofordinary joint ventures that don't result in a monopoly orunfair market control. Currently the EC has no clear rules ordeadlines for approving such ventures, and approval can taketwo years or more of costly legal work.   The resulting uncertainty &quot;has caused more work forlawyers and less {joint-venture} activity,&quot; said JohnGrayston, a Brussels-based lawyer with the British law firmTaylor Joynson Garrett.   The new guidelines reflect the EC Commission's view thatjoint ventures generally will play a useful role in the 1992single-market program and in enhancing industrialcompetitiveness. &quot;Joint ventures can give a spur tocompetition by promoting new technological developments, thecreation of new products and the penetration of new markets,thus speeding up economic integration,&quot; the commission saidin the proposed guidelines.   ---   MAXUS SETTLES dioxin suit over New Jersey plant for $1million.   Maxus Energy Corp., a Dallas energy company, agreed to thesettlement with more than 80 former Diamond ShamrockChemicals Corp. employees, workers' relatives, and owners ofbusinesses near the Newark plant. The plaintiffs claimedillnesses and birth defects stemming from dioxin, a byproductof chemicals made at the plant, which was closed in 1969.Maxus sold the Diamond Shamrock Chemicals subsidiary in 1986but took responsibility for claims incurred before then.   The settlement came seven weeks into a state court trialin Newark. &quot;In agreeing to settle, we continue to believe inthe merits of our defense,&quot; Maxus said in a statement. &quot;Webelieve it would have prevailed.&quot; A lawyer for DiamondShamrock, George McCarter, said the agreement was far lessthan the $85 million in damages plaintiffs initially sought.   The claimants will get $5,000 to $75,000 each, saidMichael Gordon, an attorney for the plaintiffs. He said mostof the claims are for medical monitoring and for interferingwith plaintiffs' use of their property. A judge dismissed thebulk of the dioxin health claims in 1986, ruling that many ofthe plaintiffs lost their right to sue when they soughtworkers compensation.</TEXT></DOC>