<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900918-0146</DOCNO><DOCID>900918-0146.</DOCID><HL>   Law:   Technological, Social Changes May Spur   Courts to Widen Definition of Parenthood   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><LP>   Who is a baby's mother: the woman who provides the ovum orthe woman who provides the womb?   That's the question a Santa Ana, Calif., court is beingasked to decide in a lawsuit filed last month by a surrogatemother. It is one of a growing number of cases that expertssay could redefine the legal meaning of parenthood.</LP><TEXT>   Anna Johnson, 29 years old, is eight months pregnant withan implanted embryo produced with sperm and eggs supplied byMark and Crispina Calvert. She has sued the Calverts, seekingcustody of the baby she is carrying for them. Her case raisesnovel legal questions because Ms. Johnson has no geneticconnection to the unborn child.   &quot;In the Bible, when two women were claiming to be themother of the same child, King Solomon offered to divide thechild in half and give part to each. Now the courts are beingforced to consider the notion that a child can have more thantwo parents,&quot; says Lori Andrews, a lawyer specializing inreproductive law at the American Bar Foundation in Chicago.   This quiet legal revolution has been spurred byfundamental social and medical changes. The increase indivorce and the number of stepfamilies has meant that manyadults perform all the functions of a parent without legal orbiological ties to a child. Rapidly evolving medicaltechnologies, such as the in vitro fertilization used in theJohnson case and artificial insemination, have also raisedconcerns about the legal definition of family.   In recent years, courts around the country have createddoctrines that give stepparents and others with no geneticconnection to a child expanded legal rights. Many of thesecourts are ruling that the best interests of the child mayoutweigh the natural parent's constitutional rights to makedecisions about the child's upbringing.   Some family lawyers worry that the changes will result intoo many people calling themselves parents. These lawyerscontend that expanding the legal definition of parenthoodwill increase litigation over custody, visitation and otherrights.   But other legal experts say that looking at a biologicalrelationship is no longer sufficient to determine who is aparent. They say the courts must accept the reality of &quot;howwidespread the phenomenon of complex parental relationshipsis,&quot; says Nancy D. Polikoff, an associate professor atAmerican University Law School.   Ms. Johnson's battle typifies the social challengesconfronting the courts. She has no genetic connection to herunborn child, but California law says the woman who givesbirth is the mother.   &quot;There is no law that says anything about the parentalrights of parties that donate an embryo that was formulatedin a petri dish,&quot; says Richard Gilbert, a lawyer for Ms.Johnson from the Santa Ana law firm Gilbert andamp; Marlowe. &quot;Annais the mother of the child. She has bonded to the baby in herwomb.&quot;   Robert Walmsley, a lawyer for the Calverts with the SantaAna law firm Van Deusen, Youmans andamp; Walmsley, says thatbiologically the child is the Calverts'. &quot;The court mustacknowledge and protect the biological link. There isn'tanything else at this point,&quot; he says.   Custody suits filed by lesbian couples who reared childrentogether and separated are pending in appeals courts in NewYork, New Mexico and California. The women are relying onprotections that used to be reserved for traditionalfamilies.   Michele G., a 43-year-old graduate student, wants to berecognized as a parent of two children she reared with herex-lover, the biological mother. The couple split up in 1985after 15 years together. (Court papers don't use the women'sfull names.)   As part of a verbal agreement, Michele G. retained custodyof the older child, a girl. Her former lover, Nancy S., whoconceived the children through artificial insemination, keptcustody of the younger child, a boy.   But in 1988, Nancy S. sued for custody of both children. Alower court in Alameda County denied Michele G. standing as aparent and terminated her rights to visit the children. Hercase is pending before an appeals court in San Francisco.   She contends that she acted in every way as a parent andwas listed on the children's birth certificates as theirfather. &quot;The children were born because of a joint decision,&quot;says Amy Oppenheimer, an Oakland, Calif., lawyer representingMichele G. &quot;It's not fair to the children for the court tonow say that only one of them is their mother.&quot;   But Carol Amyx, a lawyer for Nancy S., says Michele G.'sreasoning could be used to open the door for too many peopleto become parents. &quot;Children will potentially be placed inthe midst of multiparty custody litigation on a much morefrequent basis,&quot; says Ms. Amyx of Berkeley.   Some courts have been willing to create legal doctrineswhen they have believed continuing a significant relationshipis in a child's best interests. During divorce proceedings,Harold J. Atkinson learned that he wasn't the biologicalfather of a child born during his marriage. A lower courtawarded custody of the child to his ex-wife, Terri, anddenied visitation rights to Mr. Atkinson.   But a Michigan appeals court in Detroit in 1987 overturnedthat decision, ruling that Mr. Atkinson could be consideredan &quot;equitable parent&quot; because he and the child acknowledgedeach other as father and son and Mr. Atkinson was willing toaccept the rights and financial responsibilities of being aparent.   But Paul W. Harty, a Birmingham lawyer representing Mrs.Atkinson, says it was poor law to allow a husband who isn'tthe biological father to acquire rights after living with achild for the first two years of his life. &quot;I'm afraid thatthis case will permit a vindictive husband to create problemsnot only for his former wife but her child,&quot; Mr. Harty says.   In other cases, courts have refused to grant a plaintiffparental rights but nonetheless articulated new rules thatappear to expand the legal definition of parenthood. Lastyear, the appellate division of a New Jersey state court inHackensack ruled that third parties who can prove they &quot;standin the shoes of a parent to the child&quot; will be treated likenatural parents by the courts. And in 1988, a New Jerseystate court in Trenton found that visitation and otherparental privileges can be extended to stepparents who canshow a significant bond with the child.   Courts have also begun to re-examine legislation adoptedto deal with new medical technologies. More than 30 stateshave enacted artificial insemination laws in which spermdonors, with the exception of the husband, have no parentalrights.   These laws, enacted under the assumption that the womanwouldn't know the sperm donor, failed to take into account asituation like Kevin McIntyre's, says his lawyer, Ronald A.Fontana of Portland, Ore. Mr. McIntyre, a teacher, donatedsperm to a friend of 12 years, Linden Crouch. Mr. McIntyreclaims that Ms. Crouch reneged on her promise that he couldhelp raise the child, born in 1986.   Last year, an Oregon appeals court in Salem ruled that thestate's 1977 artificial insemination law violated Mr.McIntyre's constitutional rights. G. Philip Arnold, a lawyerwith Drescher andamp; Arnold of Ashland who is representing Ms.Crouch, said the court's ruling could be extended toanonymous donors who change their minds and then obtain themother's identity.   &quot;In the past, the courts tended to look at how much timethe father spent with the child in trying to determineparental rights. But this court is saying that a sperm donormay have rights if he just attempts to establish arelationship,&quot; says reproductive law specialist Ms. Andrews.   The case was settled this month. Mr. McIntyre wasacknowledged to have legal rights as a father, includingregular visitation, says Mr. Fontana.   Stepparents have benefited significantly from the latestchanges. Traditionally denied parental rights, more courtsare awarding them custody. Six states have enacted statutesthat grant visitation rights to stepparents if the marriagedissolves or the natural parent dies.   In addition, the American Bar Association's family lawsection is expected this January to consider a model act thatcould be adopted by state legislatures. The proposed billwould establish a legal relationship between stepparents andstepchildren in the areas of child support, custody,discipline and visitation.   &quot;The time has come to recognize the right of stepparentsto come into court and determine the best interests of thechild,&quot; says Joel Tenenbaum, chairman of the committee thatdrafted the proposed act and a lawyer with the Wilmington,Del., law firm Woloshin, Tenenbaum andamp; Natalie.</TEXT></DOC>