<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900606-0077</DOCNO><DOCID>900606-0077.</DOCID><HL>   Fading Picture:   High-Definition TV,   Once a Capital Idea,   Wanes in Washington   ---   Despite Its Promise, It Riles   Foes of `Industrial Policy,'   Fails to Get Much Money   ---   A High-Tech Gift to Japan?   ----   By Bob Davis   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   ZE JAPAN</CO><IN>HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Just last spring, high-definition televisionwas the hottest new technology in town.   U.S. consumers, the Commerce Department predicted, mightwell snap up $100 billion of high-definition TVs and VCRsover the next two decades. Lawmakers decked out Capitol Hillconference rooms with HDTV monitors to show off strikinglysharp taped footage of the Olympics. At a high-level strategysession, Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher and Pentagontechnologist Craig Fields signaled joint efforts to promotethe technology in the U.S. Then 65 officials from government,business and academia split into three groups, war-gamestyle, to map out an HDTV battle plan against Japan and otherforeign competitors.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;It seemed possible that the U.S. government and industrycould work together in high technology, as they do in Japan,to close the gap between the U.S. and Japan,&quot; says JamesMagid, a Wall Street analyst who specializes in electronicsand attended the April 1989 strategy session.   Today, HDTV is in retreat, a victim of political blundersby its partisans and relentless opposition in the top levelsof the Bush administration. Mr. Fields has been ousted, Mr.Mosbacher chastened and other HDTV allies silenced. The veryterm high-definition TV is being shunned in Washington forfear that any proposal identified with it will be snuffedout.   High-definition TV has come to symbolize the Bushadministration's technology strategy: An open checkbook forbasic research projects such as the space station orsuperconducting supercollider, but a tight fist forcommercial technologies. The latter are best left to privateinvestors, not government managers, says Richard Schmalensee,a member of the President's Council of Economic Advisers. IfU.S. companies can't compete in high-tech markets withoutfederal help, so be it. &quot;There's no divine right of U.S.leadership that says our companies will always be marketleaders,&quot; Mr. Schmalensee says.   The only large U.S. company still in the HDTV race isZenith Electronics Corp. Some small U.S. firms are scurryingto build high-definition equipment, but they're all desperatefor money. Just constructing an HDTV manufacturing facilitycould cost $200 million. &quot;It infuriates me,&quot; says PeterBrody, president of closely held Magnascreen Corp. inPittsburgh, who pioneered high-definition technology yearsago at Westinghouse Electric Corp. &quot;The Japanese walked awaywith the technology, and I can't get any money&quot; to developnew monitors, he says.   High-definition may well represent the next great leap inelectronics technology. Researchers are experimenting withvarious technologies to create sharper images and crystallinesound, so that watching TV would become like going to amovie. In Japan, the first of the new sets are expected tocost at least $5,000 and go on sale next year. They wouldthen be sold in Europe and in the U.S. in the mid-1990s.Prices would surely drop as sales increase.   Later TV sets, incorporating more advanced technology,would resemble large, thin wall screens. They could havebroad applications. Wall-sized monitors could display mapsand satellite images at Pentagon control centers;window-sized ones could make next-generation TV sets; smallerones could become part of computer workstations andmedical-imaging devices. &quot;High-resolution displays will bethe key to the computer of tomorrow,&quot; says Cornell economistAlan McAdams.   In the U.S., two little-known federal officials recognizedthe potential of HDTV and pushed the government, and areluctant electronics industry, to back the technology in abig way. The two men couldn't be more different intemperament and political skills -- and those differenceshelped determine their careers in government and the fate ofHDTV in Washington.   The first, Alfred Sikes, headed the NationalTelecommunications and Information Administration, a CommerceDepartment backwater that he transformed into thegovernment's first HDTV advocate. Mr. Sikes, a cautious,patient 50-year-old, once managed political campaigns inMissouri, and he approached HDTV as a backroom organizer. Herecruited allies in Congress, commissioned studies showing ahuge potential market, courted the secretary of commerce andpushed industry to devise a plan to pursue the HDTV market.By late 1988, more than a year after he had started workingthe issue, HDTV was getting hot in Washington.   Then the second official, Mr. Fields, got involved, andHDTV ignited. The 43-year-old Mr. Fields, intelligent andaggressive, was the deputy director of the Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency. Darpa, a reclusive, $1 billionPentagon agency that has pioneered many computertechnologies, sees Japan as an adversary second only to theSoviet Union. Mr. Fields viewed HDTV, which would use scadsof semiconductor chips, as the coming wave in electronics --and one that Japan was determined to ride to victory.   But Mr. Fields approached the problem as a technologist,not a politician, and stumbled badly. He proposed to leapfrogthe first generation of HDTV sets -- costly behemoths thatwill use conventional cathode-ray tubes and weigh hundreds ofpounds -- and develop monitors as wide as four feet acrossbut not much thicker than picture frames. This meant fundinga host of exotic technologies, such as plasma gases and tinydeformable mirrors -- but he couldn't find the money to pullit off.   He managed to persuade Darpa to start a largely symbolic$10 million-a-year HDTV program. Then, he clumsily lobbiedCongress and other government agencies for 10 times thatamount -- without any luck. Darpa found itself in the worstof all situations. Its HDTV foray made it seem as if thePentagon were trying to save the moribund U.S.consumer-electronics industry. That didn't shake loose anymoney. Instead, the publicity brought the attention of thenew Bush White House, which chose a hands-off approach tocommercial technology and, except for Commerce SecretaryMosbacher, opposed HDTV as a handout to electronicscompanies.   &quot;We didn't expect that, in a friendly takeover&quot; -- BushRepublicans replacing Reagan ones -- &quot;we'd be seen as out ofstep,&quot; says Robert Costello, a former Pentagon official.   The usually adept American Electronics Associationblundered as well. In May 1989, the trade group was preparinga request for $1.35 billion in research grants, low-interestloans and loan guarantees for HDTV. But it didn't inform Mr.Mosbacher, until then an HDTV ally, of the specifics of theplan before he was scheduled to testify on it in Congress.Mr. Mosbacher glanced at the price tag, turned to SenateCommerce Committee Chairman Ernest Hollings, a South CarolinaDemocrat, and lambasted the trade group for relying on &quot;UncleSugar&quot; for handouts.   &quot;That was the watershed event that caused HDTV todecline,&quot; Mr. Sikes says.   Any question of where the White House stood was answeredaround the time of the &quot;Uncle Sugar&quot; remark, when Mr.Mosbacher and Commerce Department Counselor Wayne Berman wereinvited to White House Chief of Staff John Sununu's office.Gathered around were Mr. Sununu, Vice President Dan Quayle,Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Budget Director RichardDarman, Economics Adviser Michael Boskin and other top aides.They were to discuss HDTV, and they weren't happy with theCommerce Department's role.   According to several participants, Mr. Boskin, Mr. Darmanand others took turns chewing out Mr. Berman for singling outHDTV for special treatment, and they cajoled Mr. Mosbacher, alongtime friend of the president, to take a broader approachto technology. The message was clear: HDTV was out, and sowas anyone who pushed it too hard.   One immediate casualty was a Commerce Department study ofHDTV. The study contemplated, as an option, spending billionsof dollars to support the technology and setting technicalstandards to block foreign competitors. &quot;It was preciselywhat we go nuts about when the Japanese do it,&quot; says Mr.Schmalensee, the White House economist.   Also marked as a loser was any proposal for the governmentto target specific industries for low-interest loans, even ifthey need the aid to compete with Japanese companies that canraise capital cheaply. &quot;If the question is who's going to getinto a low-margin business {such as video displays}, it'speople with lots of capital who bet on high volume over thelong term,&quot; says Mr. Berman, describing a slew of Japaneseelectronics companies but few American ones.   By last summer, Mr. Mosbacher had quit the HDTV debate.&quot;It was like a vaudeville show,&quot; says Rep. Les AuCoin, anOregon Democrat who supports HDTV. &quot;Someone yanked him with ahook.&quot; (Mr. Mosbacher declines comment, but a Commercespokeswoman says he &quot;wasn't yanked at all.&quot; Mr. Bermanexplains the change by commenting: &quot;We saw that Darman was onthe right track.&quot;)   Mr. Sikes didn't need a hook. Ever the adroit politician,he stopped talking about HDTV last spring and instead startedcampaigning successfully for the chairmanship of the FederalCommunications Commission. Now Mr. Sikes, who sold a group ofsmall-town Missouri radio stations when he joined thegovernment, has heads of TV networks and film studios callingon him for advice. &quot;It's a kick,&quot; he says.   He still has an important role in HDTV, too -- and onethat hasn't raised any flak from the White House even thoughit uses technical standards as a tactic against foreigncompetitors. He recently said the FCC will take until 1993 tochoose a method by which HDTV programs can be broadcast here-- giving U.S. companies a chance to catch up with theJapanese. It wasn't done to hurt the Japanese, &quot;but it mayhave the effect of slowing them down,&quot; says Richard Wiley, aformer FCC chairman who now heads the agency's HDTV advisorypanel.   The FCC is leaning toward a system pushed by Zenith, sayofficials involved in the agency's deliberations. That wouldgive Zenith tens of millions of dollars in royalty paymentsand a leg up in developing U.S. HDTV receivers.   Mr. Fields, who moved up to become Darpa's director,wanted more. He pressed for a broad HDTV technology programin which the Pentagon would seed U.S. companies with researchmoney. He won't talk about his role, but colleagues describehim as dedicated, even obsessed, with the need to strengthenthe U.S. in competition with Japan and other countries.   Mr. Fields's views closely reflect Darpa's intenselynationalistic outlook. The research agency budgets just 0.1%of its grants for foreign companies, even though many of itsgrants are supposedly open to all bidders. It also translatedinto English the Japanese best-seller &quot;The Japan That Can SayNo&quot; so policy makers could see how the authors argue thattechnology can give them a military edge.   Last July, when Thomas Murrin, the Commerce Department'sdeputy secretary, invited Mr. Fields to weekly luncheons withindustry executives, the Darpa director used the occasions topress his views. &quot;We need a national religious conversion,&quot;he wrote Mr. Murrin in August, so that the government wouldback heavy aid to high-tech industries, particularlyelectronics, without worrying whether this transgressesfree-market dogma.   &quot;Anyone who proposes any ideas for solving thecompetitiveness problem can be silenced by accusing him ofsupporting `industrial policy,'&quot; he complained. &quot;And anyonewho suggests an approach tailored to the unique circumstancesof trade with particular countries . . . is a `Japan basher.'It's hard to succeed against such a quiver of verbal arrows.&quot;   Shortly after that, when a portion of the letter appearedin this newspaper, Mr. Fields fell silent, too. He turneddown interviews, avoided lawmakers and sent his deputy,Victor Reis, to represent him -- figuring Mr. Reis wouldn'tget Darpa into any more trouble because he didn't set policy.   From then on, Darpa fought a holding action against HDTVopponents. It enlisted allies in Congress to protect its tiny$10 million program. Last November, these Darpa allies beatback a plan by Deputy Defense Secretary Donald Atwood to killthe HDTV program. Shortly before Memorial Day, they passed aprovision that freed $20 million in additional HDTV funds theadministration had tied up for six months.   But these small victories couldn't save Mr. Fields. Bythis February, he conceded in a letter to Congress, hisrelations with the rest of the administration haddeteriorated so badly that the Commerce Department and WhiteHouse science adviser wouldn't respond to his letters askingfor help in devising an HDTV policy.   The end came suddenly, in late April. An emissary from Mr.Atwood's office showed up unexpectedly at Darpa and handedMr. Fields a piece of paper describing a new job assignment.Mr. Fields and Mr. Atwood won't discuss the incident, butcongressional and Pentagon staffers say Mr. Fields was toldto sign the paper, resign or be fired for &quot;insubordination.&quot;He signed and now spends his days in a dead-end job studyingthe Pentagon's laboratories and looking for work outside thegovernment.   Other HDTV advocates clammed up, too. Mr. Murrin, thedeputy commerce secretary and a Westinghouse veteran,attended the joint strategy session on HDTV and once backedlow-interest loans and other aid for high-tech industries.Now, he dodges the controversy.   &quot;It's not practical for Tom Murrin from Pittsburgh, Pa.,to come here and quarterback these issues,&quot; he says. &quot;I'llget benched so quickly you won't even see I played in thegame.&quot;   But HDTV backers in Congress aren't giving up. SomeDemocrats are pushing a $200 million &quot;technology superfund&quot;that would provide low-interest loans to high-tech companiesand sharply increase funding for a new Commerce Departmenttechnology program. And Rep. AuCoin says he plans to lobbywith the Defense Appropriations subcommittee on which he sitsto increase Pentagon HDTV funding to $100 million. &quot;There'slife after death&quot; for HDTV, he insists.</TEXT></DOC>