<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910820-0019</DOCNO><DOCID>910820-0019.</DOCID><HL>   Crisis in the Soviet Union -- Perilous Moment:   Gorbachev's Downfall   Raises Political Specter   For Soviets and West   ---   Many Fear Violence, Return   To Superpower Rivalry   As Hardliners Take Charge   ---   Limited Options for Bush   ----   By Peter Gumbel and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>CZECHOSLOVAKIA (CK)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)POLAND (PL)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- The coup by Soviet hard-liners who oustedPresident Mikhail Gorbachev yesterday marks the moment oftruth for the democratic reforms Mr. Gorbachev set in motion.   Will the Soviet people once again knuckle under to aregime they fear and despise, as they have done for so muchof this century? Or will the limited doses of democracy andfreedom they have tasted over the past six years push theminto civil war?</LP><TEXT>   Either path is fraught with danger and uncertainty for theU.S.S.R. and the West. Submission to a government thatassumes power through the barrel of a gun would again put achill on Soviet society, and perhaps revive the Cold War withthe West. But revolt could easily spiral into bloodshed and,perhaps, internal chaos.   Yesterday's developments set the stage for a showdown. Theeight-man &quot;state committee&quot; that seized power, backed by thearmy and led by Gennady Yanayev, vice president of the SovietUnion, clamped down on the Soviet press and declared a stateof emergency in Moscow and other parts of the country. Mr.Yanayev said cryptically that Mr. Gorbachev was recoveringfrom health problems somewhere in the south of the country,where he was reportedly under house arrest. Boris Yeltsin,president of the Russian republic, emerged as the leader ofthe opposition to the coup and, standing atop a tank inMoscow, called for a general strike throughout Russia.Thousands of protesters joined him in the streets.   In Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, Soviet troops seizedradio and television stations and blockaded harbors to haltany resurgence of the independence movement there. The topSoviet military commander in the region declared himselfruler of the breakaway republics. And in the West, leaderscondemned the coup and demanded that the new regime assurethe safety of Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Yeltsin. Mr. Bush, whojoined other western leaders in suspending aid to Moscow,termed the ousting &quot;misguided and illegitimate&quot; and calledfor Mr. Gorbachev's restoration to power.   As the state of unrest in the Soviet Union enters itssecond day, all eyes are on Mr. Yeltsin. He declared Mr.Yanayev's state of emergency an &quot;unconstitutional reactionarycoup&quot; and quickly called for a show of defiance both bycitizens and the army. Indeed, last night, at least 10 Soviettanks and a number of army paratroopers took up positionsoutside the Russian Parliament, apparently switching sidesand moving to protect Mr. Yeltsin.   Mr. Yeltsin's resistance was echoed, albeit more mildly,by some other Soviet republican leaders, including LeonidKravchuk of the Ukraine. It remains to be seen how many willheed Mr. Yeltsin's strike call, but already, coal miners inthe Kuzbass region of Siberia say they will start anindefinite political strike. Monday night, crowds of peoplein Moscow formed a human shield around the barricaded RussianParliament building. They chanted slogans supporting Mr.Yeltsin, who is the top democratically elected official inthe Soviet Union and thus has a legitimacy that many Sovietscherish. Notably, popular support has been coalescing aroundMr. Yeltsin, not Mr. Gorbachev; in the months leading up tothe coup, Mr. Gorbachev had grown unpopular with citizenstired of food lines and deteriorating living conditions.   &quot;If the coup fails, it will almost certainly be becauseYeltsin succeeded. He is the main threat to the junta thathas seized control,&quot; says Stephen Sestanovich, director ofSoviet studies at the Center for Strategic and InternationalStudies in Washington.   There remains considerable doubt whether the newleadership can count on the support of large parts of thearmy or the KGB, particularly if blood is shed. &quot;Just becausea person is in army uniform doesn't mean that he supportssuch actions against the people,&quot; says Konstantin Kobets, acolonel-general who heads the Russian republic's defensecommittee. Oleg Kalugin, a former KGB intelligence officerwho has turned into the security agency's biggest critic,believes that even many KGB officers are far from persuadedabout the wisdom of the takeover.   &quot;Are they going to shoot the millions of people who votedfor Yeltsin?&quot; Mr. Kalugin asks. He reckons the answer is no,making a mass campaign of civil disobedience at leastpossible.   Such early defiance, however, could be quelled quickly bya mixture of public apathy and repression. But the outcry hasalready been enough to raise the spirits of some who believethat the coup will be short-lived. Too much has changed inthe past six years under Mr. Gorbachev, these optimistscontend, for the new Kremlin leadership to stuff the genie ofperestroika back into the bottle.   &quot;Freedom is dear to the people, we saw that in EasternEurope,&quot; says Gleb Yakunin, a politically active RussianOrthodox priest. The new military regime can't sustain power,he believes, because it doesn't have any new ideas to curethe U.S.S.R.'s enormous problems, particularly its economicones.   U.S. leaders in Washington watched the unfolding eventswith evident dismay. Mr. Bush's foreign policy relied on thepersonal force and good will of Mr. Gorbachev to bury theCold War for good. The coup not only undercuts that strategy,but also endangers other cherished administration goals,ranging from a peace conference on the Middle East todisarmament in Europe.   In fact, the very future of Mr. Bush's much-heralded NewWorld Order now is in doubt. Some central elements of thatmore benign world -- the new treaties cutting strategic armsand conventional forces in Europe and unprecedentedU.S.-Soviet cooperation at the United Nations -- areimperiled. Both Mr. Bush and the hard-liners now in controlof the Soviet Union declared their intention to stick by therecently completed arms treaties, and the president assertedthat &quot;we don't want to go back to the Cold War days and we'renot going to do that.&quot; Yet the arms treaties haven't beenratified by the U.S. Senate, which now will be leery ofsanctifying them. What's more, it's uncertain the U.S.military will feel as sanguine about defense cuts.   A subdued Mr. Bush, who just three weeks ago was sittingin shirt-sleeves at Mr. Gorbachev's Moscow dacha,acknowledged to reporters at his vacation home that &quot;at thispoint what we do is simply watch the situation unfold.&quot;   Later, after returning to the White House fromKennebunkport, President Bush met with his national securityadvisers and telephoned a number of world leaders --including Presidents Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia and LechWalesa of Poland. &quot;In the conversations with East Europeanleaders, the irreversibility of the democratic process inEastern Europe was emphasized,&quot; said a White House spokesman.   Mr. Bush faces an unpalatable choice. He can vigorouslythrow his support behind Mr. Yeltsin and thereby riskaccelerating the Soviet Union's descent into chaos. Thatcould anger American allies in Europe, who don't want to rockthe Soviet boat so badly that the Kremlin halts thewithdrawal of its troops from Eastern Europe. Or Mr. Bush canstand by as the newly empowered hard-liners continue to wrapan iron fist around Soviet republics seeking their freedom.That would enrage many in Congress and the U.S. public. As oflast night, he appeared inclined more toward supporting Mr.Yeltsin than toward passivity. But, significantly, Mr. Bushdidn't endorse Mr. Yeltsin's call for a general strike.   In Congress, there were immediate signals that brakes willbe applied to the whole range of U.S.-Soviet agreements thathave been painstakingly assembled over the past few years.   &quot;The position of the United States must be unambiguous andclear,&quot; said House majority leader Richard Gephardt. &quot;Just aswe would reward the Soviets for reforming, we will rebukethem for stepping backward. Specifically, this means nomovement&quot; on a liberalized trade status for the U.S.S.R. oron the new strategic arms reduction treaty, he said.   For Mr. Bush, the best hope is that the coup collapsesunder the weight of pro-democracy sentiment. But while notingthat coups often fail that way, he carefully measured hiscomments. &quot;It's important to keep in mind the enormouschanges that have taken place -- toward openness, towardreform, changes in Eastern Europe, the newfound cooperationwith the United States and others in the Gulf and many otherareas,&quot; he said. &quot;There's a whole new era of cooperation andwe don't want to see that change, obviously.&quot;   In fact, it is this sweeping change that Mr. Gorbachevbrought about during his six years in office that likely ledto his downfall. Notably, the growing power of individualSoviet republics, and the newfound legitimacy of theirelected leaders, threatened the influence of the military andbureaucracy in the Soviet Union. The coup was timed to takeplace on the day before Mr. Yeltsin and leaders of two otherrepublics were to sign a new union treaty that would transfermost political and economic power from the Kremlin toindividual, sovereign republics.   At the same time, the crisis has also revealed the reverseside of the coin: While new democratic structures havestarted to take shape in the Soviet Union, they still lack asolid underpinning, and therefore can be toppled. Even Mr.Yeltsin's Russia is almost completely reliant onlaw-enforcement agencies controlled by central government.When the crunch came, the Kremlin had no trouble takingcontrol of the media.   One of the new regime's first decrees closes down all butnine newspapers; the ones that remain open are firmly in thehands of the Kremlin or the Communist Party. The freewheelingindependent press that has mushroomed in recent months willhave to apply to be &quot;reregistered,&quot; Mr. Yanayev told a newsconference, sounding the death knell for most, if not all, ofthe publications.   Inside the Russian Parliament Monday morning, officialswere desperately seeking ways to get Mr. Yeltsin's messageout to the people. Lacking access to TV or radio, &quot;theproblem for us now is a problem of transmitting the appeal bytelephone, telefax, telex, everything that is available inour hands,&quot; said Andrei Fyodorov, the Russian deputy foreignminister.   Mr. Gorbachev's fate is still unknown. Mr. Yanayevinsisted that he is alive, but unwell and &quot;undergoingtreatment&quot; in a safe place. &quot;He is very tired after thesemany years, and he'll need time to get better,&quot; Mr. Yanayevadded.   Speaking at a rally in Leningrad, the town's reformistmayor, Anatoly Sobchak, said that the coup leaders hadapparently wanted Mr. Gorbachev to sign a resignationstatement, but that he had refused.   The men who assumed power are all Communist Partystalwarts, most of whom were elevated to the top leadershipof the Soviet Union by Mr. Gorbachev himself. In addition toMr. Yanayev, they include the prime minister, the heads ofthe army, the KGB and the interior ministry and the leadersof two powerful lobbies, the state-run agriculture andmilitary industries.   For months now, they have publicly complained about signsof collapse in the Soviet Union, including growinglawlessness, rapid economic decline and a loss of nationalpride. A statement issued by the committee asserted that Mr.Gorbachev's reforms had led the U.S.S.R. &quot;into a blindalley.&quot; It took particular issue with Mr. Gorbachev's recenteconomic overtures to the West, saying that &quot;onlyirresponsible people can bank on some aid from abroad.&quot;   Yet while attacking his legacy, the new leadershipcontinues to mouth the rhetoric of at least some of Mr.Gorbachev's policies, especially his economic ones. Mr.Yanayev, calling the deposed president &quot;my friend,&quot; insistedthat &quot;the policy initiated by Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachevin 1985 will be continued.&quot; Among other things, the emergencycommittee has said it wants to hand out agricultural land toall city dwellers, and encourage some private enterprise,including house building.   In part, such statements seemed designed to ease worries,both at home and abroad, that the new leadership will try toturn the clock back to a far more repressive and intolerantera. It appears that the hard-liners' best hope of staying inpower is to convince Mr. Bush and other Western leaders thatthey, too, support economic reform and improved relationswith the West, and want simply to end a slide intolawlessness and disintegration.   Toward that end, the hard-liners seem to be offering intheir initial statements an implicit bargain -- namely, thatthey will continue to voice support for reform if the Westlets them carry out their crackdown against the republics. Ina radio appeal, the coup leaders declared: &quot;We stand fortruly democratic processes, for a consistent policy ofreform, leading to a renewal of our motherland, to itseconomic and social prosperity, which will make it possiblefor it to occupy a worthy place in the world community ofnations.&quot;   But the new regime's contradictory statements about reformalso serve to underscore the sense of helplessness in theKremlin over how to end the nation's catastrophic economicdecline. Faced with a drop in gross national product of atleast 10% this year, Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov has beenjuggling for months with an uneasy mixture of centralizedadministrative measures and more market-oriented remedies.The new government is now clearly signaling that it wouldlike to move more firmly back to central planning, but itnonetheless tacitly admits that it was this very system thatcaused most of the nation's economic problems in the firstplace.   &quot;We are not going to reverse market reforms. That's thecorrect and wise policy,&quot; pledged Alexander Tizyakov,president of the country's major state-run industrialassociation and one of the eight members of the new rulingcommittee. At the same time, he and the other members of thecommittee advocate firmer &quot;discipline&quot; in factories and farmsin a bid to raise production. Because of such contradictions,many radicals are already predicting that the new regime willhave no more success than Mr. Gorbachev in curing thenation's economic ills.   The pace of change has been so breathtaking in theGorbachev era that it is easy to forget how thoroughly thenow-deposed Soviet leader reshaped the world. He personallydevised and carried out the policies that allowed EasternEurope to go free after four decades in the Soviet orbit. Heoversaw the literal dismantling of the Warsaw Pact militaryalliance.   He was the first Soviet leader in the Cold War era todecide that cooperation, rather than confrontation, with theU.S. would be the Kremlin's policy in the volatile MiddleEast, making possible the entire U.S.-backed war againstIraq. He stood aside and allowed the downfall of thepro-Soviet Sandinista regime in Nicaragua. And he unleashedopen debate throughout the Soviet Union.   In the end, Mr. Gorbachev probably fell victim as much tohis own political machinations as to any disputes over policywith his colleagues. Many officials here say the key momentcame in the fall of 1990, when the Soviet president decidedagainst making rapid moves to a market-oriented economy,instead embracing more authoritarian rule in an attempt torestore &quot;order.&quot; Later, in disgust, most of Mr. Gorbachev'smore liberal advisers abandoned him, leaving him dangerouslydependent on conservatives in the Kremlin, the very leaderswho yesterday took control of the country.   Mr. Yanayev, who has assumed Mr. Gorbachev's functions ashead of state, is a pasty-faced career bureaucrat who rose toprominence in the Soviet labor movement. Little is knownabout his private views. But a recent article by a formerclose colleague, published in the Swiss newspaper NeueZuercher Zeitung, describes him as a committed, hard-workingand hard-drinking apparatchik, &quot;who cultivates the myth ofthe working class hero dating back to early Bolshevik days.&quot;   It was Mr. Gorbachev who nominated Mr. Yanayev to be hisvice president last December. At the time, Mr. Gorbachevdescribed him as &quot;a mature politician, a man with firmprinciples, an active supporter and participant inperestroika.&quot;   &quot;The saddest thing,&quot; says Mr. Kalugin, the former KGBofficer, &quot;is that the president didn't listen to us. We toldhim that he mustn't keep the structures that at any momentcould organize a Putsch against him.&quot;   ---   Walter S. Mossberg in Washington contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>