<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920127-0152</DOCNO><DOCID>920127-0152.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   Quality Control From Mars   ----   By Craig J. Cantoni</HL><DATE>01/27/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><NS>MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><RE>NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Forget the Japanese. Forget the Germans. The best lessonson management come from Mars.   No, not the planet. But the multibillion-dollar,world-class company known as Mars Inc., a leader in candy,pet food, rice and other products. A secretive, closely heldcompany like no other in the U.S., Mars is as successful asit is unconventional. As someone who worked as an executivethere, I can speak from experience: Being hired into Marsfrom a conventional, publicly held company is akin to anearthling trying to survive on the red planet. You cansurvive only by letting go of most of the beliefs andassumptions learned in a normal business environment.</LP><TEXT>   The first visible symbols of this alien culture are theabsence of assigned parking spaces, private offices or evenpartitions between desks. Time clocks are at the door andeverybody punches in, including senior executives and thebillionaire owners. Punch in on time and get a 10%punctuality bonus.   Walk into any Mars subsidiary worldwide and see the sameoffice layout of concentric circles, with the president andhis (or her) staff at the center and their directsubordinates at the next circle, their subordinates at thenext, and so on. Operating in close proximity to each otherin the fishbowl at the center, the senior staffers aretotally visible and accessible.   When something important happens in the business, watchthe president call the senior staff to his desk. At theconclusion of the impromptu meeting, observe the staffersgoing back to their desks to call their departments togetherfor their own impromptu meetings. Like an army of ants goinghither and fro, the office is soon a buzz of sound andactivity. Communications are fast and open. Memos aren'twritten and electronic mail goes unused.   Since Mars offices are always connected to a plant, it'san easy walk over to the factory, where the most wondroussights await you. Everyone is in white uniforms and bump hats-- managers and workers alike. The plant is spotless andshiny, the high-speed lines are marvels of efficiency, andthe high-paid, non-union employees are loyal and proud.   On any particular day, one of the Mars brothers who ownthe business is likely to show up at a subsidiary. He flys infrom his Virginia office, where a headquarters staff of lessthan 50 runs a far-flung, 25,000-employee enterprise. Wearingscuffed cowboy boots and a wrinkled shirt, he parks amidsized rental car in the far end of the employee lot andwalks toward the office. Unlike most chief executives, hedoes not head straight for the subsidiary president to reviewthe quarterly results. Instead, he grabs a white smock andbump hat and heads for the factory. You will hear himscreaming if he finds unclean or unsafe conditions. And woeto the plant vice president if less-than-perfect product iscoming off the line.   Quality is an unrelenting obsession at Mars. One exampleof that obsession is a fear of &quot;incremental degradation,&quot; aterm used by Mars to describe what can happen by usingcheaper ingredients. Rather than replace a high-pricedingredient with a cheaper one, even if taste tests show thatthe consumer would not notice a difference, Mars will forgothe extra profits instead of risking an incrementaldegradation of the quality of its products.   The latest in statistical process/quality control chartingmay not be seen on the walls, but observe in the factoriesthe constant product inspection and tasting -- even thetasting of pet food. Watch a whole production run of candybars be thrown out because of barely noticeable nicks in thechocolate coating. Better yet, follow a Mars salesman on asupermarket visit. Watch the individual discard a wholedisplay of product because it is getting too close to thedate on the freshness code. Look for someone with quality inhis title and come up empty-handed. Look for people concernedabout quality and come up with the entire work force.   Closer inspection of Mars's operation reveals huge marketshares, obscene profits and such high productivity that thebusiness operates with 30% fewer employees than its closestcompetitor. With results like these, you'd think that Marsmust have the best merit and incentive programs in America.But the conventional wisdom does not hold true in the worldof Mars. All Mars employees are on a step-increase system,getting the same annual adjustment as everyone else.   Employees at Mars have something more motivating thanphony merit and incentive systems: a high degree of jobsecurity and pay that is pegged at the 90th percentile of thecompensation offered by other premier companies in the world.Moreover, by operating with only six pay levels and payingall vice presidents approximately the same salary regardlessof the function they head, Mars finds it easy to transferpeople from business unit to business unit and function tofunction.   Someone heading up human resources today in abillion-dollar domestic business may be heading upmanufacturing tomorrow in a half-billion-dollar Europeanbusiness. It is a rare general manager who has not done atour of duty in manufacturing or marketing in at least twobusiness units. As a result, key managers know the businessso well that a consistent organizational culture andoperating style can be maintained world-wide with few formalrules and procedures.   Financial and business measurements are few but powerful.The most powerful is ROTA (return on total assets), which, ina unique equation, takes into account inventory turns andasset utilization. This measurement, combined with valuingequipment at replacement cost instead of book value, givesmanagers an incentive to replace equipment with the latesttechnology. At a Mars pet food plant I once visited inGermany, a perfectly good can-filling machine was replaced bya state-of-the-art machine, even though the additionalcapacity wasn't needed at the time.   Is there a dark side to Mars? Yes. Just as the planet is aharsh environment, the company can be a stressful place,particularly for higher-level managers who must deal with theimpulsive nature of the owners. I remember the finance vicepresident in a subsidiary who decided to buy some nice woodendesks. One of the owners came by one day and began to fumewhen he saw them. &quot;Would you ever buy a more expensive deskthan your boss has?&quot; he asked me, as he sat down just waitingfor the VP to walk in. When the VP arrived, the shoutingbegan.   If it had been anybody other than an owner, it would havebeen devastating. But because the culture of the organizationis so effective, there's an aura about the people who own thecompany. These occasional outbursts become ingrained in themythology of the company and serve to reinforce the corporatephilosophy.   Companies like Mars can force us to face the possibilitythat we are wrong about what a true quality culture lookslike, about how business should be measured, about how peopleshould be paid, about the role of senior management, andabout the development of management talent. Instead oflooking overseas for solutions to our problems ofcompetitiveness, maybe we should look to another planet forthe answers. The Mars Voyager is waiting for you on thelaunch pad.   ---   Mr. Cantoni is vice president of human resources andlogistics at J.M. Huber, a $1 billion family-held company inEdison, N.J.</TEXT></DOC>