<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910314-0109</DOCNO><DOCID>910314-0109.</DOCID><HL>   Why Soviet Reform Failed   ----   By Walter Laqueur</HL><DATE>03/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   This Sunday millions of Soviets are expected to go to thepolls to answer the following question: &quot;Do you consider itnecessary to preserve the U.S.S.R. as a union of equalsovereign states?&quot; It seems straightforward enough, but thereis a built-in ambiguity. What if 90% of the voters in theRussian federation were to vote in favor and 90% in Lithuaniaagainst? It is an academic question, for Lithuania (alongwith five other republics) refuses to participate in thereferendum. Worse yet, the referendum has turned into apopularity contest between Mikhail Gorbachev and BorisYeltsin and a vote on the situation in the Soviet Union ingeneral.   The referendum will not answer any of the criticalquestions now confronting the Soviet Union. If a majority ofvoters should abstain or vote against it, the leadership willnot necessarily accept the verdict. But a favorable vote willnot mean a vote of confidence for Mr. Gorbachev's domesticpolicies, which are more unpopular than ever. An initiativethat probably was well meant but not carefully consideredwill end in confusion and failure.</LP><TEXT>   That already has happened to the reform movement. Some putall the blame on Mr. Gorbachev's &quot;betrayal,&quot; but this iswrong. In the early years of his rule, Mr. Gorbachev was aparty leader, full of good will to make the system work andready to accept far-reaching concessions to achieve this aim.But it is more than doubtful whether he ever had a clearconcept of what he wanted to achieve and how.   For the reformers this opened up certain chances, as theparty bosses and the state bureaucracy were on the defensive.They had never imagined how unpopular they were; even thegenerals found themselves the butt of sharp criticism. Theold political establishment was temporarily confused and evenparalyzed. In this situation, the reformers got some of theirleaders elected to high local office in Moscow, Leningrad anda few other places; Mr. Yeltsin became the head of theRussian federation. For a while the democrats had a greatdeal of freedom to state their case in the mass media.   Perhaps inevitably they made a number of mistakes. Theseparatists in the non-Russian republics sometimes actedwithout great wisdom. Instead of pressing for immediatewithdrawal from the Soviet Union, sometimes openly provokingthe Russians, they should have opted for gradual devolution.Given the economic and political realities, this would havebeen more realistic. Thus the Estonians, in evading an openconfrontation, have achieved more during the past few yearsthan the Lithuanians.   The rhetoric of Valeria Novodvorskaia of the DemocraticUnion and that of other extreme anti-Communist groups alsowas not helpful. To call Mr. Gorbachev a Russian fascist wasno more correct than to brand (as Stalin had done 60 yearsago) the Social Democrats &quot;social fascists.&quot; These unbridledattacks were grist for the mill of the real fascists, whoused these exaggerations to prove that a surfeit of freedomof speech was endangering the very survival of the SovietUnion.   It is not certain whether the reformers had any controlover the actions of the separatists and the speeches of theDemocratic Union. But they could have gotten their acttogether in Moscow and Leningrad, rather than splitting intovarious factions -- the Democratic Party and the RepublicanParty, the Russian Social Democratic Party and the DemocraticPlatform, not to mention the many smaller groups. Suchfragmentation exists in many democratic regimes, but underSoviet conditions it was a luxury the reformers could illafford. True, the anti-reform party is also split(neo-Stalinists vs. Russian nationalists). But both factionsare cooperating against the common enemy, which the democratsall too often did not.   However, I suspect that even if there had been full unityin the reformers' ranks, even if they had not committed asingle political mistake, they still would not have prevailedin the struggle for power. While they accepted office andresponsibility, they never gained possession of the truelevers of power. The army and the KGB quite apart, there aretwo immensely strong blocs in Soviet society -- the state andparty bureaucracy and the military-industrial complex -- thatwant an end to political experimentation. This is not to saythat every colonel and factory manager is anti-democratic;there were liberal governors even in czarist Russia. Butthese sectors have no wish to surrender their power,privileges and status in society.   It is one of the ironies of history that the term&quot;military-industrial complex&quot; was coined in the U.S., for itis so much stronger in the Soviet Union. According to Sovietsources, even now, the Soviets produce 4.5 times more tanksthan the U.S., nine times as many guns, five times as manytroop transporters and three times as many submarines. Sovietmilitary aviation is burning three times as much jet fuel asAeroflot, and this when thousands of civilian flights have tobe canceled for lack of fuel.   As a result of the Gulf war, the generals and chiefmanagers are asking for new budgetary allocations. They wanta government they can trust to defend their interests, andthe same is true in other sectors of the old establishment,such as the party secretaries and the KGB officers.   In theory, the old Communist Party monopoly was abolished;in practice, nothing moves without the permission of thelocal party secretaries. Boris Yeltsin may be president ofthe Russian federation, but he has to beg to get half an houra week on a radio network not widely heard. There is generalagreement between left and right that agriculture should bedecollectivized. But with all his popularity, Mr. Yeltsin hasnot been able to achieve anything in this respect -- the oldparty apparatus has sabotaged all reform initiatives.   The positions of Mayors Gavriil Popov in Moscow andAnatoli Sobchak in Leningrad are now quite untenable; theypass resolutions and give orders, but since they have neitherfunds nor a loyal bureaucracy or police force at theirdisposal they are simply ignored. As Boris Gidaspov, one ofthe leaders of the anti-reform party, said: &quot;When they willget sick and tired of the democrats, the people will crave astrong hand. They do not distinguish between democracy andauthoritarian rule. What matters is goods in the shops.&quot; Ifduring the past year Moscow and Leningrad have beensystematically starved of food supplies and goods, it waspartly mismanagement. But as a high Moscow law official saidin this context: &quot;30% disorganization and 70% sabotage.&quot;   Aware of the full extent of the failure of reform, the twomayors and other democratic leaders have asked themselveswhether they should collectively resign. Were they wrong toaccept office (the &quot;illusion of authority&quot;) in the firstplace? Several ideologists of the reform movement had arguedearly on that a &quot;temporary democratic dictatorship&quot; wasinevitable. Change in Russia has always come by order fromabove, and nowhere in history has a totalitarian regime evertransformed itself into a free system without passing throughsome transitional phase.   But is such advice very helpful? Would an authoritarianregime headed by Mr. Gorbachev that aimed at thedemocratization of the Soviet Union been obeyed? This ishighly doubtful; in any case, Mr. Gorbachev had no wish topreside over the dismantling of all the Leninist structuresand traditions.   All this is very depressing for Soviet democrats and thoseWesterners who two or three years ago were so ecstatic aboutthe final triumph of freedom in the Soviet Union, with acivil society and democratic institutions just around thecorner. But even if such Pollyannish expectations were out ofplace in 1988, there is no reason to go to the other extremein 1991.   The countries of Eastern Europe, after all, did get rid oftheir communist regimes. True, the party and themilitary-industrial complex were not remotely as powerfulthere, and the nationalists (unlike in the Soviet Union)opted for democracy rather than dictatorship. For the samereason, democracy probably will make quicker progress in thenon-Russian republics of the Soviet Union. But in the Russianfederation, too, the task of the old elite trying to reimposeits power is not enviable -- and its more intelligent leadersmust be aware of this. They have no answers for the urgenteconomic and social problems; patriotic indoctrination willnot make the workers work harder, or wait in long lines withgreater patience, or buy shoddy goods with more enthusiasm.   The anti-reform party presenting itself as a Committee ofNational Salvation can cling to power. But its long-termprospects are still dismal.   ---   Mr. Laqueur is chairman of the International ResearchCouncil of the Washington-based Center for Strategic andInternational Studies.</TEXT></DOC>