<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900924-0036</DOCNO><DOCID>900924-0036.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>09/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   IRAQ THREATENED a wide-scale Mideast war and destructionof oil fields.   Baghdad warned it would attack oil installations in theregion and include Israel in an all-out war if the West triedto &quot;strangle&quot; its people. Baker, meanwhile, said the fivepermanent members of the U.N. Security Council will meettomorrow to consider an air embargo against Iraq. The Bushadministration prepared to send Congress a roughly $10billion arms package for Saudi Arabia. Over the weekend, theSaudis ordered several diplomats from Jordan, Yemen and Iraqto leave the country, asserting that they were involved inspying for Baghdad.</LP><TEXT>   U.S. and Saudi generals are considering proposals to setup a joint military command to improve control of theinternational forces confronting Iraq.   ---   SOUTH AFRICA'S LEADER ARRIVED in Washington for talks withBush.   President de Klerk is scheduled today to become the firstSouth African head of state to be received at the White Housein more than 40 years. He also is expected to meet withcongressional and business leaders to discuss ways in whichthe U.S. can help in bringing about a peaceful transitionfrom apartheid. His visit has been clouded by an upsurge offactional violence in black townships.   In Johannesburg, Mandela charged that new police measureswere timed to create an appearance of calm during de Klerk'sthree-day trip to the U.S.   ---   Gorbachev appealed to Soviet lawmakers on Friday foremergency powers that would enable him to push througheconomic changes by decree. Despite his plea, the SupremeSoviet adjourned until today without taking a vote on the newpowers, and it also failed to meet a deadline for approvingan economic restructuring plan.   ---   Two rival Liberian rebel chiefs will meet Friday in SierraLeone for U.S.-brokered peace negotiations aimed at endingthe country's nine-month-old civil war, according toofficials from the West African Economic Community. Acease-fire has been in effect since Saturday in Monrovia.   ---   Cambodian guerrilla factions accepted a compromise for anexpanded Supreme National Council, a key element in a U.N.peace plan, and asked to resume talks with the government.The council's first meeting broke up last week when theguerrillas and the Vietnam-backed regime disagreed on howmany seats each side should have.   ---   Patriarch Alexi II led a Divine Liturgy in the Kremlin'sUspensky Cathedral, the first full service allowed in morethan 70 years in Russia's most important cathedral. Thegovernment's decision to permit the service was seen as asymbolic step in the revival of the Russian Orthodox Church,long controlled by the Communist Party.   ---   Bhutto was ordered to appear before a special court toanswer a mounting legal challenge by Pakistan's interimgovernment that could force the former prime minister out ofnext month's elections.   ---   Forest fires raged on the French Riviera as 2,500firefighters and soldiers struggled for the second straightday to keep flames away from coastal towns. Officials saidsome 28,400 acres of forests and dozens of homes had beendestroyed since Friday in the region, and that about 2,500people had been evacuated over the weekend.   ---   Researchers reported that a new treatment could lead to acure for the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, the muscularailment that affects more than 350,000 Americans. Theresearch involves the subthalamic nucleus, a part of thebrain previously regarded as unconnected to Parkinson's.   ---   Aquino expressed satisfaction with progress made last weekon the future of U.S. military bases in the Philippines. Thepresident said her government would weigh proposals made forphasing down U.S. operations at the Subic Bay Naval Base. Shesaid the Philippines had demanded that the U.S. returncontrol of five other installations.   ---   An agreement was signed Friday by Vietnam, Britain, HongKong and the U.N.'s refugee agency concerning steps forrepatriation of Vietnamese boat people who aren't opposed toreturning home from Hong Kong camps. The joint statementfollowed three days of talks in Hanoi.   ---   Swiss citizens voted over the weekend to forbid theconstruction of nuclear power plants for 10 years, despitewarnings of lower living standards and increased dependenceon imported oil. The voters decided against shuttingSwitzerland's five existing nuclear facilities, which provideabout 40% of the nation's electricity.   ---   An Indian student killed himself Saturday by eatinginsecticide, prompting rioters to rampage through the town ofKurukshetra to protest government plans to reserve federaljobs for lower-caste Hindus. The policy has set off a wave ofsuicide attempts.   ---   California's Deukmejian signed a landmark oil-spill billthat taxes oil 25 cents a barrel, creates a cleanupadministrator and regulates tankers in the state's waters.The governor said the new law will give California anunprecedented ability both to prevent spills and fight theeffects of spills.   ---   Aides to Bush said the administration -- as part of a planfor preserving the northern spotted owl -- is asking Congressto allow new sales of 3.3 billion board feet of timber onForest Service lands in Washington, Oregon and NorthernCalifornia during the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.   ---   President Gaviria rejected criticism of his handling ofColombia's drug war and ruled out talks between thegovernment and powerful cocaine cartels. Three prominentColombians have disappeared in the past month, and it hasbeen suggested that they were kidnapped by drug traffickersin an effort to force the government to negotiate.</TEXT></DOC>