<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911004-0131</DOCNO><DOCID>911004-0131.</DOCID><HL>   Telecommunications (A Special Report): Cover   ---   Spanning the Globe:   Competition in Telecommunications Heats Up   As National Boundaries Break Down   ----   By John J. Keller</HL><DATE>10/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R1</SO><CO>   BTY F FORGN MCIC T</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)</IN><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)ILLINOIS (IL)JAPAN (JA)MICHIGAN (MI)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   It's all so routine:   -- A clerk in Richmond, Va., slides a credit card throughan electronic device. In a flash it clears a customer'spurchase of the new Bonnie Raitt compact disk.</LP><TEXT>   -- An executive calls New York from his Stockholm office.   -- A technician in Chicago discusses an engine design witha client's research and development group in the UnitedKingdom. He does it via a video conference.   Repeated tens of thousands of times a second around theworld, such electronic chatter has become mundane, theinformation-age equivalent of brushing your teeth. But don'tbe fooled. The global superhighways that carry this rapidlymultiplying traffic use some of the most sophisticatedtechnology anywhere. And they are the focus of an intensebattle among the world's largest telecommunications concerns.   The reason is simple: National barriers are breaking down,allowing competition in markets that were protected before.Deregulation and privatization of national communicationscompanies are speeding the breakdown.   For the telecommunications companies, it's not just aquestion of expanding their markets. It's a question ofkeeping them. Their corporate customers are going global, andthese businesses need international suppliers oftelecommunications services and equipment.   Moreover, today's major players -- such as AmericanTelephone andamp; Telegraph Co., Britain's Cable andamp; Wireless PLC andJapan's Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp. -- seek to do farmore than simply transmit corporate messages. They want tocapture revenue from both ends of a call and all themaintenance in between. In short, they want to manage theircustomers' entire telecommunications systems. This meansproviding the communications links, keeping them in goodrepair, handling a customer's internal switching systems,negotiating with overseas carriers to lease lines andproviding the customer with detailed accounting in eachcountry's currency.   If the competition is growing, so is the market. Corporatevoice, data and teleconferencing traffic volume betweencountries -- measured in terms of messages per minute -- isspurting at an annual rate of 15% to 20%, about double the 7%to 9% corporate domestic rate. From $5 billion this year,international revenues from corporate traffic will grow by atleast 12% annually, to $8 billion by 1995, according toMichael Kennedy, a telecommunications consultant at Arthur D.Little Inc. in Cambridge, Mass. By the end of the decade heexpects such revenue to rise to $14 billion, out of a totalworld communications market of $750 billion.   No self-respecting competitive phone company could ignoresuch numbers. &quot;We want to act as the traffic center for{multinational} corporations,&quot; says Marie Monique Steckel,president of France Telecom Inc.'s U.S. unit. Not that thetelephone companies have much choice. National phonemonopolies are slowly disappearing, and countries such as theU.S., Britain, France and Japan are opening their markets tooutside competitors. &quot;If you're a {monopoly phone company},your market share has only one place to go,&quot; says SethBlumenfeld, president of MCI International. &quot;Down.&quot;   Richard Marriott, director of corporate strategy forBritish Telecommunications PLC, agrees. &quot;If we don't meet ourcustomers' international communications needs, some {foreignphone company} will do it and then work its way back to takeour U.K. business,&quot; he says.   Carriers, to be sure, can't enter every business inforeign countries. Local phone service to residentialcustomers and small businesses remains a monopoly in mostcountries and is provided by a state-owned phone company. ButU.S. carriers are beginning to penetrate newer markets suchas cellular communications and private data transmission. InBritain the Baby Bells have made big investments in cabletelevision, and Germany has begun allowing outsiders toprovide satellite-based data transmission.   Investments in U.S. carriers by foreign entrants arelimited by law to a 20% stake if the U.S. company holdsradio-transmission licenses from the Federal CommunicationsCommission. But foreigners are stepping up investments inbusinesses such as long-distance and data-transmissionservices, which don't require such licenses.   As the global competition heats up, big carriers are doingall sorts of things in search of market share. The mostobvious: They are spending more than $100 billion a year onequipment, including state-of-the-art digital switches andfiber-optic lines that provide crystal-clear transmission.Between now and 1996, ATandamp;T and numerous foreign phone-companypartners will lay more than $3 billion of transoceanicoptical cable systems. These voice and data cables, ATandamp;Tsays, will be able to transmit five billion bits ofinformation each second -- roughly the equivalent of 5,000200-page books.   &quot;Future networks which transport video signals includingHDTV {high-definition television} will have to run a thousandtimes faster than those carrying voice,&quot; says Josef Cornu,executive vice president of the French equipment giantAlcatel NV, a unit of Alcatel Alsthom. &quot;Carriers' networksmust have this capacity but still handle voice efficiently.&quot;   Carriers are also installing equipment that lets a voiceand data network linking distant facilities perform as thoughit were a single office system. Suppose, for instance, acompany's phone system in its home office has seven-digitspeed dialing and voice mail. Its office workers might lackthese features in a developing country without an advancedphone system. The new equipment would allow the home officeto extend such features overseas. &quot;The vision is to make anetwork change in Singapore from your center in Atlanta,&quot;says Frank Ianna, vice president of marketing for ATandamp;Tinternational communications services.   Billing is another competitive weapon.   MCI Communications Corp. has installed a sophisticatedsystem that will provide a customer with phone bills thatitemize calls from each of its phones. For overseas offices,it gives a detailed accounting in each country's currency.   Dealing with foreign carriers is still another service.MCI and ATandamp;T, for instance, will negotiate for overseastransmission lines with local phone companies in eachnation-a laborious process that can stall a customer'sbusiness expansion for months if the customer tries to lobbyon its own.   Despite such lures from telecommunications companies, somebig corporations prefer to do it themselves. &quot;We'd rathermanage our own facilities,&quot; says S.I. Gilman, executivedirector of information systems at Ford Motor Co. He saysFord's communications experts probably have more experienceat running private networks and negotiating with foreignphone companies than many of the big carriers do.   Such negotiations can be tricky even for Ford. Mr. Gilmanrecalls a project to install a satellite link between Ford'sstamping and assembly plant in Hermosillo, Mexico, whichbuilds the Ford Escort and Mercury Tracer, and an engineplant in Chihuaua. He says it took two years to get theMexican government's permission to install the necessary dishantennas. Then &quot;Mexican law demanded that we turn thefacilities over to the government,&quot; he says, &quot;which means ourequipment now is part of the Mexican phone network.&quot;   Managing a global voice, data and video network likeFord's can be a major task. A computerized network centermonitors each of Ford's 23 high-speed voice and data linesaround the clock and reroutes traffic when a line fails. Thenetwork management center must also keep tabs on 100,000computer terminals, as well as telephones, used by 65,000employees in the U.S. and 30,000 in nine European countries.   Network traffic is routed through two main switchingcenters, which are supervised by Ford, in Detroit and London.And Ford's communications team has to negotiate transmissionservice with government authorities in each of the countrieswhere the company has facilities.   Not all carriers could handle a customer as big as Ford.While British Telecom, with its $3.64 billion in annualprofit, can well afford expensive excursions abroad, poorercousins, such as phone companies in Mexico and Argentina,aren't strong enough to compete in the new globaltelecommunications market.   This is leading to a consolidation among big nationalcarriers. Telefonica de Espana S.A. of Spain, for instance,snapped up national phone properties in Argentina and Chile.And it has led to major investments elsewhere. SouthwesternBell Corp. has purchased a big stake in Telefonos de Mexico,the Mexican phone company, and is helping to direct Telmex'smodernization.   &quot;These consolidations will continue into the future,particularly in adjacent territories such as SouthwesternBell and Mexico,&quot; says Eli Noam, a professor at ColumbiaUniversity's School of Business. &quot;While laws governingforeign ownership of carriers are still fairly nationalistic,in time this will change.&quot; Mr. Noam says, for example, thatNTT of Japan could acquire a U.S. company such as TeleportCommunications Group. This New York-based alternative carrierprovides companies with direct links to long-distancecompanies, bypassing New York Telephone, a subsidiary ofNynex Corp. NTT already has a complementary business thatsells global communication services to Japanese corporationsoperating satellites in Manhattan and New Jersey.   But Mr. Noam questions whether some of these globalplayers &quot;can do it all&quot; -- that is, both competeinternationally and provide up-to-date domestic service. Henotes that criticism has been growing in Spain overTelefonica's deteriorating service. And British Telecom stillruns a somewhat antiquated system. &quot;Each country's regulatorsare going to mandate the best {domestic} service at thelowest price,&quot; he says, &quot;and this could lead them to attachall sorts of conditions to the national carrier before it'sallowed to expand internationally.&quot;   Pricing overseas could be another battleground. In theU.S. the average cost per minute of a business call hasdropped to 10 cents from 25 cents five years ago. Such callsoverseas, however, &quot;are still very expensive, leadingcorporations to build private voice and data networks,&quot; saysJames Harrison, program director of global networkingservices at Meta Group, a research firm based in Westport,Conn. Mr. Harrison expects this to change once competitionforces the phone monopolies to lower their prices.   Three years ago &quot;it was more expensive for us to {obtain}a line between Germany and France because of the inbredmonopolies there than to transport our traffic to the U.S.from Germany and then to France,&quot; says Roger Peirce,executive vice president at Visa International. &quot;Today mostbig {telecommunications authorities} recognize that they'reoperating in a competitive environment rather than amonopolistic one.&quot;   From his office in San Mateo, Calif., Mr. Peirce overseesone of the world's largest corporate communications networks.While he won't divulge his annual budget, the companyrecently signed a five-year agreement with MCI for $87million. That's not counting how much Visa pays ATandamp;T, whichcarries half of Visa's domestic voice and data traffic.   Visa's network handles three billion transactions eachyear, representing almost $350 billion in purchases annually.   Keeping all of these transactions moving is a &quot;smartswitch&quot; system in which a transaction is routed over thefirst available circuit among five computer processing hubs.There are two of these centers in the U.S., two in Britainand one in Tokyo, all processing traffic from banking centersin more than 100 countries.   In a network catastrophe &quot;if San Mateo goes out,Basingstoke {England} could take over without any noticeabledegradation in service,&quot; says Mr. Peirce. And how long doesit take to clear a purchase from the time a card is swipedthrough a Visa terminal? &quot;We recently clocked a response timeof 1.9 seconds,&quot; he says. &quot;We want a payment system that'ssuperior to cash.&quot;   Not all customers have to communicate this elaborately,however. Schwinn Bicycle Co. in Chicago sells bikes in Canadaand recently installed a toll-free international 800 linefrom ATandamp;T. Now customers and Schwinn dealers can place ordersand send computer messages from anywhere in Canada directlyto Schwinn's headquarters at no charge. The line has workedso well that Deborah Carter, Schwinn's telecommunicationscoordinator, had a second toll-free link installed betweenChicago and the company's plant in Hungary, where Schwinnbuilds its Woodlands all-terrain bike.   In a future service, ATandamp;T lines will automatically routetoll-free traffic to whichever one of Schwinn's fourcustomer-service centers happens to be open. &quot;We don't haveto staff any center 24 hours a day,&quot; says Ms. Carter. &quot;In the1990s services like these are going to be key.&quot;   ---   Mr. Keller, a Wall Street Journal staff reporter in NewYork, served as contributing editor of this Wall StreetJournal Report.</TEXT></DOC>