<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900605-0035</DOCNO><DOCID>900605-0035.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>06/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   GORBACHEV MET with Roh in a step toward Soviet-SouthKorean relations.   Foreshadowing an adjustment of East Asian political andeconomic ties, the Soviet leader and South Korean presidentheld talks in San Francisco and said their nations are movingtoward establishing diplomatic relations. It was the firstmeeting between leaders of the two countries since 1948 andcame at the end of Gorbachev's five-day visit to the U.S. Inan address at Stanford University, he declared the Cold War&quot;behind us,&quot; and called for &quot;new structures&quot; in internationalalliances. He also had a brief reunion with Reagan.</LP><TEXT>   Baker traveled to Denmark to discuss with Shevardnadze anine-point Western proposal on Germany's military future. Theplan allows the Red Army to remain temporarily in EastGermany.   ---   THE SUPREME COURT RULED that public schools must allowreligious clubs.   In an 8-1 decision, the justices said public schoolsgenerally must give student religious groups the same accessto scheduling and facilities as other extracurricularactivities. The ruling in a case from Omaha, Neb., whereofficials refused to permit a high school Bible-reading club,upheld a 1984 federal law aimed at allowing religiousorganizations in public schools. The court said the statutedoesn't violate the separation of church and state.   The court ruled that police undercover agents may seek toelicit confessions from jailed criminal suspects withoutfirst giving Miranda warnings.   ---   Rebels in Liberia captured a strategic military checkpointnear the international airport outside Monrovia, officialssaid, and President Doe appealed for U.S. assistance as theinsurgents advanced upon the capital. Four U.S. warships,meanwhile, arrived off the West African nation's coast tohelp evacuate Americans and other foreigners.   ---   Prime Minister Shamir defended the right of Soviet Jews tolive in Israeli-occupied lands, saying a democracy couldn'tlimit where people live. His comments were in reaction toGorbachev's statement Sunday that the Kremlin might restrictemigres to Israel if they continued to settle on land seizedin the 1967 Mideast war.   ---   Police in China blocked roads to Beijing's universityarea, and tight security elsewhere in the capital stifleddissent on the first anniversary of the government'scrackdown on a pro-democracy movement. The public was barredfrom Tiananmen Square, center of last year's protests, and afew people trying to demonstrate were arrested.   ---   A U.S. judge in Los Angeles ruled the county's supervisorsviolated the constitutional rights of the area's largeHispanic population when it drew voting boundaries in 1981.The decision came in a 1988 suit that alleged the supervisorsillegally established boundaries to separate the Hispaniccommunity, diluting its voting strength.   ---   Jury selection began in the cocaine-and-perjury trial ofWashington Mayor Barry. The official, 54, arrested Jan. 18 inan FBI sting operation, has accused U.S. prosecutors ofpursuing him with the tactics of &quot;a totalitarian kind ofsociety.&quot; Sources said plea bargain talks between Barry'slawyers and the prosecutors were at an impasse.   ---   NASA said the space shuttle Discovery sustained possibledamage when an overhead bridge in a hangar at Cape Canaveral,Fla., snagged a payload door. Separately, space agencytechnicans prepared to make a last-ditch attempt tomorrow tofind a fuel leak that caused last week's postponement ofColumbia's astronomy mission.   ---   Mandela traveled to Botswana, beginning a foreign tour.The black leader is to visit 13 nations, including the U.S.,on his most extensive trip since being released from a SouthAfrican jail in February. In Johannesburg, the governmentsaid it wouldn't force whites-only state schools to acceptblack pupils, despite its pledge to end apartheid.   ---   Japanese officials worked to avert the collapse ofCambodian peace talks in Toyko. The discussions, aimed atending the 11-year conflict in the Southeast Asian country,faltered after the leader of the Khmer Rouge guerrillafaction failed to attend the negotiations between the PhnomPenh government and a three-party insurgent alliance.   ---   More than a million mourners gathered at the tomb ofIran's Ayatollah Khomeini to mark the first anniversary ofhis death. Some of those at the Islamic shrine on theoutskirts of Tehran beat their chests in grief asloudspeakers at the compound blared anti-U.S. andanti-Israeli slogans.   ---   The U.S. plans to begin destroying its stockpile ofchemical weapons late this year, well ahead of a treatysigned Friday at the Bush-Gorbachev summit, officials inWashington said. The destruction of the weapons, currentlystored in West Germany, would take place on a Pacific island.   ---   Died: Jack Gilford, 81, dramatic actor, comic andvaudevillian who appeared on stage, TV and in films during a55-year career, in New York, of stomach cancer.</TEXT></DOC>