<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900816-0075</DOCNO><DOCID>900816-0075.</DOCID><HL>   Under the Gun:   FMC's Quick Reaction   Shows How One Firm   Deals With Iraq Crisis   ---   Maker of Defense and Oil Gear   Stops Shipments, Prepares   Escapes, Sends Salesmen   ---   Big Risks -- and Opportunities   ----   By Robert Johnson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FMC MDEST EUROP</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)OIL EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES (OIE)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><LP>   CHICAGO -- Iraq has just invaded Kuwait, and Larry Bradyis thumbing through documents to gauge the effect on hiscompany, a far-flung conglomerate called FMC Corp. Halfwaythrough, he stops and looks up in horror. Five new FMCstreet-sweepers, worth $400,000, are on a freighter bound forKuwait City -- and they're just hours from their destination.   &quot;Get that ship turned around]&quot; Mr. Brady, the executivevice president, barks to Joe Murdock, international businessmanager at FMC's sweeper division in Pomona, Calif. &quot;SaddamHussein isn't getting his hands on those sweepers.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Murdock is already phoning the freighter's captainwhen Mr. Brady calls. Take a quick turn into Abu Dhabi, Mr.Murdock orders the captain, just in time.   It's crisis management time at FMC Corp., as at hundredsof businesses across the U.S. and the world. For the past twoweeks, FMC executives have been meeting and moving nearlynonstop to prevent damage -- for instance, by planning MiddleEast evacuation routes for employees -- and to take advantageof opportunities, such as gearing up factories in Malaysia tospeed production of oil-field equipment.   FMC, a manufacturer with $3.4 billion in annual sales, isthe 48th biggest exporter in the U.S. and has one of thelargest involvements in the Middle East. It has long wooedthat part of the world as a market for its array of armoredfighting vehicles, oil production and shipping equipment, andagrichemicals. As a result, the Iraq-inspired economic chaosis sparking widespread action at the company.   FMC executives are clogging each other's phone-mail fileswith about 2,000 messages a day, more than twice the numberbefore the invasion. Nha Hoang, FMC's director ofinternational business, is staying up two hours later until 1a.m. for his messages. He gets up at 6 a.m. and typicallyfinds at least three messages related to the Middle Eastwaiting for him.   At night, he watches Cable News Network while janitorswork around him in the employee lounge; they stop dusting andwatch with him when cameras fall on Saddam Hussein orarriving U.S. troops.   Robert Malott, FMC's chairman and chief executive officer,now checks his phone messages from home by 7 a.m. daily andright before bed. The crisis even follows him to theexecutive suite bathroom, where autographed photos of himsocializing with a half-dozen desert kings adorn the walls.In their midst hangs a huge painting of Elvis Presley,appropriately shedding a tear. &quot;He was the King,&quot; says the63-year-old Mr. Malott, laughing.   It's a rare moment of humor during the crisis. Every FMCdepartment is on alert: checking all contracts for deliverieswithin 2,000 miles of Iraq to make sure banks outside the warzone will guarantee payment; tactfully suspendingnegotiations of long-erm sales contracts for fear ofinflation; hedging on the futures markets for such suppliesas aluminum in case of oil-driven price spirals.   They're hurriedly reassessing expansion plans, reviewingmarketing strategy, and revamping expense and profitprojections.   William Schumann III, FMC's treasurer, gets on the phoneto one of his company's Middle East experts. &quot;What hashappened to the Bank of Kuwait?&quot; he asks into the phone. Andthen he repeats the answer: &quot;We don't know?&quot;   Despite the uncertainty, the FMC executives know it'simportant not to panic. Abrupt canceling of contracts in atroubled region may insult customers and frighten prospectswho can't be won again when the danger passes. So Mr. Malottis promising customers in the Middle East he will stick withthem if possible.   Mr. Malott knows there are some ways that the crisis couldbenefit FMC. Several of Suddam Hussein's potential targets,including Saudi Arabia and Turkey, had already ordered FMCarmaments before the invasion of Kuwait, and their shoppinglist may lengthen now. In fact, opportunities to sell morearmaments appear to give FMC &quot;more options than a mosquito ina nudist camp,&quot; says James McClung, vice president ofinternational business.   The company dispatched oil-equipment salesmen to Alaskalast week on the chance that producers there will soon wantto drill or pump more crude. FMC's former top equipmentsalesman in Saudi Arabia, who recently retired to ruralFrance, was abruptly wooed back to work and ordered to thekingdom. FMC expects the Saudis to order additionaloil-production equipment to make up for some of the lostKuwaiti supplies.   Further hostilities could damage expensive oil-fieldequipment whose replacement would require expansion of FMCfactories. So a new plant to make oil-related machinery inMalaysia will open this month, several weeks earlier thanplanned.   FMC might also benefit because it has recently venturedinto mining gold, which often rises in value during times ofturmoil (it has gone up 8% since the Iraqi invasion). Goldproduction accounted for about 16% of FMC's $136.4 millionprofit last year, so Mr. Schumann has increased his profitprojections both short- and long-term. But not all of hisrevisions are complete, frustrating the roughly 10 securitiesanalysts who call daily -- twice the number before theinvasion.   There are also worrisome dangers for the company and someof its 24,000 employees. The FMC man in Kuwait, a Palestinianwho requests anonymity, had a dead phone line the morning ofthe invasion. He wasn't heard from for nine days.   When he finally phones Mr. Hoang, the director ofinternational business, the Palestinian says an overturned16-wheel truck, blown up by a rocket, had blocked the nearesthighway, so he'd escaped across the desert to Saudi Arabia ina friend's Chevrolet Caprice.   &quot;Chevy is the new ship of the desert,&quot; replacing camels,he exults. He complains that his own Caprice, which has a carphone, was stolen by Iraqi troops on invasion day.   Mr. McClung's 39-member international-operations staffquickly dedicates itself to devising possible evacuationroutes for other FMC employees stationed in Egypt, Turkey,Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Oman, Pakistan and even Greece. The plansinclude buying advance tickets on more than one airline outof the area, filling personal cars with gasoline, studyingmaps for routes across the desert and topping off waterbottles in case employees are stranded in remote terrain.   And FMC orders that all company officials traveling within2,000 miles of Baghdad furnish full daily itineraries,including the phone numbers of restaurants where they plan totake clients to lunch.   A week after the invasion, FMC oil-equipment salesmanColin Jaring reroutes his trip into Oman to avoid acommercial airline flight over Saudi Arabia, where he fearsthere might be fighting. Instead, he flies in through Egyptand flies out over the United Arab Emirates.   He reports that Oman continues to yield hot salesprospects.   At 2 a.m. on invasion day, Aug. 2, Mark Ahn, FMC's foreignexchange manager, was awakened by his message beeper. HisLondon currency adviser warned that he should be makingtrades to protect FMC's monetary exchange portfolio in thewake of nervous fluctuations in the yen and several othercurrencies. By dawn, Mr. Ahn had spread FMC's exposure moreheavily into U.S. dollars and British pounds. By the time hearrived bleary-eyed in his office at 9 a.m., his day wasalready seven hours old.   Mr. McClung first heard of the invasion from the chauffeurof his hired limousine as he left a performance by theBolshoi ballet. He didn't know it, but FMC Chairman Malott,who was arranging a high-level meeting for the morning, wastrying to reach him at the same time from Aspen, Colo.   At first, Mr. McClung was speechless. He waited untilseeing the morning's TV news before starting to phonesubordinates, U.S. government officials and customers fromWashington to Khartoum, Sudan, seeking information onconditions in the Middle East.   Mr. Malott, an executive who has dined with both GeorgeBush and Mikhail Gorbachev, also desperately began seekinginformation, dipping into FMC's network of political andeconomic advisers from Washington to Istanbul.   But fresh facts from the Middle East have been rarer thanraindrops in that region. One midnight last week, an aide ofMr. Malott phoned FMC's representative in Dubai to get thelatest. All the Dubai representative could offer was hisinterpretation of what he had just seen on TV.   When the company does get news, it's often bad. The UnitedArab Emirates had been interested in buying dozens of FMCarmored vehicles for $1.5 million apiece, and the U.S. AirForce had agreed to transport one of them to the Emiratesthis week for a test drive. But the Pentagon informed FMClate last week that its planes would be busy transportingU.S. troops into Saudi Arabia.   FMC officials notified officers in the Emirates' army thattheir 10-day test drive must be postponed indefinitely. Thiswas a major disappointment for Mr. McClung, who had arrangedfor a half-dozen U.S. Army experts and 12 FMC armamentsspecialists to hold mini-war-games with the armored vehicles.They would train Emirates soldiers to drive them over sanddunes, blast away at a few junked cars and, of course,demonstrate how to adjust the air conditioning -- &quot;the wholedamned show.&quot;   FMC has many other concerns throughout the region. FMCofficials wondered briefly last week if their 200 industrialorange-juice squeezers on lease to Israel are in danger,should that country be drawn into the conflict. But Mr.Brady, who recently returned from the squeezing site,reported to Mr. Malott that the Israelis are prepared toprotect the area where the juicers are.   Then there's Iran. If Iran should somehow get involved inthe conflict, that could cause problems for FMC too, becauseFMC recently accepted a $15 million job to rebuildoil-shipping facilities in Iran -- a project that couldbecome an easy target for Iraq. Iranian involvement seemsless likely now, what with Iraq offering yesterday toformally settle the 1980-88 Iraq-Iran war. But before thatmove, FMC officials reviewed the wisdom of proceeding withthe Iranian contract. They decided to tell Iran that theywon't abandon contractual obligations, but that a lengthypostponement might be in order.   The contract could be canceled altogether if the PersianGulf conflict escalates. Mr. Malott wants no part of theMiddle East if Iraq starts using chemical weapons. &quot;In myjudgment, that will quickly start a tactical nuclear war. Thewhole area could blow up,&quot; he says.   Until the economic sanctions ordered by the U.S. (and manyother nations), Iraq had also been a customer for FMC'soil-production equipment and herbicides. But Iraq owes FMCabout $100,000. Before sending Saddam Hussein a dunningletter, FMC will seek payment from Iraq's European bankers.Its finance department expects to decide how to handle thisin the next month, depending on whether Saddam Hussein'sstaff is busy with a war.   As of invasion day, FMC was manufacturing equipment orparts to fill about 40 contracts with Kuwait, most of themfor petroleum-related equipment. What do they do with thatequipment now?   FMC officials cross-checked hundreds of contracts withcustomers in safer climes to see whether the parts made forthe Kuwaitis can be used by somebody else. Three days ofcrash research by FMC's department of international businessrevealed that out of a $4 million inventory destined forKuwait, all but about $500,000 worth can be used elsewhere.Some of the equipment was too tailor-made to substitute onother contracts.   Another issue faces the company: Should it close its300-employee oil-equipment plant in Singapore? All of itscurrent orders are from Kuwait. But instead of closing theplant, the company has decided to retool it to accelerateorders in its distant backlog from India and Indonesia, whichhave longstanding orders to be filled after the productionfor Kuwait is finished. &quot;You have to think that with oil upto $25 a barrel from $15, our customers won't want to wait,&quot;says Joseph Netherland, vice president of FMC's petroleummachinery business.   In fact, after studying rapidly changing world oilmarkets, FMC officials decided to go ahead with a $6 millionplan to expand oil-related manufacturing operations, an ideapreviously scheduled for discussion by directors in October.The move makes Mr. Malott, the CEO, uneasy. &quot;We haven't mademoney in the oil business for 10 years, but now there'sopportunity,&quot; he reasons.   That chance could dim fast if the Iraq crisis eases, heconcedes. But FMC is betting on its customers' gearing up forconsistently higher oil prices.   Together with all of the international crisis management,FMC is also preparing for economic consequences at home. Fornow, Mr. Malott is more worried about being overrun byinflation than Iraqi troops. The day of the invasion, heordered a halt to new long-term, fixed-price contractsanywhere in the world. &quot;I'm concerned that for the lastdecade, too few of our people on the firing lines have beenthinking about inflation. That's what you don't want to getcaught in the middle of,&quot; he says.   The invasion is throwing a wrench into FMC's plans torestructure about $150 million in adjustable-rate debt. OnAug. 2, &quot;interest rates were almost down to the level wewanted to switch with the banks to a fixed interest rate. Butnow the fixed rates have edged out of our desired range,&quot;says Mr. Schumann. &quot;So we're looking at an inflationary popfrom rising energy costs while we also have considerablefloating-interest-rate exposure. It isn't where we want tobe.&quot;   Rising fuel costs may prompt conservative FMC into a raregamble on energy futures trading, Mr. Schumann says. Much ofthe natural gas used in FMC factories is purchased in thespot market, where prices are soaring. &quot;We have to come togrips with our options,&quot; he says.   And even though aluminum prices haven't jumped yet, Mr.Schumann's staff is starting to buy long-term aluminumcontracts to ensure that it can make a profit on the promisedsticker price of armaments.   Mr. Schumann faxed orders to controllers at 30 plants fromCalifornia to Venezuela to tabulate dozens of scenarios fortheir expected costs of natural gas and diesel fuel. Heordered the calculations at oil prices from $15 to $35 abarrel. Those estimates are still pouring in and it willprobably be several weeks -- depending on whether fuel pricesstabilize -- before he can estimate how much FMC's profitmargins will erode this winter.   Meanwhile, Mr. Hoang, the director of internationalbusiness, monitors the Middle East via 18-hour days on thetelephone. Mr. Hoang, a former pilot in the air force ofSouth Vietnam, fires off orders to FMC officials en route toappointments in the troubled Persian Gulf region.   The night after the invasion, a salesman phoned from Paristo ask whether he should keep an appointment to pushherbicides in the Sudan the next day. &quot;Just get your businessdone and get out of there,&quot; Mr. Hoang replied.</TEXT></DOC>