<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900718-0139</DOCNO><DOCID>900718-0139.</DOCID><HL>   Now It's the Ukraine's Turn   ----   By Adrian Karatnycky</HL><DATE>07/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet declared the Ukraine asovereign state on Monday. The Ukrainian proclamationasserted the republic's right to create its own currency,raise its own army, collect tariffs and erect enforceableborders. The Ukrainian parliament served notice thatUkrainian citizens will fulfill their military service onlyon their own territory, expressed its preference that theUkraine become a neutral state outside the Warsaw Pact andrejected the &quot;production, deployment and use of nuclearweapons&quot; -- a big step for a region that is a major basingpoint for the Soviet nuclear force. Yet far from signalling adangerous lurch toward nationalist xenophobia, the Ukrainianparliament's action was an important victory for an emergingnon-communist patriotic movement, firmly rooted in democracy.   With a population of 52 million, the Ukraine is a majorchunk of the Soviet economy. The republic producesone-quarter of Soviet agricultural output, more than 40% ofthe Soviet Union's nuclear energy and some 10% of its coal.</LP><TEXT>   During the first three years of the Gorbachev era, from1985 until 1988, the Ukraine remained quiet under the rule ofBrezhnev crony turned Gorbachev ally, Vladimir Shcherbitsky.The republic learned silence from its immense suffering underStalin. Between 5 million and 7 million Ukrainians died atStalin's hand and each month brings reports of newlydiscovered killing fields, like Bykivnia near Kiev, whichholds as many as 300,000 victims.   But Ukrainian quiescence ended in 1988, when crowds of asmany as 200,000 began to gather in unsanctioned and oftenbrutally repressed rallies. An energetic, democratic reformmovement, the Ukrainian Popular Movement, or Rukh, appeared.   In the 10 months since it was founded, Rukh has emerged asa formidable political force. It now claims 3 millionsupporters. Most of Rukh's reform communist members have quitthe party.   When the Ukrainian parliament began meeting in May, Rukhmembers quickly turned it into a boisterous forum for radicalpolitical debate. Sessions were televised throughout therepublic. Nationalist deputies, more than a dozen of themformer long-term political prisoners, got a large publicaudience for the first time. In the nationalist hotbed ofLvov, a new newspaper, For a Free Ukraine, has been launched,with an initial print of 100,000. Dozens of samizdatnewspapers are proliferating at workplaces and in urbancenters, all of them spreading the message of Ukrainianindependence.   Public opinion is shifting toward non-communist forces.The call for self-determination has been propelled by theUkraine's mounting ecological crisis: the aftermath of theChernobyl nuclear accident, the poisoning of the Dnieper andDniester rivers and the rampant mining of uranium which hasplaced the Ukraine first in the world in oncologicalillnesses.   Western analysts have long differentiated between the morenationalist western Ukraine and the more Russified easternsegment. But Rukh leaders such as Orest Vlokh see a differentdichotomy emerging. &quot;Increasingly, the divide is not betweenEast and West, but between North and South,&quot; says Mr. Vlokh,a physicist and member of the Supreme Soviet. In thepredominantly rural southern Ukraine, the memory of Stalin'sterror, coupled with the legacy of domination by the OttomanEmpire, has long blocked the emergence of a normal civilsociety and political ferment.   Meanwhile, supposedly accommodationist east Ukrainiancities such as Kharkov are quickly radicalizing. Kharkov, a 1million-strong industrial center, once served as the capitalof the Bolshevik Ukrainian republic. But radicals andpro-independence forces won more than one-third of the city'sseats in the national parliament. Kharkov is home to a new,independent Ukrainian trade union confederation, Unity. Evenin the mining center of Donetsk, where nearly half thepopulation is Russian, the movement toward sovereignty isgaining. One independent miner's leader told me, &quot;The Ukraineis very rich. It has enormous economic potential. The Donbasworkers will support sovereignty and independence for theUkraine if it makes economic sense.&quot;   Even Ukrainian Communists are coming to realize that theycan no longer be protected by the center, a point driven homeby the recently concluded Party Congress in Moscow. Whilehardliners were staging a futile challenge to MikhailGorbachev, the Ukrainian parliament angrily took theunprecedented step of voting to recall the 63 Communist Partyparliamentarians &quot;who left for the congress without thesession's permission.&quot;   The Ukraine's Communists are seeking to cling to their ownbase of support and enhance their power by appealing to thepublic mood for self-determination. As such, they arerepeating a pattern that emerged twice before: in the 1920s,when Ukrainian National Communism led to a brief flowering ofUkrainian culture, and in the early '70s, when the Ukrainianparty's first secretary was purged on charges of promotingnationalism.   Mikhail Gorbachev has been slow to react to the risingnationalist unrest throughout his empire. He now confronts agrowing challenge in the Ukraine and elsewhere. Havingalready abandoned the idea of &quot;federalism,&quot; Mr. Gorbachev maywell be forced to retreat from his concept of a &quot;union ofsovereign republics&quot; and to embrace reluctantly the conceptof a confederation with a much diminished central government.   The Ukraine's re-emergence on the world stage is likely toprovoke profound unease among Western policy makers. This isnot Lithuania: The Ukraine is the linchpin in the Sovietempire. Yet now is precisely the right time for the West toestablish links to the Ukraine's emerging political leaders,who -- contrary to stereotypes -- are men and women ofmoderation, sincerely committed to the rights of nationalminorities, resolutely hostile to anti-Semitism andprofoundly devoted to the parliamentary road to democracy.They offer a vision of a peaceful evolution from an empire incrisis to a stable community of democratic European states.   ---   Mr. Karatnycky, director of research at the AFL-CIOdepartment of international affairs, is co-author of &quot;TheHidden Nations: The People Challenge the Soviet Union,&quot;coming this fall from Morrow.</TEXT></DOC>