<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910304-0146</DOCNO><DOCID>910304-0146.</DOCID><HL>   Technology:   Precise Navigation Points to New Worlds   ----   By Laurence Hooper and Jacob M. Schlesinger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   TRMB ROK G.BOS PIO PHG</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY andamp; PRODUCTION, QUALITY CONTROL (ITC)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   Since June, Kuni Fukui, the president of a Japanesemarketing firm, has cruised through the streets of Tokyo in asatellite-navigated Mazda. So far, a paper map might haveserved him better. The device &quot;has indicated too often that Iwas in the middle of Tokyo Bay,&quot; he says.   But such glitches probably won't be a problem for long.Precise navigation, once a complex task reserved for sailorsand navigators, has arrived for the masses. And just as thepocket watch wrought social change by making precise timewidely available, so a new satellite navigation network --combined with advances in electronic maps, informationstorage and nonsatellite location technologies -- promises torevolutionize ancient tasks.</LP><TEXT>   The possibilities are as broad as the human imagination:An electronic Yellow Pages that can give directions to thenearest Italian restaurant; an air-bag attachment thatautomatically guides police to crashed cars; an alarm systemthat warns oil tankers away from reefs.   Already, farmers are experimenting with the use of acomputer tuned to satellites to spread fertilizer moreaccurately. Last August in Montana, scientists andmanufacturers demonstrated a system that adjusted the mix ofsix fertilizers depending on a spreader's position in a50-acre wheat field.   A world-wide market for geographic information systems,which relate map data to other information, is growingquickly. Sales of the systems increased 29% to $1.41 billionin 1990 and will more than double by 1994, according toDataquest Inc., a market-research firm.   Spurring all this activity is a confluence of newtechnologies. First is the network of satellites known asGPS, for global positioning system. Conceived and controlledby the U.S. military, GPS now includes 16 satellites thatpermit people with receivers to pinpoint their positionsanywhere on Earth, 24 hours a day.   A GPS receiver incorporates a small computer that measuresthe reception of coordinated radio pulses beamed from severalsatellites. It then solves basic trigonometry problems todisplay a user's latitute and longitude. By mid-1993, thesystem should provide altitude data, too.   Most GPS receivers can also calculate a user's heading andspeed, as well as the direction and distance to any otherpoint on Earth. Unrefined GPS data is accurate to within 85feet or so; an additional signal allows military users towhittle that to 55 feet. Combining two or more receivers cancut errors almost to zero.   There's a hitch, though: Wary of giving enemies too muchhelp, the Department of Defense sometimes &quot;degrades&quot; the GPSsignal so that it's less accurate. The degradation can becountered with some effort, but the military's practice iscondemned by commercial receiver makers.   In addition to the satellite network, navigation-devicemakers can use several other methods to pinpoint locations.&quot;Dead reckoning,&quot; used by the German company Blaupunkt andothers, employs motion sensors and a compass to trackdistance and direction from an original position. Errors addup quickly, but a technique called map-matching improvesaccuracy.   Progress in basic computer technologies, from fastermicrochips to tiny liquid-crystal screens, has helped theindustry by miniaturizing the devices that use navigationinformation. In particular, the advent of compact disks meansthat large amounts of data -- all of Japan's major roads, forexample -- can be crammed onto a single disk for instantretrieval.   Operation Desert Storm may have been the navigationsystems' biggest test so far. U.S. troops have used hand-heldreceivers from Trimble Navigation Ltd., RockwellInternational Corp. and Magellan Systems Corp. to tap thesatellites and determine their locations in the featurelessdesert.   But well-heeled boaters have been using the receivers fora couple of years, and other consumer applications haveemerged as well. Earlier this month, Blaupunkt, a unit ofRobert Bosch G.m.b.H., unveiled the first mass-marketnavigation device for the U.S. The $3,495 TravelPilot allowsautomobile drivers to see where they are, and where they'regoing, on a 4 1/2-inch computer screen. Because it doesn'tuse satellite technology, it will work only in California atfirst; other major metropolitan areas will be added later inthe year.   Cars are a natural starting point for navigationtechnology. According to the Department of Transportation,$73 billion in productivity is lost every year in trafficcongestion. Navigation systems could be tied totraffic-management systems that warn of jams and suggestalternate routes. Car makers are also enthusiastic aboutdevices that direct drivers to, for example, the nearest gasstation or rest area.   In Pinellas County, Fla., ambulances operated by Lifefleetuse nonsatellite navigation devices to find unfamiliaraddresses in 25 communities. Since the devices also relaypositions to a dispatcher, the system makes it easier toensure that each call is taken by the nearest ambulance.&quot;Ultimately, it boils down to saved lives,&quot; says Lifefleet'sSue Tolliver.   Navigation devices also aid recordkeeping. MagellanPresident Randy Hoffman says his $2,500 gadgets have beenused in Nigeria to map guinea-worm infestation. Wildlifebiologist Laura Cockerham carries a Trimble receiver torecord the nesting locations of red-cockaded woodpeckers, aprotected species, in Florida's Ocala National Forest. Otherforest officials use the receiver to map trails, timber fellsand fires. &quot;This is really state-of-the-art for us,&quot; says Ms.Cockerham, who used to do the same job more slowly and lessaccurately with a map, a compass, some plastic grids and apencil.   Japan's Pioneer Electronic Corp. is considering ahand-held device for hikers and mountain climbers. Magellanalso wants to move into the recreation market. &quot;Our long-termvision is to see {satellite} receivers in the sporting-goodsdepartment of Kmart,&quot; says Mr. Hoffman.   Mike Ferguson, administrator of Montana's aviationauthority, hopes the devices become standard equipment inaircraft: After crash landing his airplane in a Utahsnowstorm last month, he determined his position with aTrimble receiver. Then he radioed the data to a planecircling overhead, which relayed the information to hisrescuers. &quot;We were able to guide them right in,&quot; says Mr.Ferguson.   Geographic information systems can also give businesses acompetitive edge. United Parcel Service of America uses oneto keep track of its trucks, and Burlington Northern Railroadhas one to make sure its trains don't collide.   Standardizing the format of geographic information remainsa problem, though. Several companies are scrambling to mapthe U.S., which remains startlingly undocumented at theelectronic level. An early leader is News Corp.'s Etak Inc.in Menlo Park, Calif., whose technology has been endorsed byGeneral Motors and Blaupunkt.   Position-fixing also has to overcome technical problems.Satellite positioning doesn't work underground or near tallbuildings. And some &quot;navigation&quot; systems, like Pioneer's newunit, available only in Japan, don't navigate; they just showusers where they are. Others, including Honda'sdead-reckoning system, present only a limited menu ofdestinations, such as historical landmarks.   Blaupunkt's new unit avoids these pitfalls, but its appealis limited by a hefty price tag and the need to register astarting point for every trip.   Manufacturers say their wares will catch on as navigationis tied into more functions. Pioneer's in-car system alreadyincludes data on nearby restaurants, for example, and Hondadrivers who have car phones can dial nearby hotels with asingle touch to the navigation screen.   N.V. Philips of the Netherlands even allows drivers tolisten to music on the same CD player they're using tonavigate. &quot;You can play Beethoven and Eindhoven at the sametime,&quot; crows Philips engineer Frans Op de Beek, referring tohis company's headquarters city.   ---   Richard L. Hudson in London contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>