<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920305-0058</DOCNO><DOCID>920305-0058.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS:   The Last Yiddish Linotype in America   ----   By Stanley W. Angrist</HL><DATE>03/05/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Holyoke, Mass. -- In English the headline on this storyreads &quot;The Last Yiddish Linotype in America.&quot; The type toproduce it was set on machine No. 23,211, built in 1918. (Seethe Yiddish headline -- WSJ March 5, 1992).   The story of this ancient Linotype tells a lot, inminiature, about the Yiddish language and its remarkablesurvival.</LP><TEXT>   Yiddish was the &quot;mameh loshen,&quot; or mother tongue, tomillions of Jews in Eastern Europe for centuries. It is afusion of German, Hebrew and Slavic languages written inHebrew characters. Like Hebrew, Yiddish reads from right toleft. Until recently the Yiddish language was thought by manyto be in the process of disappearing.   Machine No. 23,211 was in continuous service from the yearit was built in Brooklyn until 1991 at the Forverts, theJewish Daily Forward, at one time the largest Yiddishnewspaper in the world with a circulation during World War Iof about 200,000. Machine No. 23,211, along with eight othermachines, was used to set the type for the Forward in thepaper's building on East Broadway in Manhattan, and then onEast 33rd Street when the paper moved uptown in 1974.   Today, the machine has found a new home in this NewEngland town, which until recently wasn't known as a centerfor Yiddish. Improbably, here it sits on the fourth floor ofa rehabilitated warehouse in a decaying neighborhood -- stillspitting out lines of Yiddish type every day, just asthousands of Linotypes used to do all over the world indozens and dozens of languages.   Until Ottmar Mergenthaler began manufacturing Linotypemachines in 1884, the type used to print anything was set byhand, letter by letter, just as Gutenberg had done 500 yearsbefore. Mergenthaler's new machine probably was a bigger stepin printing technology than the recent application ofcomputers to printing. His invention allowed an operator atthe keyboard of a 3,000-pound clattering mass of pulleys,gears, power transmission belts, cams and, to top it all off,a pot of molten lead, to set type-one solid line at a time,typing as fast as possible.   Publishers, especially those who needed lots of words setinto type in a hurry, such as those who printed newspapers,found in the Linotype an answer to their dreams: A singleoperator sitting in front of Mergenthaler's machine becameequivalent, in terms of output, to a whole room of skilledcompositors setting type by hand.   Of course, technology doesn't stop. The nine YiddishLinotypes; a machine for setting headlines; a blast furnace;trim saws; six weighty cabinets of lead, brass and wood handtype; and tons of other equipment have all been replaced atthe Forward by a single Macintosh computer.   That No. 23,211 has not been melted down as scrap, thefate of its eight sisters, is due to the unflaggingdetermination of Aaron Lansky, president of the NationalYiddish Book Center, and his colleague Neil Zagorin.   In January 1991, Mr. Lansky received a call from HaroldOstroff, the Forward's general manager, telling him that thepaper needed the room in the basement where the Linotypes hadbeen operating because the English-language version of thepaper was growing. Because the machines are huge, theyoriginally had been brought into the basement through a holeknocked into the floor of the building. Mr. Ostroff, knowingwhat a job it was to get the machines into the building,assumed that Mr. Lansky would be content with removing akeyboard and perhaps a nameplate from one of the Linotypes.   The thought of taking a couple of mementos never crossedMr. Lansky's mind. Perhaps because of what he had been doingthe previous 10 years, he had other ideas about the fate ofat least one of those Linotypes. In 1979, Mr. Lansky took aleave of absence from graduate studies in Yiddish literatureat McGill University to try to save a fraction of the Yiddishbooks that were being destroyed each year as their ownersdied or moved to nursing homes.   In order to do that he created the National Yiddish BookCenter in Amherst, Mass., near where he had attended college.A panel of experts he assembled, all knowledgeable in Yiddishliterature, estimated that there were, perhaps, 70,000volumes extant in North America. Mr. Lansky collected thatnumber in the first eight months, and now, 12 years later,has saved well over a million volumes. And more books arriveevery day at the center's warehouse here.   So Mr. Lansky knew how to get to New York, Montreal oreven Atlantic City, N.J., in a hurry when someone would callhim with a tip on a load of books about to be thrown out. Butrescuing an intact Linotype clearly presented a greaterchallenge. &quot;There was never any doubt in my mind that weshould save an entire machine,&quot; he explains. His reason wassimple: &quot;What better way than the jangling and clanging of avintage Yiddish machine to make Jewish immigrant history comealive?&quot; He pauses and adds, &quot;The Jewish world has too manystatic exhibits.&quot;   But as he stood in the basement on East 33rd Streetsurveying these once firebreathing monsters (well, almostfirebreathing, considering the pot of molten lead) it was notimmediately apparent how he could move one to westernMassachusetts. Maybe it was luck (or divine intervention),but Mr. Lansky soon had the assistance of the man known asthe best hotmetal machinist in New York City. In three daysPaul Nash broke down the Linotype into about 1,000 pieceswhile Mr. Lansky and Mr. Zagorin trucked them to Holyoke eachnight.   While Mr. Nash was taking apart No. 23,211 the other eightmachines were being destroyed. &quot;If you wrote a novel youcould not describe the death of a culture any better thanthose three guys with stocking caps on their heads andcrowbars and sledgehammers in their hands,&quot; explains Mr.Lansky. He says not only was it sad but it also was &quot;scary,with shards of metal flying everywhere.&quot;   After the parts for No. 23,211 were spread on thewarehouse floor here, &quot;like dinosaur bones,&quot; reports Mr.Lansky, it dawned on him that Mr. Nash had neither numberedthem nor did he have an assembly drawing for the machine. Butwhen the machinist arrived he explained to Mr. Lansky thatsince he knew what the machine was supposed to do it was justa question of putting it together to make it do it. It tookhim only three days to bring No. 23,211 to life again.   The machine sits amid shelf after shelf of Yiddish books,about 750,000 at any one time, going through the process ofbeing cataloged by the center. Most of these books eventuallywill find their way to the major universities of the world,where more than 50 substantial programs in the Yiddishlanguage are now offered as young people seek to learn abouttheir roots.   Mr. Lansky says the machine couldn't be located in a morepropitious spot. He points out that since the Forward in itsday was the primary publisher, mostly in serial form, of theleading Yiddish writers, &quot;without a doubt many of thosewriters had their work set in type on this very machine. Thatmeans the machine is surrounded by its progeny.&quot;   The greatest satisfaction that the Linotype has evoked isfrom older visitors, many of whom are Holocaust survivors.&quot;They see the machine and the hundreds of thousands ofYiddish books and they don't believe it. They thought Hitlerhad destroyed this world,&quot; says Mr. Lansky, adding that manyof these visitors break into tears.   According to Mr. Lansky, the Linotype representshopefulness -- it shows that things can come back to life.&quot;It's a typographical &quot;golem&quot; {an automaton frequentlydepicted in Yiddish literature}. It can change the way Jewsthink about their history.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>