<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900716-0042</DOCNO><DOCID>900716-0042.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Polish Mistrust Threatens Border Talks   ---   Germany Is Angered   By Warsaw's New Demands   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   BONN -- Centuries-old Polish mistrust of German intentionshas flared anew, threatening a crucial meeting tomorrow thatis supposed to finally settle the issue of the German-Polishborder.   Foreign ministers of the two Germanys and the four WorldWar II allies will be meeting in their third session of theso-called two-plus-four talks aimed at resolvinginternational obstacles to German unification. The Polishforeign minister, invited to attend the meeting in an effortto settle the nagging border question, has instead raised newdemands.</LP><TEXT>   To Bonn's chagrin, Polish officials are demanding that theU.S., Soviet Union, France and Britain retain their remainingoccupation rights over Germany, even after unification, untilthe new German state signs a treaty with Poland thatrecognizes the current borders as permanent. Poland alsowants the treaty to end the West German practice ofrecognizing ethnic Germans in Poland as German nationals.   &quot;The Poles mistrust us greatly, and, we think, withoutreason,&quot; shrugged a senior West German official. &quot;They fearthat once the leverage of the two-plus-four process is gone,they will lose all leverage with us, and we will loseinterest in a border treaty. They don't want to negotiatealone with the Germans.&quot;   Indeed, Poland's newest demand came against a backdrop ofheightened political tensions between the two governments.West German officials believe it resulted from their decisionto cut off trilateral negotiations with the East Germans andPoles, against Warsaw's wishes, over a new draft state treatyon the border.   Bonn officials angrily responded to the Polish action asan unwanted distraction at a time when their greater problemwas winning Soviet approval for their unification plans.Chancellor Helmut Kohl flew to Moscow over the weekend to tryto knock down other remaining barriers posed by Soviet leaderMikhail Gorbachev, mostly involving opposition to Bonn'sdemands that a unified Germany stay in the North AtlanticTreaty Organization. Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genschersaid the West Germans would offer Mr. Gorbachev furthereconomic cooperation and a concrete number to which a unifiedGermany would reduce troop levels.   West German officials say Poland is demanding more thanBonn can give, thus acting as the de facto ally of the SovietUnion in mounting international barriers to Germanunification. Mr. Kohl's government insists that West Germanlaw requires that only a unified German state can finallysettle the border issue. And in an effort to satisfy Warsaw,both Germanys' parliaments this month declared theirrecognition of the present border.   But distrustful Polish officials argue those actionsaren't legally binding on either country now and certainlywouldn't obligate a reunified Germany. &quot;We have had enoughbad experience in Central Europe, and we want this issue tobe settled in as waterproof a manner as possible,&quot; said aPolish official.   Western officials believe the difference may be smoothedout tomorrow by offering Poland a statement promising thatthe border issue will be settled as the first order ofbusiness of a unified German Parliament in December. Mr. Kohlset the table for such a solution by sending a letter toPolish Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki citing Bonn'swillingness to undertake negotiations immediately afterDecember's all-German elections. Western diplomats say theycan't support Poland's new demands, despite sympathizing withthem, for that would only encourage more Sovietintransigence.   U.S. officials are also troubled by a more generalworsening in German-Polish relations. Ties had been warminguntil a November visit by Chancellor Kohl to Poland was cutshort when the Berlin Wall was opened. Since then, the warmthhas turned to suspicion, with Poland accusing the Germans ofignoring its interests and the Germans resentful that Warsawisn't actively supporting reunification.   German officials are impatient with Polish worries. Theytalk of a new economic curtain that could fall betweenGermany and Poland that might replace the Iron Curtain ifPoland doesn't clean up its economic house and recognize thatit is following a risky course in upsetting West Germany,perhaps its greatest hope for economic assistance.   &quot;We won't allow, under any conditions, that the Poles willdecide when and how we are to be unified,&quot; says Hans Klein, aBonn cabinet member and government spokesman.   German resentment of Poles has also grown discernibly,particularly in Berlin and East Germany, where thousands ofPoles have streamed through newly opened borders on shoppingtrips. The West Germans require visas for Poles, whileallowing other East Europeans to cross freely. One Polishofficial complains that West German officials are obsessedwith backing Mr. Gorbachev and his economy, recently offeringa guaranteed credit of five billion marks ($3.06 billion),while disregarding the danger of Poland's increasing economicdifficulties.   West German officials argue that they have done much forPoland. Chancellor Kohl has moved to forgive 700 millionmarks of Poland's official debt, and he agreed to place allrepayments of a further 500 million marks in loans in a fundto finance projects &quot;of mutual interest.&quot; German officialssay the Poles ignore Bonn's overwhelming commitment to thebilateral relationship and current borders.   Yet historic Polish concerns were heightened when, afterthe parliamentary resolutions of July 1, Bonn and East Berlinbroke off trilateral talks on a draft border treaty Polandhad drawn up.   West German officials say Mr. Kohl opposed Poland'sincluding in the draft treaty matters that would anger hisconservative constituency. They included a demand that WestGermany abandon its policy of offering German ethnic groupsin Poland benefits such as citizenship and pensions if theymove to Germany. Warsaw has also sought an agreement thatreparations be paid to Poles who served in forced labor campsduring World War II. This would be a costly concession forBonn, which estimates that two million Poles and Soviets whosurvived the camps are still alive.   For both countries, the border issue raises oldresentments and new animosities. Germans remember with angerhow Winston Churchill, at a dinner during the Tehran summitin 1943, used three matchsticks to demonstrate for Sovietdictator Josef Stalin how borders could be redrawn after thewar. He simply moved the matches westward.   Under an agreement reached at war's end, Poland moved outof eastern portions of its own country, which had beenannexed by the Soviet Union after the 1939 Hitler-Stalinpact. From the Ukraine, Byelorussia and Lithuania, 1.5million Poles trekked to the new frontier. Some 4.4 millionresettled from central Poland. Most of the 5.6 millionGermans in what became Polish territory were expelled. Fourmillion had already fled as refugees.   The Poles, six million of whom were killed during the war,regained from German territory only about half the land itlost to the Soviets. But it was valuable property. Itsfertile land had produced agricultural surpluses while itscoal mines produced a fifth of Germany's prewar production.</TEXT></DOC>