<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911015-0111</DOCNO><DOCID>911015-0111.</DOCID><HL>   Legacy of War:   The Battles Are Over,   But Gulf Environment   Still Fights for Its Life   ---   Oily Saudi Arabian Beaches   And Tarred Desert Lands   Are Given Scant Attention   ---   Progress Against Well Fires   ----   By Ken Wells   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)</NS><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><RE>AFGHANISTAN (AFG)ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)BAHRAIN (BA)BULGARIA (BU)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)INDIA (II)IRAN (IR)KUWAIT (KU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PAKISTAN (PK)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)TURKEY (TU)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   ADAFFI BAY, Saudi Arabia -- In the white-hot part of thedesert day, a dozen workers struggle with rakes and shovelsto rid a beach here of mounds of sea grass saturated withacrid crude oil.   Nearby, a bulldozer scrapes through a foot-thick frostingof oil that runs in a wide ribbon as far as the eye can see.In a few days, these efforts will have given a two-milestretch of this shore, near the port town of Jubail, back tothe bathers and the birds.</LP><TEXT>   That's two miles down -- and about 398 miles to go.   The world's biggest oil spill -- six million barrels --has largely disappeared from headlines but not from SaudiArabia's shores. Eight months after Saddam Hussein unleashedthe first known major act of eco-terrorism, much of thekingdom's coastline, from the port city of Jubail north toKhafji, remains smothered by crude.   The mess is catastrophic: Whole estuaries lie dead underasphalt-like slabs of oil. And little has been done about it,beyond the efforts of a handful of United Nation'scontractors armed with a small budget.   This mess isn't the only one left by the war, or the onlyone being largely ignored. Some Gulf regions languish in a&quot;hellish daily living environment,&quot; says the World Wide Fundfor Nature, a Geneva-based conservation group. Yet efforts tocoax governments and environmental groups into a coalition totackle the war's environmental legacy have thus far failed.   The breadth of damage is indeed staggering; some problemswill take decades to overcome. Though Kuwait's coastline wasspared heavy oiling, all but a few of its 180 miles remaininaccessible because of minefields and barbed-wire. Majorprogress has been made against the burning oil wells; some85% have been snuffed. But even with that, tons of pollutantscontinue to pour into the air daily, producing oily, acidrain in regions up to 1,500 miles away.   In Iran, officials have told visiting Greenpeacescientists, coastal regions across the Gulf from Kuwait havesuffered substantial crop damage from black rain. Thescientists also report black snow on numerous Iranianmountain peaks, says Nicolo Barcelo, a Greenpeace spokesman.   Similar reports have also come from Pakistan, where blackrains heavily damaged local wheat crops in the province ofBaluchistan, according to the Pakistani press. The WorldwatchInstitute, a Washington, D.C., environmental group, says italso has reliable reports of black rain or snow in Bulgaria,Turkey, the southern Soviet Union, Afghanistan and theHimalayan region of Indian Kashmir.   These areas are almost certain to be plagued by damagingacid rains as well, says Britain's Meteorological Office, agovernment weather arm that has done computer modeling ofsmoke-plume effects. Such rains, polluted with sulfur fromthe oil fires, have been linked to the slow destruction offorests, crops and lakes in many parts of the industrializedworld.   Most scientists maintain that the smoke isn't ascendinghigh enough to affect global climate. But some aren't sosure. Scientists at the U.S. National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration acknowledge that at least some &quot;spikes&quot; ofoil-fire soot have leaked into the upper stratosphere. Suchspikes, because they can't be rinsed out by localizedweather, could begin to affect global climate should theirconcentrations increase, the scientists say.   Closer to home, both Saudi Arabia and Bahrain, directlydownwind from the Kuwait plume, live under smog clouds.Khafji, less than 20 miles from the burning Burgan Field, isoften smothered in an acrid pall. Some residents who canafford to have moved away; one Saudi official says thegovernment has given serious thought to evacuating the town.   Kuwait fares little better. While the fires in the Ahmadifield near Kuwait City have been extinguished, many north andsouth of the nation's population hub continue to burn. Thismonth, as seasonal wind patterns begin to shift, the smogthat now bedevils Saudi Arabia will begin to descend onKuwait.   The gravest danger is on windless days, when stagnantconditions allow the smog -- containing sulfur dioxide,carbon monoxide and nitrous oxide -- to billow intopopulation centers. The short-term health hazard of such smogis so severe that Kuwaiti officials want to create an earlywarning system to tell citizens to scramble indoors ahead ofthe smoke pall, says Ibrahim Hadi, director of Kuwait'sEnvironmental Protection Council.   The oily fallout from the fires is also dumping vastamounts of pollutants into the Persian Gulf, the northernfishing grounds of which have already been decimated byspilled oil. These airborne pollutants are also posing athreat to Kuwait's and Saudi Arabia's water supplies, largelydrawn from Gulf desalination plants. At the core of thesepollutants are organic compounds that are difficult to filterout. When combined with chlorine used to disinfect water,they form compounds, known as chlorinated hydrocarbons, thatare carcinogenic.   The land is also taking a beating. The KuwaitiEnvironmental Action Team, a non-governmental group,estimates that up to 75% of Kuwait's desert floor has beencovered by oily fallout. Vast areas are being turned into theequivalent of parking lots as layer after thin layer of tarryprecipitate hardens in the desert heat.   Still more of Kuwait's desert has been rendereduninhabitable by minefields and vastly larger tracts in SaudiArabia and Iraq have been disrupted by the passage ofsoldiers and machinery that fought the war. Though some maythink of deserts as empty expanses of sand, scientists saythey are complex ecosystems dependent on an equilibriumachieved when scattered plant colonies anchor a thin layer oftopsoil. Severely disturbed, &quot;a lot of the desert will simplyblow away,&quot; destroying wildlife habitat and sparse farmlandand possibly overrunning roads and towns, says CharlesPilcher, a researcher who has studied the wildlife of theKuwaiti desert.   Temperatures in the Kuwaiti and Saudi deserts were 10degrees cooler than normal most of the summer, and up to 25degrees cooler under the thickest part of the haze. Coloniesof desert plants requiring strong sunlight are dying or goinginto premature reproductive cycles. The same is true ofdesert mammals and reptiles, says Dr. Pilcher.   Even swallows common to the summer fields of the Westaren't immune. Scientists with Britain's InternationalCouncil for Bird Preservation say recent studies of migratorybank swallows currently flapping across the Kuwaiti desertshowed that 90% had been oiled. The birds, en route to wintergrounds in Africa, apparently had tried to drink from one ofthe 200 or so oil lakes formed from the overflow fromsabotaged wells, the group says. He says that 1.5 billionbirds migrate across the northern Arabia flyway.   Yet except for the oil-well fires and some mine-clearingefforts, few of these problems have been addressed. Kuwait,for example, has only just started work around the edges ofits oil lakes, even though much of the oil, were it removedpromptly, could be recycled.   Saudi Arabia's response to the Gulf oil spill has beenjust as lackluster. Saudi Aramco, the state-owned oilcompany, along with international volunteers, quicklymobilized wartime oil-spill-containment efforts to protectdesalination and power plants and refineries. But SaudiArabia has largely left its 400 miles of oil-soaked beachesfor nature to deal with. It only recently put its first crewto work on a small stretch of beach near Jubail.   Projects such as the one at Adaffi Bay have been carriedout by a handful of Western contractors working for theU.N.'s International Maritime Organization. Their $6 millionbudget is drawn from foreign contributions, says Dave Usher,an IMO official. The far smaller 1989 Exxon Valdez spill inAlaska spill attracted 11,000 workers and a $2.5 billioneffort.   Saudi officials contend money is the problem: Theyestimate that the tab to rid the entire coastline of oilcould run to $500 million, which they insist is a big sum fora nation still strapped by billions in war debts. They alsocontend that the spill, set off by an act of war, shouldn'tsolely be a Saudi Arabian responsibility.   The cleanup effort the country did muster during the warwas narrowly directed at protecting its coastalinstallations. Its six desalination plants not only representa billion-dollar-plus investment but were key to providingdrinking water to the 500,000 Western troops here, says aspokesman for the country's Meteorological and EnvironmentalProtection Administration. By ridding the Gulf of floatingoil -- about 1.5 million barrels were recovered, a record forany spill -- Saudi Arabia also largely extinguished thethreat that roaming oil posed to its coastline, the spokesmanargues.   At best, Saudi scientists think that shore areas that haveunusual environmental value will be tackled in the next stageof the cleanup. Other areas -- huge stretches of the northernSaudi Arabian coastline subject to constant wind and waveaction -- will probably be left to nature. &quot;Fortunately orunfortunately, large sections of the shore don't have verymuch use. Therefore nobody is complaining that they should becleaned up,&quot; says Abdallah E. Dabbagh, director of King FahdUniversity's Research Institute, which is conducting spillstudies.   The kingdom's failure thus far to act on its beaches hasevoked dismay among the many U.S. scientists and spillexperts here. They say the delay -- in part, environmentalapathy, in part a function of the bureaucracy -- may bothcomplicate recovery and exacerbate the harm done by previousspills, industrial pollution and land reclamation. While muchof the heavily weathered surface oil on the kingdom's coasthas lost its toxicity, storms and high tides are constantlyloosing settled oil back into the Gulf, posing danger anew tobirds and other sea life.   &quot;The Saudis' plan was A, we protect the `desal' plants, B,we get oil off the water, and C, we then worry about ourbeaches,&quot; says a U.S. government consultant here. &quot;What wetried to tell them is that typically, you would begin to tryto save your beaches at the same time you are doing theseother things. The concept of delaying for months while you dostudies is ludicrous.&quot;   The price of this neglect is high. Much of Saudi Arabia'sonce bird-rich intertidal zone is an oily wasteland. Saltmarshes and tidal flats -- the nursery grounds for shrimp andthe very womb of the Persian Gulf food chain -- sit poisonedby tar. An estimated 80% of Saudi Arabia's coastal mangroveswamps are dead or dying.   Yet one environmental success story shows that speedyintervention on beaches can pay big dividends. When oil begansmothering the shores of a chain of small, coral-ringedislands off the coast of Jubail, Saudi Arabia's NationalCommission for Wildlife Conservation and Development cutthrough red tape to allow U.N. and U.S. military crews ontothe islands by March. The low-lying islands are not onlysurrounded by perhaps the clearest water in the Persian Gulf,but they are also the predator-free rookeries for hugecolonies of terns and two species of sea turtles.   Focusing on Karan, the largest island, crews within dayshad scraped tons of thickening oil from the beaches and hadrounded up and burned perhaps a half century of debris. Bythe time terns and turtles began showing up for their annualnesting season, they found a habitable environment &quot;insteadof an oily death trap,&quot; says Peter Symens, a Belgianornithologist studying the spill.   About 65,000 chicks subsequently hatched on Karan, and asmany as 40 turtles a night have been returning to the island;their fate, had the island been left covered in oil, wouldhave been grim. Says Peter Vine, a British ecologist in theGulf: &quot;We're talking about turtles perhaps 50 to 70 years old-- born before oil was produced in the Gulf.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>