<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910506-0125</DOCNO><DOCID>910506-0125.</DOCID><HL>   Universities Must Defend Free Speech   ----   By Benno C. Schmidt Jr.</HL><DATE>05/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><LP>   The most serious problems of freedom of expression in theU.S. today exist on our campuses. Freedom of thought is indanger from well-intentioned but misguided efforts to givevalues of community and harmony a higher place than freedom.The assumption seems to be that the purpose of education isto induce &quot;correct&quot; opinion rather than to search for wisdomand to liberate the mind.   On many campuses, perhaps most, there is little resistanceto growing pressure to suppress and to punish, rather than toanswer, speech that offends notions of civility andcommunity. These campuses are heedless of the oldest lessonin the history of freedom, which is that offensive, erroneousand obnoxious speech is the price of liberty. Values ofcivility, mutual respect and harmony are rightly prizedwithin the university. But these values must be fostered byteaching and by example, and defended by expression. When thegoals of harmony collide with freedom of expression, freedommust be the paramount obligation of an academic community.</LP><TEXT>   Much expression that is free may deserve our contempt. Wemay well be moved to exercise our own freedom to counter itor to ignore it. But universities cannot censor or suppressspeech, no matter how obnoxious in content, without violatingtheir justification for existence. Liberal educationpresupposes that a liberated mind will strive for the courageand composure to face ideas that are fraught with evil, andto answer them. To stifle expression because it is obnoxious,erroneous, embarrassing, not instrumental to some politicalor ideological end is -- quite apart from the invasion of therights of others -- a disastrous reflection on the idea ofthe university. It is to elevate fear over the capacity for aliberated and humane mind.   Two decades ago, in a time of turmoil on campuses,unpopular speakers were hounded down, harassed, and preventedfrom delivering such messages as support for the Vietnam War,opposition to the civil-rights movement, or obscure theoriesabout the genetic roots of intelligence.   Ever since, universities have lived with the threat ofdisruption whenever anyone comes to campus with acontroversial message. The first victims of such suppressionare the students and faculty who do not have their ownconvictions tempered by exposure to other points of view,even if ultimately unpersuasive. But the more serious loss issuffered by the university, because these acts of suppressiontend to contribute to a pall of conformity.   The freedom of such speakers on our campuses goes to theheart of academic freedom. However bizarre, off-beat, oroutrageous a speaker may be, however compelling the concernsof protesters, the right to speak is as fundamental an issueof principle as any campus can face.   This is why I believed so strongly that essentialprinciples of academic freedom were violated at Yale, thoughnot by Yale, earlier this year when protesters, for the mostpart not from Yale, shouted down Health and Human ServicesSecretary Louis Sullivan and effectively prevented him frommaking himself heard to a group that had invited him tospeak.   A more vexing question of freedom of expression concernsthe actual use of university authority to suppress freedom.This is the most serious example of confusion and failure ofprinciple in university governance today. It reminds us howfrequently in history threats to free expression have comenot from tyranny but from wellmeaning persons of littleunderstanding.   There is no more important line drawn in our entire corpusof First Amendment law than the line between threats andfighting words -- which may be appropriately punished -- andoffensive speech generally. For if concerns about dangers ofviolence are permitted to balloon into justification forpunishing any expression that offends, a vague andunpredictable engine of suppression is loosed. Freeexpression is lost. Any statement that might give offense isat risk.   Yet in many universities this is the critical line thathas been blurred or abandoned in the effort to create acivil, inoffensive community. Some of the nation's finestuniversities have empowered groups of faculty and studentswith roving commissions to punish offensive speech.   At the University of Michigan, before judicialintervention, persons were subject to discipline for anystatement that &quot;stigmatizes or victimizes . . . on the basisof race, ethnicity, religion, sex, sexual orientation, creed,national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, handicap, orVietnam era veteran status . . . that creates anintimidating, hostile, or demeaning environment foreducational pursuits.&quot; A pamphlet that listed examples ofproscribed speech included &quot;a male student makes remarks inclass like `women just aren't as good in this field as men.'&quot;Another: &quot;Your student organization sponsors a comedian whoslurs Hispanics.&quot; So along with utterly boundless options ofoffensiveness, we have guilt by association. A federal judgethrew this out.   The University of Wisconsin promulgated a prohibition of&quot;racist or discriminatory comments . . . that intentionallydemean the race, sex, religion {etc.} of any person orpersons . . . and create a hostile or demeaning environmentfor education.&quot; Its disciplinary code indicates that &quot;jokesthat have the purpose of making the educational environmenthostile&quot; are an example of the sort of thing that is barred.   The University of Pennsylvania prohibits any comments that&quot;stigmatize or victimize individuals on the basis of race{etc.} and that create an . . . offensive academic, living,or work environment.&quot; The University of Connecticut hadprohibitions on speech that included &quot;conduct causing alarmby making personal slurs.&quot; The ban extended to&quot;inappropriately directed laughter, inconsiderate jokes . . .and conspicuous exclusions {of others} from conversation.&quot;This too was narrowed after a judicial challenge.   In the recent Brown case that has received such widespreadattention, press accounts might justify the view that thestudent who was punished had directly and intentionallythreatened other individuals with violence. This can surelybe punished. The problem is that the Brown rule under whichdiscipline was imposed forbids students from subjecting&quot;another person, group, or class of persons to inappropriate,abusive, threatening, or demeaning action based on race,{etc}.&quot;   Under this wide-open formulation, a group of students,faculty and administrators can decide after the fact whenspeech should be treated as &quot;inappropriate action.&quot; Thus,although the facts of the particular case may well have beenwithin the very narrow prohibition of threats thatfree-speech theory and practice have long accepted aslegitimate, the rule that authorized this discipline seemsvastly wider, indeed almost boundless.   The chilling effects on speech of the vagueness andopen-ended nature of many universities' prohibitions ofoffensive speech are compounded by the fact that these codesare typically enforced by faculty and students who commonlyassert that vague notions of community are more important tothe academy than freedom of thought and expression. Such aview is disastrous to the independence and creativity of theacademic mission.   A sad footnote to this erosion is the complacency withwhich many who ought to know better are responding, orfailing to respond. An editorial in the New York Times tookthe position that because Brown is a private university, andtherefore not bound by the First Amendment, it need not treatfree expression as a paramount value and should thereforebalance the needs of freedom and the needs of civility oncampus.   This is profoundly wrong. A university ought to be moredevoted to freedom than the larger society, which has othergoals that compete with the search for truth. This search isthe paramount end of the university, its reason forexistence. Moreover, universities have a special capacity toanswer obnoxious speech. The communal character of theuniversity, the fact that it is replete with opportunitiesfor expression, the capacity of students, faculty, deans andpresidents to answer forcefully and promptly, all presentmanifold opportunities to counter offensive expression.   Decades of First Amendment adjudication have shown thatvague balancing formulas of the sort the Times is ready toapprove for universities are, even in the hands ofdisciplined judges, a disaster for freedom. What can weexpect of such formulations in the hands of students andfaculty, however well-meaning?   The current wave of suppression is largely directed atexpression that is said to demean racial minorities, women,gays and lesbians, religious groups, persons withdisabilities, and other groups that tend to be victimized byugly stereotypes. Racism and other such prejudices areantithetical to the academic mission of the university,because the search for truth requires that each individual inthe university be judged on the basis of his or herindividual academic merits. But it does not follow that theuniversity should suppress any speech that can plausibly bethought to be racist. A university ought to be the last placewhere people are inhibited by fear of punishment fromexpressing ignorance or even hate, so long as others are leftfree to answer.   I have often heard the argument lately that uninhibitedfreedom of speech was somehow more appropriate in the dayswhen our universities were more homogeneous, while today'sfar greater racial, religious and cultural diversity call forcontrols in the interest of harmony and community. That somany people of good will would make such an argument showshow far we have drifted from our confidence in and commitmentto freedom. I can only imagine what Madison or Holmes wouldhave thought of this inversion of the theory of freeexpression. It is precisely societies that are diverse,pluralistic, and contentious that most urgently need freedomof speech and freedom of religion.   The courts have begun to see bits of the problem thatsurface occasionally in legislation, and by and large havereacted with justified bewilderment. But the last placeuniversities should look for protection of freedom is thecourts. Private universities are in most cases not covered bythe First Amendment because their actions are not those ofthe state. And judges will properly tend to approach issuesof freedom within universities with much deference based onlong traditions of academic autonomy.   Nor does the answer to these problems lie in federallegislation. Rep. Henry Hyde, with the support of the ACLU,has proposed a statute that would subject private collegesand universities that receive federal funds to the stricturesof the First Amendment. This is well-intentioned but verydangerous. The political process is too prone to agitationabout various sorts of speech to be a wise and stable sourceof enduring principle. If freedom of thought on campus is tobe protected, the universities themselves must summon up theclarity of purpose to defend the principles of liberty onwhich the academic mission must rest.   ---   Mr. Schmidt is president of Yale. The article is adaptedfrom a longer speech delivered at New York's 92nd Street Y.</TEXT></DOC>