<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900424-0078</DOCNO><DOCID>900424-0078.</DOCID><HL>   Law:   Plea Bargains Must Balance Rewards   Vs. Risks in Settlements Such as Milken's   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   After all the buildup, the government's case againstMichael R. Milken is scheduled to end today with a pleabargain.   But as the government prepares to drop most of its 98charges against the former Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.junk-bond chief and to scrap a broader new indictment, aquestion looms large: Do plea bargains serve the public'sinterest in learning the full scope of alleged crimes andseeing justice done?</LP><TEXT>   The plea bargain in this case will make the extraordinaryMr. Milken quite ordinary by courtroom standards: More than90% of all criminal defendants plead guilty to lesser chargesto avoid facing trial.   And regular participants in the justice system seem tolike things that way. For prosecutors, says Benito Romano, aformer U.S. attorney in New York, plea bargaining &quot;is aneffort to spare the expenditure of precious resources --courtrooms, prosecutors and judges -- and still achieve adisposition that does justice.&quot;   For defendants, pleas eliminate the risks of trials,narrow the charges and generally result in shorter prisonterms than a judge would mete out after a conviction attrial. &quot;Plea bargaining is really a way to resolve conflictin a way where you can contain and better control theconsequences of a conviction,&quot; says New York defense lawyerStanley Arkin.   Although criminal cases are typically described as &quot;ThePeople&quot; vs. such-and-such defendant, many prosecutors anddefense lawyers minimize the significance of the public'sinterest and say that general curiosity about the details ofan investigation shouldn't bear on whether a plea bargain isstruck.   &quot;The public clearly has an interest in what the facts areof investigations and the right to know whether prosecutorsare doing their job,&quot; says Aaron Marcu, a former prosecutorin the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office who is now a defenselawyer. But Mr. Marcu says the public shouldn't have a voicein deciding whether a particular case ought to end in a pleabargain because &quot;the public doesn't usually know all thefacts, and it has entrusted these decisions to prosecutors.&quot;   Adds Mr. Romano, &quot;The rights of the individual defendantare more important&quot; than the interest of the public.   That's not a view that sits easily with some critics.&quot;What is the point of the taxpayers having spent millions ofdollars investigating cases if the material the governmentuncovers is then to be swept under the rug?&quot; asks Benjamin J.Stein, a Los Angeles attorney and economist who is a longtimecritic of the government's handling of insider-tradingissues. &quot;It's in the constitution that trials should beopen.&quot; A regular contributor to Dow Jones andamp; Co.'s Barron's,Mr. Stein's open letter opposing a plea bargain in the Milkencase appeared in the magazine this week.   &quot;If I had my way, I'd have everyone go to trial,&quot; says NewYork defense lawyer Bruce Cutler, who represents John Gottiand others whom the government has called alleged mobsters.&quot;Pleas help the system along, and I'm not in favor of doingthat. I believe the government ought to try its cases, so I'min favor of fighting.&quot;   Critics argue that plea bargains often create the falseimpression that a defendant committed only the crimes towhich he agreed to plead guilty. In fact, plea bargains arenegotiated compromises and defendants usually plead guilty tofewer crimes than the government believes they committed orto lesser charges.   Often, the government attempts to combat the impressionthat the defendant committed only a few minor offenses byunveiling details of additional allegations in sentencingmemos that are presented to the judge. The thinking is thatthe judge -- and the public -- should be aware that thegovernment was prepared to bring broader charges against thedefendant if he had refused the plea agreement.   This effort to shape the public perception of aprosecution spawned a heated dispute in the government'srecent case against Robert Freeman. The former head ofarbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. had been arrested in ahighly publicized incident, amid indications from thegovernment that he had been involved in a hugeinsider-trading scandal. But Mr. Freeman ultimately pleadedguilty last year to one felony count of using insideinformation under circumstances that made his crime appear tosome to be of little significance.   In an effort to dispel that impression and give the judgean idea of the potentially broader charges that might havebeen brought, the government alleged in a sentencing memothat Mr. Freeman committed some 20 other similar crimes. Butthe judge ruled in that case -- at the request of Mr.Freeman's lawyers -- that he wouldn't consider or release theadditional allegations in sentencing Mr. Freeman. The judgesaid he wanted to avoid a lengthy hearing in which eachcharge would have to be debated.   Prosecutors in the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattandecline to comment on why they were willing to strike a pleabargain with Mr. Milken, who was charged last year with 98counts of racketeering and securities and tax fraud. (Hisdeal requires him to plead guilty to six felony counts, noneof them involving racketeering or insider trading.)   But prosecutors and defense lawyers not involved in thecase say that while the government won't be able to show asomewhat skeptical public that it had a broad andwell-documented case against Mr. Milken, the benefits ofaccepting his plea outweigh the risks of public criticism.   &quot;Here's a man who's been saying for four years he wasinnocent and now he's agreeing to plead to six felonycounts,&quot; says Washington, D.C., defense lawyer Harvey Pitt,who represented stock speculator Ivan F. Boesky in hisinsider trading-related plea bargain in 1986.   Mr. Pitt says Mr. Milken's plea &quot;is an admission of guiltthat vindicates the whole prosecutorial effort here.&quot; He addsthat the plea sends out a sign to future defendants that theManhattan U.S. attorney's office &quot;is an office to be reckonedwith.&quot;   Additionally, prosecutors benefit from the Milken pleabargain by avoiding the expense and inherent risk of going totrial against a defendant with nearly unlimited resources anda powerful legal team. A trial could have dragged on foryears, and even if Mr. Milken had been convicted, he probablywould have appealed.   It might have taken the government many years to get thehundreds of millions of dollars of fines and restitution itsought. The plea agreement ensures instead that thegovernment will quickly get the $600 million Mr. Milkenpromised to deliver.   On a more personal level, prosecutors who have beenworking on the case for nearly four years have made it clearthat they would like to leave their relatively low-payingpublic jobs for lucrative partnerships at private law firms.While such considerations may not have been paramount, theywere no doubt a factor, many current and former prosecutorsagree.   Few plea bargains in cases of this magnitude get made,however, unless the defendant agrees to cooperate with thegovernment in taking its investigation further. Often, thegovernment will use plea bargains to turn defendants intowitnesses in cases it is trying to build against moreprominent targets.   The Milken plea bargain, too, requires him to cooperate.But for several years it has appeared that Mr. Milken was thegovernment's prime target in its insider-tradinginvestigation. So the question will be raised whether the bigcase -- the one against the master of the junk-bond market --should have gone to trial.   Indeed, Mr. Milken himself had always made clear that hewanted the government to have to prove its charges publiclyin a trial by jury. But even he succumbed to the lure of acompromise.   By pleading guilty, Mr. Milken avoids a drawn-out legalbattle and the risk of a conviction on racketeering charges,which carry maximum prison terms of up to 20 years. He alsogets to serve his time immediately and get on with his lifemore quickly than if he first had to face a trial and anappeal.   Moreover, by accepting a deal, Mr. Milken avoids thefurther barrage of media attention that a trial would surelybring. And his plea bargain makes it less likely that thepublic will ever know precisely what he did wrong -- and whyhe became the target of the largest securities fraudinvestigation ever.</TEXT></DOC>