<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910502-0030</DOCNO><DOCID>910502-0030.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>05/02/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   ANGOLA INITIALED a peace agreement with the U.S.-backedUnita rebels.   The 1,500-page accord to end the 16-year-old civil war,reached after Portuguese-mediated peace talks, calls for aninternationally monitored cease-fire to take effect in Juneand multiparty elections in 1992. The pact was initialed bythe Luanda government's chief negotiator in Portugal and bythe vice president of Savimbi's Unita. The two sides haveuntil May 15 to communicate their final acceptance of theaccord.</LP><TEXT>   A State Department official said Washington and Moscowwere bound by the truce accord to suspend their deliveries ofmilitary aid to Unita and the governing MPLA, respectively.   ---   A KURDISH LEADER SAID Iraq agreed to hold a multipartyvote in six months.   Jalal Talabani, a member of the Iraqi Kurdistan Front,also said Baghdad officials agreed to abolish the rulingRevolutionary Command Council, with a freely electedParliament supplanting other governing bodies. Speaking tothe British Broadcasting Corp., Talabani said he had securedan amnesty for Kurdish and Shiite prisoners captured duringuprisings after the Gulf war. He said his delegation expectedto meet with Iraqi officials again next week.   Allied military forces plan to expand a security zone innorthern Iraq today, pushing 25 miles east to secure an areafor a second camp to shelter refugees.   ---   The death toll soared from Tuesday's cyclone inBangladesh. News agencies in the country estimated that25,000 to 50,000 people may have died during or after theeight-hour storm. The government said it knew of only about3,000 deaths but acknowledged its reports were incompletebecause of severe communications problems.   ---   South Korean protesters battled with riot police in 13cities on the third day of anti-government demonstrations. InSeoul, dozens of people were injured and at least 170protesters were arrested. President Roh pledged that he wouldstop the violence, which was sparked by last week's fatalbeating of a student by police.   ---   Gorbachev presided over a somber May Day parade inMoscow's Red Square while rival Yeltsin signed an accord inSiberia to transfer control of mines from the Kremlin andperhaps end a coal strike. There were reports that ex-PremierRyzhkov plans to challenge Yeltsin for the Russian republic'spresidency in June elections.   ---   An explosion devastated a fertilizer plant in Louisiana,killing two people, leaving at least seven missing andinjuring more than 120, officials said. The blast shookbuildings eight miles away, a witness said, and promptedevacuation of the town of Sterlington. Authorities wereseeking to determine if chemicals were released into the air.   ---   FDA and industry inspectors are testing tons of importedfruits, vegetables and fish for possible contamination from acholera outbreak that has killed more than 1,300 people inSouth America. So far, no cholera has been found on foodlegally imported from the region and U.S. officials said theysee little threat to American consumers.   ---   Four Israeli parties threatened to topple Prime MinisterShamir's ruling coalition if Israel makes concessions on thenumber of proposed Mideast peace conference sessions. Theright-wing and religious parties said they will leave thegovernment if it agrees to more than one meeting of aregional peace conference.   ---   Medical researchers implanted an artificial insulin-makingpancreas into dogs, an advance that could someday transformtreatment of diabetes. If it can be successfully implanted inhumans, the device could enable diabetics to control glucoseor blood-sugar levels without daily injections of insulin.   ---   Five thousand Lebanese soldiers entered the Christian andDruse areas of Lebanon to dismantle sectarian strongholdscarved out by militias during 16 years of civil war. Thedeployment didn't cover territory in eastern Lebanon and thesouth, where pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim groups are entrenched.   ---   Britain's House of Commons put down a challenge to itsauthority by the unelected House of Lords over a bill toprosecute alleged Nazi criminals. In what was viewed as themost serious clash between the two houses in four decades,the government said it would push a war-crimes bill throughthe Commons, bypassing the upper house.   ---   Cambodian government forces struck insurgent positions incentral and western Cambodia, just as a cease-fire was tobegin, the rebels said. A guerrilla spokesman reported thatlong-range artillery of the Vietnamese-backed governmentattacked Prince Sihanouk's non-Communist rebels in KompongThom province.   ---   Col. Elias Ramaema was sworn in as the military ruler ofthe southern African state of Lesotho, succeeding JustinLekhanya, who was ousted in an army coup on Tuesday. Lekhanyahad headed the government since seizing power in a 1986 coup.   ---   Forty people were killed and more than 50 wounded inguerrilla attacks in southern Mozambique within the pastweek, and some 2,000 refugees fled into South Africa seekingsanctuary, Pretoria officials reported.   ---   Died: Frank N. Ikard, 78, former Texas Democraticcongressman and ex-president of the American PetroleumInstitute, in Washington, of complications after recentsurgery to remove a kidney.</TEXT></DOC>