<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900831-0149</DOCNO><DOCID>900831-0149.</DOCID><HL>   Elegy in a Greek Graveyard   ----   By Joseph Amiel</HL><DATE>08/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><LP>   The taxi was carrying me this summer from the airport intoThessaloniki, Greece's second-largest city. All I had was anaddress to start from, the address of the city's Jewishcommunity center. I had heard before my trip that the recordsof the Jews from the nearby city of Kavala, where my fatherwas born, were kept there.   In 1492 King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella expelled fromSpain all Jews who refused to convert to Catholicism, amongthem leading doctors, scholars, artisans and merchants.Non-converts who remained behind would be killed. Turkey'spragmatic sultan was delighted, as he put it, to &quot;enrich&quot; hisempire, which then included Greece, by offering the exilesrefuge.</LP><TEXT>   For more than four centuries, these Jews thrived in Greeceunder Turkish rule. By 1910 Thessaloniki had a Jewishpopulation of 65,000, half the city's inhabitants, and was acenter of Sephardic (Hebrew for &quot;Spanish&quot;) Jewish culture.But the ravages of World War I and the fears of anti-Semitismafter Greece retook its northeast from Turkey caused many ofthe region's Jews to emigrate west, among them my 12-year-oldfather and his family.   My father relished America's freedom to climb as high ashis talent could take him, achieving success as a Broadwayrestaurateur and the owner of a Kentucky-Derby-winningracehorse. After his death four years ago, I began to sense adisquiet within me, a murky longing to know my heritage, tofind my place in the long line of men who handed our namealong, one to the next.   The Jewish Center in Thessaloniki (also known as Salonika)turned out to be a surprisingly bustling place, surprisingbecause the Nazis who occupied the city during World War IIdeported and slaughtered nearly all the city's Jews, over46,000. Less than 2,000 returned alive from the death camps,and only some 1,300 reside in the city now; according toAthens's Jewish Museum, only 6,000 Jews are left in all ofGreece. But in the rich tradition of its history,Thessaloniki's Jewish Center runs two schools, an old-agehome, a children's summer camp, a community center and amedical clinic. One synagogue survived the war -- because theRed Cross was using it.   When I inquired about Kavala, an official at the centersadly informed me that no Jews were left there and, as inThessaloniki, there were no records. The Nazis had plowedunder the cemeteries and burned all the records, intent onobliterating not only the Jewish people, but every memory oftheir existence. My paternal past had been made invisible.   One older man at the community center, however, rememberedthat a Jewish cemetery remained in Kavala because it waswithin a Christian cemetery. Perhaps there I could find myfamily's graves. That would be something, I thought --enough. I hired a taxi for the hundred-mile trip.   My driver, Stavros, pointed out seaside condominiums alongthe way that housed residents from other countries,particularly from Germany. He spoke no English and I noGreek. He kept trying to communicate in German. I dredged upthe few German words I had picked up from books and moviesand fewer Yiddish ones learned as a child from my mother'smother. (&quot;Ja, Stavros, mein fater geborn in Kavala.&quot;) Ironypiled on painful irony.   Kavala turned out to be picturesque, situated on hillsthat embrace beaches and a long harbor. Stavros snapped aphoto of me on the quay in front of the old Turkish quarter,fortress -- helmet atop it, which thrusts into the sea toguard the city. Then we drove beneath an arch of the aqueductbuilt by Suleiman the Magnificent and along the coast road tothe Greek Orthodox cemetery.   A Jewish graveyard was indeed inside it, but enclosed byhigh walls and a locked gate. Some Jews in Thessaloniki hadthe key, I was told. No one had visited or tended the placein years.   I had come too far to be blocked now. A worker was talkedinto bringing a ladder, which I climbed. Spread below me wasan enclave about 40 yards square filled with rows ofrectangular above-ground tombs, each about three feet high.Some had collapsed or been vandalized. To one side was amarble cenotaph, a memorial to Kavala's Jews rounded up forextermination in 1943. A sad serenity hung on the trees likecrepe.   Descending into the enclave, I moved slowly from one graveto the next, trying to read the names carved in Hebrew orRoman script on the marble and concrete slabs, trying to find&quot;Amiel&quot; or &quot;`Abravaya,&quot; my grandmother's family name. On somegravestones the writing was illegible, worn away by time andthe elements. A decaying compost of leaves and pine needleswas heaped high on others, covering the names.   I had a sudden compulsion to cancel my plans and spend thenext few days repairing the tombs and scrubbing them clean.Just as quickly that feeling was replaced by a vast sorrow.No descendants or relatives of the people buried in thisplace were left to view the names. Those who had not escapedto other continents had been annihilated by the same sort ofmaniacal hatred that their Spanish ancestors fled 4 1/2centuries before.   I did not find my family names on any of the graves, butthat no longer seemed important. In that moment I felt as ifI were descended from every person buried there, as if I weretheir single aggregate child who had by the miracle ofAmerica survived and returned. I began to say Kaddish, theprayer for the dead, for them all.   When I climbed back over the wall, burrs were clinging tomy pant legs, as if the nettles had tried to keep me fromleaving and, failing that, had forced something of the placeon me, something that would hurt when held in my hand andwould sting my memory and remind me of my responsibility: tocontinue to say Kaddish for them wherever I was, to make surethat they -- all of them my forebears now -- would beremembered.   ---   Mr. Amiel is a writer in New York. His newest novel, &quot;StarTime,&quot; will be published next spring by Crown.</TEXT></DOC>