<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900720-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>900720-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Anxiety Grows as Comecon's End Nears   ---   Trading System's Demise   Could Hit East Bloc Hard   ----   By Tim Carrington   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6B</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   BUDAPEST, Hungary -- When Eastern Europe's new leaderscalled in January for the end of Comecon, the Communistbloc's ramshackle trading system, it seemed that anotherStalinist edifice was about to crumble amid rejoicing.   But six months into mapping the postComecon world,anxieties and second thoughts are spreading. Here in Hungary,which enjoys a head start in cultivating business ties withthe West, companies are bracing for potentially devastatingshocks next year, when Comecon is supposed to be buried sothat free-market trading can come to life.</LP><TEXT>   The widest grins at Comecon's funeral are likely to beworn not by the Eastern Europeans but by the Soviets, whostand to gain as much as $16 billion a year when their formersatellites begin paying real money for Soviet oil and gas.   Talks with government officials, foreign investors andcompany managers here drive home the point that four decadesof enforced economic dependence can't be waved away with afew bold declarations. Without the Soviet energy suppliesthat come into Szazhalombatta via the &quot;friendship pipeline,&quot;Hungary's already weak industrial base would collapse.Without Soviet markets, Hungary's enterprises would gobegging for customers -- and won't find many in the Westuntil their products and production methods are overhauled.   &quot;I believe the breakup of the Comecon market has come toosoon,&quot; says Harold Codd, general manager of Ganz-Hunslet, aBudapest rail-car manufacturer acquired late last year byU.K.-based Telfos PLC. &quot;There's nothing to replace it.&quot;   For all the worries, no one wants to return to Comecon'sartificial economy, where a centrally planned quota systemhas dictated the exchange of energy supplies, industrialmachines and consumer products -- all for a phony currencyknown as the &quot;transferable ruble.&quot; What Hungarian officialsand other Eastern Europeans are trying to negotiate withtheir Soviet trading partners are ways to soften the impactof the shift.   At the moment, though, any grace-period arrangements seemelusive, and the Eastern Europeans are poised to be the biglosers during the transition. By shifting the East bloc'strade to hard-currency settlements and world-market prices,the Eastern Europeans will get hit with a double whammy: Theywill pay more for the oil and gas they buy from the SovietUnion and get less for the consumer products and industrialequipment they sell.   David Roche, a strategist for Morgan Stanley Co. inLondon, predicts that, all told, the death of Comecon willmean losses for the Eastern European countries equal to asmuch as 4% of their gross domestic products. Meanwhile, theSoviets should gain 0.5% to 1% of GDP from the oil-priceincreases alone. Mr. Roche estimates that the higher energycosts will slug Eastern Europe &quot;with the equivalent force&quot; ofthe world-wide energy crisis of 1973 -- but with the Eastbloc countries far less able to withstand the blow thanWestern industrial nations were then.   For the Soviets, behind in payments to Western companiesby about $5 billion, the switch to hard currency and marketprices for oil and gas could be a godsend. But for Hungary,Poland and Bulgaria -- already reeling under whopping debtburdens -- the change could chew up around 20% of theirhard-currency reserves.   The situation raises troubling questions about the moneythat Western governments and such international institutionsas the new European Bank for Reconstruction and Developmentplan to pump into Eastern Europe. A hefty chunk of it willflow out to the Soviet Union in the form of higher energypayments. &quot;You give {the Eastern European countries} money,the Soviets will take money out,&quot; Mr. Roche says. &quot;There's noconspiracy; that's just how the trade patterns work.&quot;   Roger Robinson, former director of international economicsfor the U.S. National Security Council and now a consultantin Washington, predicts a &quot;major Soviet siphon effort.&quot; Hereasons that &quot;the Soviets are in a payments crisis, andthey're going to ask for cash on the barrel.&quot; When the U.S.Congress comes to ratifying and appropriating funds for thebank, he argues, it should include &quot;a creative building ofsafeguards to take account for an ambitious Soviet strategythat, more often than not, will be adverse to EasternEuropean recovery.&quot;   Though pressures for such safeguards will emerge inWashington, it will be difficult for Congress to put too manybarriers around the $12 billion reconstruction bank. Theinstitution has been embraced as the West's main vehicle forhelping the reforming East bloc, and U.S.-imposed constraintswill be unpopular in Europe. It also would be awkward for theU.S. -- the world's main champion of free-market principles-- to try to bar the Soviets from charging market prices forenergy.   U.S. and Eastern European officials are hoping the Sovietswill take a lenient attitude and permit a gradual transition.Allowing cash settlements at the end of a year, instead ofinsisting on regular payments upon delivery, would help. Butsuch leniency is far from assured.   This year, Tadeush Teodorovich, head of policy planning atthe Soviet Ministry for Foreign Economic Relations, said that-- theoretically, at least -- the Soviets could replace 70%of the machines and equipment they buy from Eastern Europewith superior, and often cheaper, items from the West. TheSoviets won't necessarily do that, but Eastern Europeanofficials say they are still negotiating future tradearrangements.   Steven Bina, who manages a Schwinn-Csepel joint-venturebicycle plant in Budapest, says he has been dropping Comeconsuppliers because &quot;we can buy lower-priced, higher-qualitygoods in convertible-currency countries.&quot; Once Comecontransactions switch to hard currency, more East blocenterprises are likely to opt for Western suppliers.   According to Oxford Analytica, a research and consultingcompany based in Oxford, England, the shift to hard-currencytrade will cost East Germany about $3 billion a year becauseof higher energy costs and lower prices on industrial goodsexported to the Soviet Union. The company estimates that thechange will cost Czechoslovakia $2.7 billion, Poland $2.6billion, Bulgaria $2.5 billion, Hungary $1.9 billion andRomania just under $1 billion.   The costs aren't summed up that simply, of course. EastGermany's escape from Comecon will be made both quicker andeasier by unification with West Germany. By contrast,Hungary's situation is made more severe by the fact that muchof its hard currency goes to servicing its $20 billionforeign-debt burden, the biggest per-capita debt in EasternEurope.   Energy dependence varies, but analysts say Eastern Europecounts on the Soviet Union for about 50% of its energy needs.Moreover, the Soviet Union provides nearly all of the highend of the energy mix in Eastern Europe -- namely, its oiland natural gas. For much of Eastern Europe, this dependencemay increase, since the main alternative is locally minedbrown coal, which emits heavy quantities of sulfur dioxideand is a major culprit in the region's environmental crisis.   At the same time, however, the Soviet Union's ownworsening economic chaos has sown fears that the onetimesenior Comecon partner is becoming less reliable. Sovietenergy production has hit snags in recent months, forexample. And East bloc enterprises are anything butencouraged by this year's spectacle of Western companieswaiting months for billions of dollars owed them by theSoviets. If the payments crisis persists after post-Comecontrade begins next year, East bloc companies may findthemselves at the end of what is even now a lengthy queue,waiting to get paid.   Ikarus, Hungary's beleaguered bus-making company, is oneof the businesses to get an early taste of life withoutComecon. In January, the Hungarian government, awash intransferable rubles from the Soviets, ordered a moratorium onsales for such currency. Buses ready for delivery to theSoviets piled up, filling all the available space in thecompany's sprawling plant at the edge of Budapest. Desperate,Ikarus arranged to roll hundreds of the vehicles into anearby stadium.   In late February, Ikarus received licenses to sell about1,000 buses to the Soviets, and the following month it gotpermission to sell 1,500. That helped, but overall Sovietdeliveries this year are expected to sink to 4,500 buses froma recent peak of 7,600 annually. Next year, sales areexpected to drop further. On top of lower volume, Ikarusofficials say, prices will come down as well, althoughpayments will be made in hard currency.   As the Soviets cut back orders, other Comecon customersare looking shaky, too. Leipzig, for example, is slated toreceive its 35,000th Ikarus bus in coming weeks -- anoccasion that the company plans to recognize with an officialceremony in the East German city. However, Ikarus officialsworry that, with Comecon disintegrating and unification withWest Germany pending, Leipzig authorities may switch toVolkswagen or Mercedes.   The only hope, says Jozsef Brumbauer, the company's deputydirector for business development, is to scramble for morebusiness outside the Comecon alliance. To that end, herecently helped negotiate $100 million of sales to threeTurkish cities. Ikarus is also shipping 170 buses to Chinathis year in exchange for Swiss francs, and 500 bus bodies toBaghdad, where they will be outfitted with separatelypurchased engines and parts. Despite these successes,non-Comecon sales will account for only about 17% of thecompany's revenue this year.   The anxieties at Hungarian enterprises notwithstanding,official statistics show that the country's non-Comeconexports jumped 16.5% in the first four months of this yearover the comparable period a year earlier. If the increasescontinue, they will help shield Hungary from the fallout fromComecon's dismembering.   Istvan Tamas, commissioner for Comecon relations atHungary's Ministry for International Economic Relations, isphilosophical about it all. &quot;It's a 40-year relationship thatwe have formed,&quot; he says. &quot;We have to bear the burden and theconsequences. We don't want to be dependent on a market ofComecon countries.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>