<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910927-0182</DOCNO><DOCID>910927-0182.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   Self-Determination: Yes, but...   ----   By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.</HL><DATE>09/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>CANADA (CN)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   Humanity owes much to Woodrow Wilson -- not least to hisvision of a world ruled by popular consent in whichaggression would be prevented or punished by the collectiveaction of the international community. This is the perennialdream that in our own time George Bush has rebaptized the NewWorld Order.   The Wilsonian vision had a codicil: the doctrine ofself-determination. &quot;Every people,&quot; Wilson said, &quot;has a rightto choose the sovereignty under which they shall live.&quot; Whatprinciple could seem more unexceptionable -- indeed, morelogical -- than this? Self-determination appears theinevitable deduction from the whole idea of democracy andself-government.</LP><TEXT>   Yet the doctrine presents anomalies. Indeed, the Americantradition is quite equivocal on the subject ofself-determination -- an equivocation embodied in thecontrast between our two greatest presidents. As thehistorian Betty Miller Unterberger has pointed out, wecelebrate George Washington because of his success incarrying out a struggle for self-determination -- and wecelebrate Abraham Lincoln because of his success insuppressing such a struggle.   Self-determination was a noble doctrine when urged byAmericans against Britain in 1776; less so when urged by theSouthern states against the national government in 1861.Woodrow Wilson himself was born in Virginia, and eight yearsold when Lee surrendered at Appomattox; but as a scholar herejected the claims of self-determination and portrayed theCivil War as the development that &quot;completes the Union.&quot;   His secretary of state, Robert Lansing, warned Wilson in1918 that the doctrine of self-determination when propoundedwithout definitions and without criteria could be &quot;utterlydestructive of the political fabric of society and wouldresult in constant turmoil and change.&quot; How, Lansing asked,to define the &quot;people&quot; who have a right to choose their ownsovereignty? How to establish due process by which the&quot;people&quot; make this choice? After all, the Civil War hadcommitted the U.S. to &quot;the principle that a national statemay by force if necessary prevent a portion of its territoryfrom seceding without its consent especially if it has longexercised sovereignty over it or if its national safety orvital interests would be endangered.&quot;   Wilson took the point. He was well aware, as he told theBritish ambassador, that &quot;pushed to its extreme, theprinciple would mean the disruption of existing governments,to an indefinable degree.&quot; He was initially opposed, forexample, to the dismemberment of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.Nonetheless, with appropriate qualifications, the principlereshaped Europe after the First World War and was reaffirmedby Roosevelt and Churchill in the Atlantic Charter in 1941.   Self-determination thereafter went into eclipse when theCold War split so much of the world between two armedideologies. Now the end of the Cold War has brought the eraof ideological conflict to a conclusion. But it has not, asforecast, brought an end to history. One set of hatreds givesway to the next. Newsweek the other day quoted SimonPetrovic, a Yugoslav political scientist: &quot;Minorities aregoing to be an acid test for all post-communist societies.With communism all but disappearing, tribal instincts arecoming back.&quot; The era of ideological conflict is giving wayto a new and menacing era of ethnic, racial and religiousconflict. Yugoslavia is the tragic case immediately in point.It will not be the last case.   In retrospect, the Soviet empire can be seen as a de factoequivalent of the old Austro-Hungarian Empire. Thedissolution of the Soviet system after the Cold War, like thedissolution of the Hapsburg system after the First World War,has released pent-up national and ethnic aspirations -- andantagonisms -- deeply rooted in history and in memory. Thedisintegration of the Soviet Union and now of Yugoslaviaemboldens separatist movements all across Europe on bothsides of the old Iron Curtain.   &quot;Spain's Nationalists Press for Independence&quot; was aheadline the other day in the New York Times. If Armenia isindependent, then why not Catalonia? If the Lithuanians enjoyself-determination, why can't the Basques? And why notSlovakia? Corsica? Brittany? Wallonia? Jersey? Scotland?Quebec? Every minority contains minorities of its own. Wheredoes self-determination stop?   Roger Thurow recently described in this newspaper theactivities in Geneva of the chief lobbyist of the Sorbian(no, not a typo for Serbian) Nationality for AutonomousLusatia, a movement that sounds as if it had been invented byEvelyn Waugh. In the old days Andorra, Monaco, San Marino andLiechtenstein were harmless tourist attractions. Do theyperhaps now represent the wave of the future?   And of course the new passions of self-determination arehardly confined to Europe. The proliferation of microstateswith few people and no real viability but the same votes inthe General Assembly as the U.S. and China is likely tobecome the bane of the United Nations.   And microstates sounding off in the General Assembly areinnocuous compared to the cruel violence wrought across theThird World by the rage for self-determination among peoplesliving under the same sovereignty. Self-determination turnstoo quickly into self-destruction. The fate of Beirut hasoffered for some time a ghastly preview of a possible future.From South Africa to Sri Lanka, from Israel to India, fromAngola to Trinidad, ethnic conflict is tearing nations apart.&quot;The virus of tribalism,&quot; the Economist has well said, &quot;. . .risks becoming the AIDS of international politics -- lyingdormant for years, then flaring up to destroy countries.&quot;   The time has surely come to reconsider the doctrine ofself-determination and to incorporate the limitations thatWilson himself acknowledged and that the experience of theU.S. confirms. Small is not necessarily beautiful. Theobjective should not be to give every people the right tochoose the sovereignty under which it shall live. It shouldbe rather to seek ways by which people of diverse ethnic,religious and racial backgrounds can be brought to livetogether in harmony under the same sovereignty.   This is all the more urgently the case in an era that willbe marked more than ever before by the mixing of peoples. Asthe 20th century draws to a close, a number of factors -- theend of the Cold War, the development of swifter modes ofcommunication and transport, the acceleration of populationgrowth, the breakdown of traditional social structures, theflight from tyranny and from poverty, the dream of a betterlife somewhere else -- converge to drive people as neverbefore in mass migrations across national frontiers.   For such reasons President Bush seems to me to be right innot rushing to recognize the independence of the peopleswhose aspirations are currently breaking up the Soviet Unionand Yugoslavia. One can understand these aspirations. Butclaims to self-determination can be contagious, and theresult can be to rend the political fabric of society.Self-determination is OK up to a point. Beyond that point itleads toward incoherence and anarchy.   Consider our neighbor to the north, long deemed the mostsensible and sedate of nations. Yet, as Michael Ignatieff(the Canadian-born and English-resident son of a Russian-bornCanadian diplomat; thus an example of the contemporary mixingof peoples) recently put it: &quot;Here we have one of the fiverichest nations on earth, a country so uniquely blessed withspace and opportunity that the world's poor are beating atthe door to get in, and it is tearing itself apart. . . . Ifone of the top five developed nations on earth can't make afederal, multi-ethnic state work, who else can?&quot;   The answer to that increasingly vital question has been,at least until recently, the U.S. But today, even here, theoutburst of multicultural zealotry threatens a spread ofseparate ethnic and racial communities, a new tribalism. Ifthe U.S. can't continue to provide the world an example ofhow to make a federal, multi-ethnic state work, then the 21stcentury will be dismal indeed. But that is another story.   ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of thehumanities at the City University of New York and a winner ofPulitzer Prizes in history and biography.</TEXT></DOC>