<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910117-0078</DOCNO><DOCID>910117-0078.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- The Mobile Guide:   Leeches, Lemurs and Very Long Names   ----   By Roger Thurow</HL><DATE>01/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9</SO><CO>   AFRIC</CO><LP>   Antananarivo, Madagascar -- In four years of Africantravels, I have seen some pretty weird things.   In Zanzibar, I stared down at the ruins of the would-beWorld's Largest Swimming Pool, which surely would havereceived that distinction if it hadn't been built on a swamp.</LP><TEXT>   In Mozambique, at the height of the great light-bulbshortage, I checked into the Dom Carlos Hotel in Beira andwas handed one 60-watt bulb. The idea, the desk clerkdemonstrated, was to move the bulb from one light fixture toanother while stumbling around the room in the dark. &quot;Enjoyyour stay,&quot; he said.   In Malawi, a group of boys waving sticks ambushed our car.They were hawking mousekebabs: whole mice, skewered on astick, lightly grilled. My wife took one horrified look androlled up the windows as we sped off. That December, anAmerican friend in Malawi sent us a picture of the youngvendors with their wares. &quot;Merry Crispmouse,&quot; he wrote.   In Africa, you get used to weird.   Then I went to Madagascar.   On the world's fourth largest island, I saw a three-footlong earthworm, a gigantic moth yellower than the sun, andseveral species of lemurs. I met a man whose name was oneletter shorter than the entire alphabet. I sat in a trafficjam while a funeral procession crossed the road, not to burysomeone but to raise him, turn his bones, give him a cleanshroud, show him what's new in town and put him back in theground. I also donated blood to a legion of rain-forestleeches.   Perhaps Madagascar is the weirdest normal country I havevisited (the &quot;normal&quot; qualifier eliminates Romania underCeausescu and South Africa under apartheid) because it brokeaway from Africa some 160 million years ago and drifted outinto the Indian Ocean to become weird all on its own. Most ofthe animals, insects and plants on the island are foundnowhere else in the world. Most notable are the lemurs,primates that never evolved like the rest of us. Generally,they are furry and cute with big eyes and long tails. Butone, the aye-aye, is hairy and ugly with big ears and long,boney fingers: the Grim Reaper in lemur's clothing.   The Malagasy, an exotic mix of Africa, Asia and France,are an equally unusual species. They give each otherhumongous names. Their lives are governed by a series offady, or taboos, and the mystical powers of dead relatives.They eat more rice per capita than the Chinese. They are veryfriendly.   Our first night in Madagascar, my wife, Anne, and I hadjust finished dinner when the wine steward offered cigars. Heopened the fine wooden box and there, amid the stogies, werea couple of large carrots. I said I'd take a carrot if hecould show me which end to light. He shook his head and said,&quot;No, monsieur, zee carrots are for zee humidity.&quot; C'est lavie.   The next morning I interviewed one of Madagascar's mostsuccessful businessmen and possessor of the longestunhyphenated name I have ever had the pleasure of foisting onmy editors. Charles Andriantsitohaina: 25 characters in all(including the space), marching majestically across hiscrowded business card. The last name, with 17 letters, isjust one short of the legal limit for racehorse names.(Thoroughbred names are to be no longer than 18 characters,including spaces, which explains why so many horses havenames that run together, like Itsallgreektome.) Mr.Andriantsitohaina (pronounced Andrian-su-TWINE, or somethinglike that) modestly said his name was short by Malagasystandards.   I then became obsessed with finding a longer one, countingletters of everyone I interviewed. While waiting 30 minutesfor a call to come through in the post office of a smallvillage, I feverishly checked all the pages of the phone bookfor Antananarivo, the capital, which the locals mercifullycall Tana. There were some marvelous specimens.Ravonitsoamaholizanany, first name Lalao.Andrianaivoravelona, Andrianavalona. But it was while touringthe old royal palace that we found a name truly worthmounting and hanging above the fireplace: KingAndrianampoinimerinandriantsimitoviaminandriampanjaka. Hissubjects, the tour guide explained, called him plain oldAndrianampoinimerina.   A Malagasy journalist named Olivier Ramahatra, who keptcalling me &quot;ThurowRoger,&quot; explained that Andrian and Ra, thetwo most-common prefixes, are noble salutations. Intimidatingas they may be, the names give Madagascar its hospitableflavor. Strangers quickly advance to first-name footing.Charles was Charles from the moment I first mangledAndriantsitohaina. After a few days in Tana observing theworld's current No. 1 tourist attraction, the ruins ofMarxism, we headed to the rain forest in search of lemurs. Onthe way, Anne studied the &quot;Guide to Madagascar,&quot; a must fortourists, to make sure we didn't violate any local fady. &quot;InImerina,&quot; she read, &quot;it is fady to hand an egg directly toanother person -- it must first be put on the ground.&quot; Thebook didn't say if this meant all eggs, including scrambledand fried. Better to stick to cereal for breakfast, wefigured, than to risk an international incident.   The eight-hour drive south from Tana to the RanomafanaNational Forest is an ecological heartbreaker. Along the way,smoke curls up from charred tree stumps, the haunting legacyof the peasants' slash-and-burn agriculture, which has madeMadagascar the most eroded place on Earth. Just outside thesmall village of Ranomafana, however, the smoke stops and theroad follows the descent of a spectacular waterfall. Here,Duke University is coordinating a uniqueconservation-development project that aims to save both lemurand man from man's destruction.   Our lemur safari began at the Duke cabin in the rainforest. Before we set out, Emil, our Malagasy guide, told usto tuck our pant legs into our boots as protection againstleeches. Leeches] The mere mention of the word conjured upvisions of Humphrey Bogart frantically pulling the slimythings off his body in African Queen. But Emil quicklyreassured us: &quot;When no rain, not many leeches.&quot; The sun wasshining. Off we went.   About 15 minutes into our hike, the forest darkened fromthe gathering clouds. A light rain began to fall, but wecontinued. Then there was a clap of thunder, followed by adownpour. Emil turned us back toward the cabin, muttering,&quot;When much rain, many leeches.&quot; I looked down, and there, onone of my fingernails, was a tiny, thread-thin worm flailingabout for a piece of flesh. My first leech. I flicked it offand alerted Anne. We stopped looking up into the trees forlemurs and concentrated on our leech-ridden selves. We walkedand flicked, walked and flicked. Back at the cabin, we did aBogart. We each had a dozen leeches sucking away, mainly onour feet and ankles, though one was working on my waist andAnne had one on her back. (Emil, alas, was clean.) They hadpenetrated our clothes through some kind of hideous osmosis.A sharp flick of a finger is all it takes to remove them, butthe result is a rather dramatic stream of blood. When theleeches attach themselves, they inject an anti-coagulant tokeep the blood flowing. You have to admire their ingenuity.   We saw several species of lemurs on leech-free hikes overthe next few days. But that afternoon, we contented ourselveswith the age-old practice of primate grooming, inspectingeach other for leeches we may have missed. I imagined thelemurs, the least-evolved primates, looking down from thetreetops at us and laughing. How weird, they must havethought.   ---   Mr. Thurow was based for four years in Johannesburg, SouthAfrica, and now is a correspondent in Vienna for the Journal.</TEXT></DOC>