<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910926-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>910926-0059.</DOCID><HL>   Tough Sell:   Soviet Managers Woo   American Investment,   Against Heavy Odds   ---   Arms Industries Go Civilian,   But Quality Is a Question   Even at High-Tech Plants   ---   Where the Expertise Is Found   ----   By Alan Murray   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GM LABOR</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>MUTUAL FUNDS (FND)FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)MICHIGAN (MI)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   ZELENOGRAD, U.S.S.R. -- They call this the Silicon Valleyof Russia.   Not that it looks much like California. The workers inthis industrial complex live in cramped high-rise apartmentblocks with corrugated metal balconies. The women wear soiledscarves, and the men baggy suits. Nobody eats sushi or playstennis. And a 20-foot bronze statue of Lenin watches sternlyover the scene.</LP><TEXT>   But there are some trees, some flowers, some fields ofgrass, even a lake with swans. The buildings are lessdilapidated than most in this economically battered country.And inside the complex, according to its managers, lies&quot;practically all the intellectual power in the Soviet Unionin the field of microelectronics.&quot;   Until a few years ago, that power was dedicated to themass destruction of the U.S. population. But times havechanged. Now, the technological experts who preside over thisonce top-secret facility near Moscow are assiduously wooingAmerican capital.   &quot;Our product will be competitive in the Third World,&quot; saysa man in a gray suit and a gray tie, gesturing at hand-drawncharts with a wooden pointer. Above him is a giant red starwith the logo &quot;The October Revolution.&quot; A huge metalchandelier sheds socialist light on the room; roughly a thirdof its bulbs are burned out. Here, not long ago, Sovietscientists briefed well-fed generals on Star Wars technology.Today, these scientists are face-to-face with Americanveterans of the Cold War who control today's ultimate weapon:money.   The American group is led by Dean LeBaron of BatterymarchFinancial Management in Boston, who is determined to become apioneer of U.S. investment in the Soviet Union. With him arethe manager of General Motors Corp.'s $34 billion in pensionfunds, the manager of New Jersey's $28 billion in such fundsand a money manager for a U.S. insurance company thatcontrols $250 billion. Had Nikita Khrushchev faced that kindof financial power, he might have kept his shoes on.   Zelenograd's Angstrem enterprise, which makes integratedcircuits, is one of a half dozen that Mr. LeBaron and hisanalysts have chosen as a target for investment. Never mindthe popular Russian joke that this nation makes &quot;the largestmicroprocessors and the fastest watches in the world.&quot; Mr.LeBaron believes there is serious brainpower here that can beharnessed to make serious profit.   The ironies of Soviet technology abound. A hallway displayshows a machine used in the space station Mir to producegallium arsenide crystals, a potential replacement forsilicon. This is leading-edge research. But just around thecorner, a secretary's desk is crowded with no less than ninetelephones, of varying sizes and shapes. The reason?Multiline phones are almost nonexistent here.   For decades, Soviet industry gave its best and brightestto the military and ignored potential improvements in dailylife. As a result, the nation has developed First Worldscience and technology but Third World living standards.   Now, at long last, the nation's military-industrialcomplex is awkwardly trying to turn its attention to theconsumer. Vladimir Koblov, chairman of the MilitaryIndustrial Commission, says the huge array of industriesunder his command now devotes about 45% of its production tothe military, down from 65% in the mid-1980s. And the figureis falling fast; by 1995, experts say it may be down to 20%.   A large exhibit hall in Moscow displays the fruits of thisstab at industrial transformation. There are refrigeratorsmade by an old cartridge factory, clocks and watches made ina plant designed for mechanical bomb fuses, sewing machines,exercise machines, disco lights. There are even a few &quot;boombox&quot; tape players manufactured in a former radio-fusefactory.   &quot;It's not a Sony,&quot; admits Vadim Sintsov, whose unwieldytitle -- director of main administration for internationaleconomic relations in the ministry of defense industry of theU.S.S.R. -- illustrates this nation's regard for efficiency.&quot;But still, it is good for the Russian buyer because it is inrubles.&quot;   Good for the Russian buyer, that is, if he can find one.An expedition the same day to the GUM department store --Moscow's largest -- finds virtually none of thesedefense-produced consumer items on display. Mr. Sintsovconcedes that the average wait for a new refrigerator isthree years, and for a car, 10. Another Soviet joke tells ofa man who is informed his car will be delivered to him on May15 in the year 2003. &quot;Could you make it the afternoon?&quot; hereplies. &quot;I have the plumber coming that morning.&quot;   How, in this Rube Goldberg economy, can an Americaninvestor expect to make money? To be sure, few have tried.Since 1987, when foreign investment was liberalized, U.S.investment has totaled only $300 million. West Europeancompanies, driven partly by the political imperative to savethe Soviet economy so emigrants won't overrun Europe, havebeen far more aggressive.   But Mr. LeBaron believes things will change. And indeed,the failure of the coup has sparked a mini-gold rush byAmericans. The airlines report increased bookings to Moscow.The embassy notes increased visits from business delegations.&quot;There is new interest and enthusiasm,&quot; says John Minneman,who heads Chase Manhattan Bank's office here.   So far, outside of a few areas like energy, Americans havebeen slow to make commitments. Mr. LeBaron sees an advantagein moving quickly. Meeting with top officials at Moscow cityhall, he states his objectives bluntly to the formerCommunist apparatchiks. The only way to attract more foreigninvestment, he says, is to make certain &quot;that the firstinvestments are supremely profitable.&quot;   Others in his group are less certain. Charles Tschampion,the General Motors money manager, notes that a pioneer isoften the guy who gets arrows in his back. Still, he doesn'trule out investing with Mr. LeBaron, who hopes forcommitments of up to $250 million by year end.   The pitfalls awaiting Mr. LeBaron are enormous. The Sovieteconomy is a mess; industrial production has fallen about 10%since the first of the year, a decline on the scale of theGreat Depression. The Soviet government is in disarray; theMilitary Industrial Commission that is Mr. LeBaron's Sovietpartner may not even exist a month from now, and no one knowsfor certain what will replace it.   Even if Batterymarch can overcome those obstacles andsomehow earn a profit, most of that profit will be in rubles.Unless the Soviet government succeeds at the monumental taskof stabilizing a hyper-inflationary economy and making theruble convertible, getting those profits out of the countrywill be extremely difficult.   Moreover, previous efforts to turn socialist enterprisesinto profit-making businesses have met little success. &quot;Thewhole idea of privatizing socialist companies is not a verygood one,&quot; says Peter Rona, chief executive of the FirstHungary Fund in New York, which for two years has beenseeking profit opportunities in Hungary. &quot;Socialist companieswere formed to fill production targets and not to makeefficient use of resources. It's in their genes, so to speak,and it's hard to get it out.&quot; The $76 million Hungary funddidn't make any investments during its first year but hascommitted $29.6 million this year to projects independent of-- and often in competition with -- state-owned enterprises.   Nevertheless, Mr. LeBaron has taken the state as hispartner, partly because that's where the expertise lies. TheSoviet economy may be twisted by 70 years of centralplanning, but because of the huge resources it has devoted todefense, it also has an abundance of world-class scientificand technological talent.   The government would be a partial owner of Mr. LeBaron'senterprises, and, along with workers, managers and privateSoviet citizens, it would control about twothirds of thestock. But a large foreign company would also be brought intoeach investment, and, combined with Mr. LeBaron's SovietCompanies Fund, would own about a third of the enterprise.The foreign partner would be expected to provide themanagement expertise needed to turn the operation profitable.   Evaluating the profit potential of any of these Sovietenterprises is a mind-numbing task. At Zelenograd, Sovietofficials readily acknowledge that their application --specific integrated-circuit technology falls well behind theWest's. Joel Barber, an analyst at Batterymarch, estimatesthe lag at five to seven years. But company officials believethey will be able to sell the chips in the future for only 70rubles -- less than $2 at auction -- market exchange rates,compared with $7 in the world market.   Across town at the Melz Amalgamation, another mammothdefense facility, television tubes are on display. Soviet TVsets have a well-earned reputation for melting down andsetting houses afire. But Sergey Polivin, chief engineer atthe Melz plant, insists that the problems have been caused byparts other than the picture tube. He passes out chartscomparing Melz's TV tubes to those made by Philips, Toshibaand Hitachi.   Nonetheless, this plant has a ways to go. Its technologyis based on a license bought in 1978 from RCA Corp., whichhas since quit making TV sets. The tubes are less flat thanmodern Western models, and the pictures less clear. Theproduction line, though highly mechanized, lags far behind inefficiency. Mr. Barber says South Korean companies canproduce the same number of sets with one-tenth the workers.   But salaries here are low, even by Korean standards. Aline supervisor tells the Americans his monthly salary is 600rubles -- roughly $12 in the auction market. The combinationof high technical expertise and cheap labor, Mr. LeBaronbelieves, makes high profits possible. The proposed jointventure would modernize the sets and increase production to2.5 million tubes a year from one million, without increasingemployment.   If any enterprise can be said to show the best of Sovietindustry, it is the Khrunichev aerospace plant. The giantfacility, surrounded by Kremlin-like walls, is where theSoviets made the strategic bombers and the enormous rocketsdesigned to carry nuclear bombs to U.S. cities. Until twoyears ago, no one could enter this plant without the highestsecurity clearances. More recently, it has become a showcase,with more than 700 foreign visitors passing through --including Marilyn Quayle, wife of the U.S. vice president,according to Alexander Lebedev, its head of foreign economicrelations.   Accustomed to visitors, this enterprise has a 10-minutevideotape describing its history, which it shows on aPanasonic TV set. And it allows visitors to stroll through afull-size mock-up of its most famous product, the Mir spacestation, in which Soviet cosmonauts live and work for a yearat a time.   Mr. Lebedev is no longer worried about CentralIntelligence Agency infiltration; he lets visitors freelyphotograph the facility. But like many American and Europeanbusinessmen, he does worry about Japanese competition. TheJapanese have an aggressive space industry, he says, and aretrying to grab technology wherever they can. &quot;That's why Ioppose us entering technology arrangements with theJapanese,&quot; he adds.   Although raised as a socialist manager, Mr. Lebedev andhis colleagues are trying to learn the language of marketeconomics. And he has learned to turn it back on Americanvisitors. Current U.S. export controls bar the shipment ofAmerican high-tech commercial satellites to the Soviet Unionto be shot into space by Soviet rockets. So, a French companyis the dominant player in the business.   &quot;When there is a monopoly, you must split the market,&quot; Mr.Lebedev says. &quot;So I don't understand why you Americans won'tlet us participate in your market.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>