<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911021-0167</DOCNO><DOCID>911021-0167.</DOCID><HL>   Research Rebel:   Weary of Red Tape,   A Scientist Abandons   Medical Establishment   ---   Institutional Review Boards,   Meant as Safeguards, Slow   Muscular Dystrophy Tests   ---   Have the Boys' Toes Moved?   ----   BY Jerry E. Bishop   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)MEDICAL andamp; BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)SCIENCE andamp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TENNESSEE (TN)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   For 15 years, Peter Koi Law, a neuro-physiologist at theUniversity of Tennessee in Memphis, worked on developing atreatment for muscular dystrophy, the progressive andincurable disease of the muscles. By last year, Dr. Law'swork seemed so promising that his research team was the firstof five to begin testing the treatment on human beings.   The new therapy, called myoblast transfer, was tried on 11boys ages five to 11. The initial results seemed so promisingthat Dr. Law decided it was time to move on to the nextphase. The medical establishment saw it differently.</LP><TEXT>   To launch the next round of testing, Dr. Law needed theapproval of the medical school's institutional review board.But according to Dr. Law, medical school officials made itclear that his proposed experiments wouldn't be approveduntil the other four research teams had caught up with him.   Chagrined at the delay, the Chinese-born,Canadian-educated scientist took a bold step: He resignedfrom the University of Tennessee and set up his own privateclinic in Memphis, the Cell Therapy Research Foundation,where he could test his treatment. The foundation's $2million annual budget comes from &quot;public donations andbenefactors,&quot; whom Dr. Law declines to name. Dr. Law alsosays an institutional review board approved his research, buthe won't identify the board.   Dr. Law's bolt from the university has shaken the medicalresearch community. Researchers are debating whether Dr. Lawis a hero for bucking the establishment in his race todevelop an effective treatment or whether his career, and thewell-being of the boys he's treating, may be victims of amisguided ambition.   Many researchers understand Dr. Law's frustration with thebureaucracy of institutional review boards, the panels of laypeople and scientists charged with protecting patients inmedical experiments. Yet most medical researchers believethat however labyrinthine the rules, there must be some limiton the risk researchers can take with human subjects.   &quot;You don't use crippled kids as guinea pigs without somekind of protection, and you don't do it with a secret{review} board,&quot; says Leon I. Charash, a pediatricneurologist on Long Island, N.Y., who serves as the unpaidchairman of the Muscular Dystrophy Association's medicaladvisory committee. Dr. Law's clinic is &quot;shrouded in secrecy,dangerous secrecy,&quot; says Dr. Charash.   Institutional review boards arose in the 1960s in responseto concerns that scientists might be too casual about thesafety of patients in medical experiments. In one celebratedcase, researchers injected cancer cells into elderlypatients' arms without saying what was being done.   Because of such questionable procedures, agencies thatfund medical research, most notably the National Institutesof Health, began requiring every hospital, medical center andmedical school that receives their grants to have adisinterested board approve human medical experiments toassure that the risks to patients are justified and that theexperiments incorporate patient safeguards.   It's increasingly rare, however, that a human medicalexperiment can begin with the approval of only one board.Most human experiments have to be approved by theresearchers' medical school review board and by the reviewboard of the hospital where the patients are undergoing theexperimental procedure. Moreover, an experimental proceduremay be tested simultaneously at several hospitals byscientists from several medical schools, each of which has areview board.   If the experiment involves drugs or medical devices thatwill be sold in interstate commerce, the experiment also mayface review by the Food and Drug Administration. And if itinvolves such controversial areas as fetal research,test-tube fertilization or gene manipulation, the experimentmay have to be approved by committees at the NationalInstitutes of Health. The result can be terrible frustrationfor scientists who may feel they have a cure but areentangled in red tape.   In the case of myoblast transfer therapy for musculardystrophy, five teams of scientists, including Dr. Law's,either have begun or are about to begin testing of theprocedure. The treatment takes normal but immature musclecells from a donor, cultures them in a test-tube and injectsthem into the crippled muscles of a muscular-dystrophy child.The hope is that the normal cells will fuse with thedefective muscle cell, providing the protein whose absencecauses the dystrophy.   Because the subjects are children, boards give theseexperimental plans especially careful review. Children, it'sassumed, can't make an informed decision on their own, andtheir parents may be emotionally blinded by their desperationto do whatever it takes to help their child.   Before Robert G. Miller at Children's Hospital in SanFrancisco and his colleagues made their first myoblasttransfer in December, they obtained approval from threereview boards: the hospital board, the board at Dr. Miller'smedical school (the University of California, San Francisco)and Stanford University's review board, because two Stanforddoctors were on the team.   In Boston, Theodore L. Munsat says he and his colleaguesat Tufts-New England Medical Center and Massachusetts GeneralHospital haven't yet begun their human experiments ofmyoblast transfer because they're waiting for another review.The experimental protocol already has passed review from twohospitals.   For Dr. Law, the bureaucracy of the review boards inTennessee simply became too much. He had been working onmyoblast transfer therapy since 1975, and by 1988 he wasreporting that the treatment led to improved muscle functionin mice. About this time, a series of advances in geneticsculminated in the discovery that muscular dystrophy wascaused by the lack of a vital muscle protein that scientistscalled dystrophin.   That discovery prompted the Muscular DystrophyAssociation, which had been funding Dr. Law since 1976, toorganize a crash experimental effort in human myoblasttransfer. The five research teams, including Dr. Law's atTennessee, were funded beginning in 1989. The teams weresupposed to cooperate, immediately sharing results. Thatmeant that Dr. Law, who had spent years doing tedious labresearch to develop the therapy, would have to share theglory if it proved effective.   The aim of these initial experiments is more scientificthan therapeutic. Researchers mainly want to know if theimplanted myoblasts fuse with the defective muscle cells andproduce dystrophin. They also want to see if there are anyadverse effects from the treatment or the immunesuppressingdrug the boys take to prevent rejection of the &quot;foreign&quot;cells.   Dr. Law says in early 1989 he began what turned intomonths of frustration trying to get approval from reviewboards to transplant a few million myoblasts into a musclethat controls the big toe, one of the first muscles todeteriorate in muscular dystrophy. Salt water would beinjected in the same muscle of the other foot.   In early April 1989, he says, the main review board at theuniversity gave the go-ahead to begin the experiments in auniversity clinic. But within 10 days, a newly created Dataand Safety Monitoring Board stepped in and put the experimentunder the jurisdiction of the medical school's clinicalresearch center, which moved the experiment to one hospitaland later to another. This shuffling meant the experiment hadto be cleared by four more review boards and then resubmittedto the university's main board.   Finally, in mid-February 1990, Dr. Law and the physiciansworking with him were able to inject myoblasts into one footof nine-year-old Sam Looper and saline solution into theother. Two more patients were treated within a few days. Bymid-July, the team had treated 11 boys.   In July, a British medical journal, The Lancet, publisheda brief letter from Dr. Law and his Tennessee colleaguesreporting that in the 92 days after treatment began, thefirst boy had remained free of any signs of adversereactions. They also reported that they had detecteddystrophin in the muscle of one toe but not in the muscle ofthe other toe. The letter stirred the excitement of otherresearchers who were preparing similar experiments.   A month later, the Tennessee team submitted a second,brief scientific paper to The Lancet, describing thepreliminary results in the first three boys. They claimedthey detected dystrophin in the treated toe in each boy and,more important, that the treated toes showed signs ofrecovering function; one boy, they reported, had regained 80%of the function in the toe.   Following their usual procedure, The Lancet editors askedan anonymous expert to critique or &quot;referee&quot; the paper. InOctober, the editors rejected the paper. Deputy editor DavidSharp wrote Dr. Law that &quot;our initial enthusiasm has beencompletely suppressed by a detailed report from our referee.&quot;The referee's comments weren't &quot;grounds for negotiation,&quot; Mr.Sharp wrote, meaning the journal wouldn't listen to anyrebuttal. Dr. Law calls such a flat rejection &quot;totallyunheard-of for a scientific publication,&quot; although Mr. Sharpsays the journal's editors occasionally write such letters todiscourage disappointed scientists from trying to debate thefindings.   Mr. Sharp won't identify the referee or furnish a copy ofthe report, but a copy was obtained by this newspaper. Thereferee's report said the Memphis researchers &quot;overplay thesignificance of their results and ignore the major practicalproblems&quot; of myoblast therapy.   The anonymous referee called the experiment's&quot;methodological faults severe&quot; and claimed, for example, thatwhen the researchers tested the movement of a boy's big toeit was impossible to tell whether the movement was caused bythe myoblast-treated muscle or by a stronger, untreatedmuscle. The referee called &quot;excessively sweeping&quot; the paper'sclaim that the myoblast therapy &quot;is the first geneticengineering procedure that has demonstrated any functionalsignificance in a mammalian genetic disease.&quot;   Dr. Law says if given the chance, he could easily rebutthe referee's scientific criticisms. But he also claims thatthe referee, whom he believes to be a British scientistwithout expertise in muscle diseases, has ties to the BritishMuscular Dystrophy Association. That organization, Dr. Lawasserts, wants one of its own scientists to win the NobelPrize that he believes will be awarded for myoblast therapy.Dr. Law says his report was subsequently published in medicaljournals in Italy and Japan.   Dismissing the referee's critique, Dr. Law insisted thatthe results in the first three patients were definitiveenough to launch another phase of experiments: injecting fourto five billion myoblasts into as many as 18 leg muscles.Late last year, he says, he broached the subject of a secondphase of experiments at three meetings of the university'sData and Safety Monitoring Board, offering the results in thethree boys as evidence of the experiment's safety andpotential benefit.   &quot;They {the board} said to forget about it,&quot; Dr. Law says.&quot;They said they wouldn't even consider a phase-two experimentfor at least two more years.&quot;   The results in the remaining eight boys are, for now,unclear. The &quot;code&quot; that would tell researchers which toe ofeach boy received the myoblasts and which received the shaminjection remains with Dr. Law's former colleagues at theUniversity of Tennessee. Meanwhile, the universityresearchers have lost contact with the boys. Until the codeddata on which toe was treated can be correlated with tests onthe boys, neither Dr. Law nor university researchers can knowfor sure whether the myoblast treatment works.   Dr. Law, however, says he is now treating all 11 of theoriginal children. In the months after the treatment, Dr. Lawsays the boys were examined several times, and the movementof their big toes was tested. &quot;We've got results of tests onall 11 patients,&quot; and it's quite obvious from the way theboys' toes function -- or fail to function -- which toereceived the injection of myoblasts, he says. Not all theboys are yet showing recovery of function, but enough have toleave no doubt the treatment works, he says.   Since Dr. Law has severed his ties with the university,isn't working with a hospital and has raised his own funds,he technically doesn't have to deal with an institutionalreview board. Nevertheless, he says, he did submit his plansto an unidentified review board, which approved theexperiment. Dr. Law says he launched his phase-twoexperiments on May 2, starting once again with Sam Looper,the boy who began phase one. By the end of the year, Dr. Lawplans to have treated 30 boys.   And, Dr. Law insists, there's no question of safety.Counting boys treated experimentally by Dr. Miller's team inSan Francisco and by George K. Karpati of the NeurologicalInstitute in Montreal, 22 boys have received myoblastinjections, Dr. Law says. None, he asserts, have had anyadverse reactions.   But other researchers charge that Dr. Law is forging aheadtoo fast. Some note there's still a statistically high chancethat a major adverse reaction might occur in a boy,particularly when the experiment uses billions of myoblasts.There is also the unanswered question of whether the initialimprovement in the muscles might wear off after a few monthsand leave the boys worse off than before.   &quot;I do feel he is a pioneer, and I have a lot of respectfor him,&quot; but his new experiments are &quot;premature,&quot; Dr. Millersays. He says it's true that in the five boys his team hastreated there haven't been any adverse effects. But, he adds,&quot;there are many, many questions&quot; still to be answered aboutmyoblast transfer therapy before anyone can justify the kindof experiments that Dr. Law has begun.   Dr. Charash of the Muscular Dystrophy Association saysthat so far the only evidence that the therapy improvesmuscle function is the paper that The Lancet referee foundinvalid. Absent this report, &quot;There is, to date, no evidencethat any of these children {treated by any of the researchteams} has been functionally improved,&quot; he says in aninternal memo. Dr. Charash finds a fund-raising brochuredistributed by Dr. Law's clinic reminiscent of a &quot;snake-oiloperation.&quot; The brochure asks for help so boys &quot;can walk outof their wheelchairs.&quot;   Even George S. Golden, who was on Dr. Law's research teamat the university, is nervous. &quot;If I were still involved Iwould approach a phase-two study a little more cautiously,&quot;he says.   But Dr. Munsat of the Tufts-New England Medical Center inBoston says, &quot;the situation is a classic example of thescientist who chooses to work outside the `old boy' systemand is ostracized. But,&quot; he adds, &quot;a lot of us are troubled&quot;by Dr. Law's secrecy. &quot;It would be helpful to everyone if weknew more about what Peter is doing down there in Memphis.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>