<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900919-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>900919-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   House Panel Approves Restrictions   On Use of RICO in Civil Lawsuits   ----   By Paul M. Barrett and Neil Barsky   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/19/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   IMA MVL LABOR XRX</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIAL (IDD)OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The House Judiciary Committee approved abill that would restrict the use of the federal RacketeerInfluenced and Corrupt Organizations law in civil lawsuits.   The legislation, approved yesterday on a voice vote, wouldleave intact the RICO law's criminal provisions, but it wouldlimit the ability of private parties to brand their courtroomopponents as &quot;racketeers&quot; and seek triple damages.</LP><TEXT>   An unusual coalition of business groups and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union has tried for years to curb RICO,arguing that a law designed to target organized-crimesyndicates has become a common weapon in garden-varietycommercial disputes. Consumer advocates and some liberallegislators have opposed revising RICO, contending that it isan effective weapon against white-collar fraud in areas suchas the crippled savings-and-loan industry.   The bill would make revisions generally considered to bemore moderate than those called for in legislation approvedin February by the Senate Judiciary Committee. It remainsunclear, according to Capitol Hill aides, whether proponentsof limits on RICO will be able to iron out differences andget a compromise approved by both houses before Congressadjourns this fall.   The House version, promoted as a compromise, would makefederal judges &quot;gatekeepers&quot; for RICO, permitting its useonly if certain conditions are met. Specifically, judgescould allow a private RICO suit if the plaintiff alleges&quot;egregious criminal conduct&quot; and the claim involves aprevious criminal conviction. To permit such a suit, judgesalso would have to find that the defendant was &quot;a majorparticipant&quot; in criminal conduct and that the potenttriple-damage remedy is needed to deter future egregiouscriminal acts.   Rep. John Conyers (D., Mich.), who has led opposition tothe bill, warned that it would &quot;diminish legal remedies forcitizens in the Sandamp;L failures, where we have the biggesteconomic scandal in American history.&quot;   The House panel approved an amendment offered by one ofthe bill's sponsors, Rep. Rick Boucher (D., Va.), that wasintended to address concerns about weakening RICO as a weaponin lawsuits involving Sandamp;Ls. The amendment would create alegal presumption that a defendant had engaged in &quot;egregiouscriminal conduct&quot; if his alleged injury to the plaintiffinvolved a financial loss suffered by an Sandamp;L that fails.   But Pamela Gilbert of the Washington consumer-advocacygroup Public Citizen called the amendment &quot;purely cosmetic,&quot;because under the House version a judge would still have tofind that a defendant was a &quot;major participant&quot; in criminalconduct to allow a RICO suit involving an Sandamp;L-related loss.That requirement &quot;would let off all the accountants andlawyers and investment bankers responsible for a lot of the{thrift} failures,&quot; Ms. Gilbert said.   In two major differences from the House version, theSenate bill doesn't include the &quot;gatekeeper&quot; provisions, butit would eliminate triple damages in almost all instances.The Senate's proposed revisions in RICO would apply tolawsuits filed only after the law's enactment. The HouseJudiciary Committee addressed that issue by passing anamendment that would make limitations on RICO applicable sixmonths after the law's enactment.   ---   SECESSION LAW gets approval from New York's highest court.   The ruling by the New York Court of Appeals will allow theborough of Staten Island to begin a cumbersome process thatcould lead to its secession from New York City.   In November, Staten Islanders will get to vote on whetherto establish a commission to study the secession issue. Butstate legislators cautioned that even if the borough'sresidents ultimately vote to secede, it is unlikely thecity's least populous borough will ever leave New York City.The state Legislature must approve the secession and isconsidered unlikely to do so.   Interest in secession has grown since last year's U.S.Supreme Court ruling that the city's Board of Estimate, whichgave the borough an equal voice in the city's governance,violated the one-person one-vote principle. Some residentsfear that Staten Island, with only 400,000 residents, willnot get its fair share of city services under the newlyenacted city charter. New York City officials have opposedthe law allowing for a secession referendum.   If this November's proposal passes, a commission will havethree years to recommend whether secession is the best thingfor the borough. If a secession referendum then passes, theborough may vote on whether to secede, and then leave it tothe Legislature to make its decision.   &quot;Should Staten Island secede it could pose enormousproblems for the city,&quot; said Michael Johnston, who followsmunicipal finance for Moody's Investors Service Inc. &quot;Itseems premature to be overly concerned about it, however.&quot;   ---   BUYER OF PROPERTY gains new weapon in conflict over wastecleanup.   U.S. District Judge D. Brock Hornby of Portland, Maine,refused to dismiss a claim by Hanlin Group Inc., seeking tohold the seller of a manufacturing plant liable for anenvironmental cleanup.   In 1982, Hanlin purchased the plant in Orrington, Maine,from International Minerals andamp; Chemical Corp., now known asImcera Group Inc. Four years later, the EnvironmentalProtection Agency said the site was contaminated withhazardous waste and ordered Hanlin to undertake a cleanup, asrequired under the federal Resource Conservation RecoveryAct. Enacted in 1976, the act holds the owner of a siteliable for the cleanup of hazardous waste.   Hanlin, a closely held Edison, N.J., chemicalmanufacturer, sued International Minerals, alleging thecompany was strictly liable for any cleanup costs because ithad caused the contamination. The ruling last week upholds adecision by a federal magistrate allowing Hanlin to proceedon the claim.   Under the doctrine of strict liability, a defendantengaged in an activity considered to be abnormally dangerousmay be held liable for damages, regardless of whether thedefendant was negligent.   Typically, the strict-liability doctrine has allowedpeople living near a contaminated site to seek compensationfor damage to their property. Maine is only the second stateto rule that the doctrine is not limited to neighboringlandowners and can be used by purchasers against sellers ofcontaminated property. An earlier New Jersey case is pendingin the state's supreme court.   Under an agreement signed with the EnvironmentalProtection Agency, Hanlin estimates it will spend $3 millionto $4 million just to study the extent of contamination atthe site, says John J. O'Leary Jr., a lawyer for Hanlin.Cleaning up an average site can often run as high as $100million.   Andrew Schlickman of the Chicago firm Sidley andamp; Austin, alawyer for Imcera, said the Northbrook, Ill., company had notdecided whether to seek further review of the decision.   ---   MANVILLE TRUST formally asks court to authorize classaction for claims.   In its motion, filed in federal court in Brooklyn, N.Y.,the trust said it has inadequate funds to pay all thepersonal-injury claims against it. The motion was expected,as part of U.S. Judge Jack B. Weinstein's efforts to come upwith a nationwide approach to settling many of the thousandsof asbestos claims now pending in the courts.   The trust was formed in 1988 as part of thebankruptcy-court reorganization plan of Manville Corp. to payasbestos personal-injury claims against the company.   Eagle-Picher Industries Inc., another former asbestosmaker, has made a similar motion before Judge Weinstein. Asmany as five other defendants, including the Manville trust,have been expected to join Eagle-Picher in that process.Eventually, a single claims-processing facility could be setup by the court to pay those claims.   ---   XEROX CORP. wins reversal of jury verdict indiscrimination suit.   A federal judge in Dallas overruled a jury verdict thatawarded $9 million to a woman who claimed she was made avictim of fraud, age and sex discrimination by Xerox.   In his ruling Monday, U.S. District Court Judge SidneyFitzwater said Elizabeth Layman's claims against her formeremployer weren't supported by the evidence. Ms. Layman, whohad worked for Xerox in Dallas, alleged that Xerox in 1986fraudulently promised to find her a job in California.   Xerox said it had in fact offered Ms. Layman, 48 yearsold, two jobs in California, both at higher pay than herDallas job, but that she rejected them as inferior and choseinstead to resign and file suit.   Attorneys in the case said Ms. Layman is expected toappeal.   ---   DEFENSE LAWYER can be compelled to testify on fees,appeals court rules.   Federal prosecutors had sought to require Mike DeGeurin, aprominent Houston criminal-defense lawyer, to testify aboutthe fees he received for defending a man charged withpossession of cocaine. Suspecting Mr. DeGeurin's bill isbeing paid with drug money, prosecutors had subpoenaed himlast September to testify before a federal grand juryinvestigating his client.   Two U.S. Supreme Court rulings in June 1989 gaveprosecutors wide authority to seize assets of accusedcriminals, including funds needed to pay lawyers' fees. But afederal district judge blocked the subpoena of Mr. DeGeurin,saying that it could turn him into a witness against his ownclient. Last Friday, a three-judge panel of the federalappeals court in New Orleans reversed that decision butdelayed issuing a written opinion.   Although Mr. DeGeurin's client already has been sentencedto prison, prosecutors are pressing for the attorney'stestimony anyway, because they believe the fees were paid bya third person involved in illegal drugs. &quot;There is noattorney-client privilege there,&quot; says Larry Finder, anassistant U.S. attorney in Houston.   Mr. DeGeurin's attorney, brother Dick DeGuerin, says hewon't know the scope of the court's ruling until a writtenopinion is produced. If his client in fact is compelled totestify, he says, &quot;that's a disaster -- and very discouragingfor practicing lawyers.&quot;   ---   Amy Dockser Marcus and Wade Lambert contributed to thiscolumn.</TEXT></DOC>