<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900822-0064</DOCNO><DOCID>900822-0064.</DOCID><HL>   Tired Mammoth:   Soviet Oil Industry,   Mismanaged for Years,   Can't Fill Iraq Gap   ---   It's Producing Less, Not More,   And Looks West for Help;   Big Fields Are Overtaxed   ---   To U.S. Firms, a New Frontier   ----   By Peter Gumbel and James Tanner   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP F.AQU CHV HAL DD RD SC AN</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)OIL EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES (OIE)</IN><LP>   NEFTEYUGANSK, U.S.S.R. -- The Mammoth oil field on theedge of this Siberian town is aptly named: Beneath the swampysurface lie some of the biggest oil reserves in the world.But even mammoths grow old and sick.   Oil production at the 20-year-old field has dropped almost25% since hitting its peak in 1988. Alexander Gusev, thechief engineer, says raising production is out of thequestion. Even slowing the decline is proving troublesomebecause of chronic shortages of such basic equipment as pipesand valves.</LP><TEXT>   Supplies of those things have dried up because of ethnicunrest in Azerbaijan, where most of them are made. &quot;We've hadproblems every day,&quot; Mr. Gusev sighs. &quot;Using old equipmentmeans more accidents and higher repair costs.&quot;   The oil patch of Western Siberia, the source of almosttwo-thirds of Soviet output, is in trouble. As the world'slargest oil producer and a major exporter, the U.S.S.R.stands to profit handsomely from the rise in prices followingIraq's invasion of Kuwait. Every $1 increase in a barrel ofcrude oil means as much as $1 billion a year in additionalSoviet export revenue.   But don't count on Moscow's pumping more to capitalize onthe Middle East crisis, as it did during the oil shocks ofthe 1970s. Although Soviet oil reserves total more than 60billion barrels, more than double America's, many of theovertaxed Soviet fields have fallen into irreversibledecline.   The reasons range from big fields reaching maturity, toinefficient extraction methods and problems with equipment.Much of the gear is outdated. A lot of money has been spentfor Western equipment, but some of it sits idle, Westernanalysts say. Pipelines and other parts of theoil-transportation system aren't adequate, and accidents andspills are frequent.   At the same time, the cost of pumping oil from new wellsis soaring, straining already strapped Soviet finances. TheKremlin, reversing its investment policy of the past 20years, is actually cutting back capital spending on the oilindustry.   While such problems mean Soviet oil won't be able to makeup for the lost Iraqi and Kuwaiti supply, they do present theWest with a big opportunity. The Kremlin has long insisted ondeveloping its oil resources alone, guarding industry detailslike military secrets. That is starting to change as MikhailGorbachev opens the economy to the West. For beleagueredSiberian oil officials, the prospect of cooperation withWestern companies is one bright spot on an otherwise darkhorizon.   How dark? Last year, total Soviet energy output declinedfor the first time since the 1940s. Western analysts believeoil output fell 2.5%, to an average 12.1 million barrels aday.   Soviet experts say it may soon drop below 12 millionbarrels, to its lowest level in over a decade. But Westernexperts say it's already below that, and see a slippage toless than 11 million barrels a day before 1995. An even morepessimistic projection comes from a senior Estonianscientist, Mikhail B. Korchemkin, who sees daily Sovietoutput falling to just over 10 million barrels by 1995, andthen, by 2010, to nine million.   The Soviet Union is trying to give priority to exports,which account for about a third of production and bring inmuch of the nation's hard currency. But it has recently cutsales to Eastern Europe to keep supplies flowing to its ownenergy-hungry economy and the West.   Even though Moscow has drawn down domestic inventories totry to maintain exports, those exports have fallen from the1988 peak of 4.1 million barrels a day to an estimated 3.7million a day last year. Of this, about 1.7 million barrels aday went to the West and two million to Eastern Europe. Thisyear, the Soviets have cut East Europe deliveries 140,000barrels a day.   Robert Ebel, an Ensearch Corp. executive and former U.S.intelligence expert on Soviet energy, sees Soviet oil exportsfalling another 400,000 barrels a day in 1990.   Although no cure-all, the Soviets' hopes for jointventures with Western oil companies offer promise. Suchventures could give them both the technology and the capitalthey need.   &quot;Tell the Americans and anyone else that they should cometo us. They're welcome,&quot; says Anatoly Tyukalov, deputy headof Glavtyumenneftegaz, the body that oversees WesternSiberia's oil and gas industry. &quot;We need new technology andnew equipment to get oil out more cheaply. That means we wantyour capital, your technology, your credits.&quot;   Western oil companies have been quick to respond. Thismonth, 15 officials from Mr. Tyukalov's organization wereflown to the U.S. by Du Pont Co.'s Conoco unit. Oil giantssuch as Royal Dutch/Shell Group and Amoco Corp. andoil-service firms such as Halliburton Co. are trekking toSiberia in hopes of getting access to Soviet oil throughjoint ventures.   So far, however, there is little to show for the flurry ofactivity. The talks are often laborious, Westerners complain,and many Soviet oil officials continue to harbor deep-rootedsuspicion of Western motives. Rather than giving theforeigners free rein, officials want them to work on fieldsthat are tricky and expensive to exploit.   It doesn't help that the Soviet bureaucracy in charge ofoil is in a chaotic state because of the government'sattempts to restructure the economy. The Oil Ministry lastyear merged with the Gas Ministry, its longtime rival. Butthe super-agency that emerged may not have long to liveitself; officials say one option is to replace it with agovernment committee.   Moreover, since Boris Yeltsin became president of theRussian Republic in May, the question of who controlsSiberian oil has been thrown into doubt. The republic'sparliament recently stipulated that it must approve anynatural-resources ventures negotiated by Soviet authorities.And this week, Russian officials even held out the prospectthat they would be interested in joining the Organization ofPetroleum Exporting Countries.   This confusion is hard on foreign oil companies trying toget a Soviet foothold. Do they need separate agreements withseparate republics? If they sign an agreement with theMinistry of Geology, as Texaco Inc. did recently, will ithold with the other ministries? (Texaco's agreement is toexplore areas of the Timan-Pechora region, straddling theArctic Circle, where Texaco estimates oil reserves could bemore than five billion barrels.)   With perseverance, some Westerners have managed tonavigate this maze. One of them is Canadian Fracmaster Ltd.,a Calgary-based oil-services company with a technique torecover oil from wells damaged during drilling.   In March 1989, the company set up a joint venture with theoil-production enterprise here. The Canadian company providesmost of the equipment and several oil specialists to overseethe process.   Unlike in the West, where it would normally be paid forits services on a contract basis, Fracmaster is paidaccording to the amount of additional oil that flows from thewells it has treated. The joint venture has treated about 100wells and recovered about 300,000 tons of additional oil, butit is not yet profitable.   Monty Meikle, chief of technology for the venture, sayswork tends to be slower than in the West, with jobs thatcould be done in one week taking two to three. One of thebiggest problems is long waits for Soviet equipment that theventure uses, such as trucks, surface rigs and fluid tanks.Still, Mr. Meikle says, &quot;as we get to know each other, thingsimprove and move more to our standards.&quot;   The Soviets are in dire need of such sophisticateddrilling and recovery methods. For years, the government andoil workers paid scant attention to the efficiency ofextraction techniques; oil was so abundant they didn't needto bother.   In the rush to pump as fast as possible, drilling wasoften slapdash and led to frequent damage of the wells.Poor-quality pipes often corrode or are damaged by carelessworkers, leading to an estimated seven million barrels of oilbeing spilled on Siberian soil every year.   The Soviet oil-equipment industry, too, ignored the needsof smaller fields, concentrating on providing for hugefields. Now, as some big fields reach maturity and new onesbecome harder to find, such neglect is returning to haunt theindustry.   &quot;Most of our sources were wrongly exploited,&quot; saysAlexander Arbatov, an oil expert at the Soviet Academy ofSciences. &quot;We have a very low technical level, and haven'timproved our standards.&quot; As a result, he says, &quot;production isfalling faster than we expected.&quot;   For Prof. Arbatov and some other Soviet experts, suchtechnical problems are merely the tip of the iceberg. Theycontend that the Kremlin's entire energy strategy over thepast 20 years has been flawed.   Since oil was first exploited in Western Siberia in themid-1960s, the government has poured billions of dollars intothe region in order to pump as much as possible. Theresulting revenues from exports, particularly following theoil price surges of the 1970s, kept the economy afloat.   Economics is dictating a drastic change of policy. Whenoil prices started falling in the mid-1980s, the newlyappointed Mr. Gorbachev initially chose traditional methodsto offset the shortfall in revenue: more money to pump moreoil.   But that policy proved prohibitively expensive. Accordingto internal government figures, the cost of extracting Sovietoil -- now mostly from smaller fields, which are harder toexploit -- has almost tripled since 1985. Last year, theKremlin slammed on the brakes. Investment in the oil sector,along with capital outlays to other industries, was paredback heavily.   Critics say the move came too late. Over the years, theysay, some of the huge amount invested in oil would have beenbetter spent on other sectors of the economy, especiallyproduction of consumer goods. At the same time, heavysubsidies on energy allowed the nation's industry to gethooked on cheap oil.   As a result, consumption surged. In all energy, the SovietUnion consumes the equivalent of nearly 28 million barrels ofoil a day, more than all of Western Europe and second only tothe U.S.   Alexei Makarov, director of the Institute of EnergyResearch at the Academy of Sciences, says the governmentneeds to triple domestic energy prices just to bring theminto line with actual costs. But such a move is politicallytricky at a time of growing social unrest.   Here in Nefteyugansk, a town of 140,000 whose name means&quot;Oil South,&quot; local officials are equally critical of pastpolicy. Government spending in the area doubled between 1980and 1988, but most of it went to the oil industry, not thepressing social needs of residents.   One tenth of the town's population is on the waiting listfor better housing. There is a dire shortage of hospitals andschools. Oil workers here and throughout Western Siberiathreatened to strike earlier this year to protest poor livingconditions. They backed off after the government gave themsome hard currency from oil revenues to buy imported meat.   Vladimir Solomin, deputy director of the town'soil-producing enterprise, would like his company to becomeindependent both of Moscow and of the oil authorities inTyumen, 600 miles to the south. &quot;We must use the oil weextract to improve social conditions,&quot; he says. &quot;Cooperationwith foreign partners is thus very important.&quot;   Foreign oil companies are eager. With prospects rapidlyshrinking elsewhere, they see the U.S.S.R. as a new frontier.   France's state-owned Elf Aquitaine announced the firstmajor exploration and production agreement with the Soviets-- although, like most agreements, it's not in Siberia, wherethe oil is easiest to exploit. It was to give Elf the rightto drill on 13,500 square miles of territory north of theCaspian Sea near the Volga River. Or so it seemed. Elf'spresident said later that many details still had to be workedout.   Then, last June 2, while Mr. Gorbachev was in the U.S.,Chevron Corp. signed a declaration of intent to explore anddevelop regions including the giant Tengiz field -- thebiggest discovered in the world in the past 10 years,according to Soviet authorities. Its potential reserves areestimated at 25 billion barrels, almost equal to all theproven reserves of the U.S.   Chevron can provide the equipment and the managementskills the Soviets lack, says Edward B. Scott II, vicepresident of Chevron Overseas Petroleum Inc., who callsSoviet equipment &quot;30 years behind us.&quot; But he says developingthe field will be difficult. The Soviets have invested $1billion so far, he says, and much more will be necessary. Thefield itself has high pressure, and there is a highconcentration of hydrogen sulfide in the gas -- a dangeroussubstance in an oil field if not handled correctly.   Mr. Scott says Chevron has been in &quot;intense negotiations&quot;for more than a year. It has brought groups of Sovietauthorities, including the top official of the province, tothe U.S. and taken them on tours of facilities. It broughtthe minister of petroleum to the U.S. But it still doesn'thave a final agreement with the Soviets.   Some smaller oil companies and oil-service concerns aresucceeding in carving out niches. Anglo-Suisse Inc. ofHouston has formed a joint venture company with the Sovietscalled White Knight. It drills horizontal wells -- extremelyhelpful in reviving oil fields thought to be worn out. It isstudying the feasibility of drilling as many as 450horizontal wells. It will share in the oil recovered.   Under a recent agreement between Texas-based Halliburtonand the Soviet Ministry of Oil and Gas, a Soviet ship issailing the Chukchi Sea collecting seismic data for futureoil exploration. The data will be packaged for sale toWestern oil companies.   But until more foreign oil companies come to the region,officials here admit their daily struggle with theuncertainties of the Soviet economy will continue.   One morning, Mr. Solomin drives out to the Mammoth oilfield with a visitor and Mr. Gusev, the field's chiefengineer. On the way, they stop to inspect a well.   The Romanian-made rig isn't moving.   &quot;Why isn't it working?&quot; Mr. Solomin asks.   &quot;Repairs,&quot; Mr. Gusev replies.   Mr. Solomin, embarrassed to show off something that isn'tfunctioning, turns to his visitor and tries to shrug it off.   &quot;They'll be here tomorrow to fix it,&quot; he says, hopefully.</TEXT></DOC>