<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910121-0027</DOCNO><DOCID>910121-0027.</DOCID><HL>   Phase Two:   Air War Intensifies   As U.S., Allies Plan   Strikes on Iraqi Troops   ---   Patriots Disarm Scud Missiles;   A Defiant Saddam Vows   To Escalate Retaliation   ---   POWs as Radio Propaganda   ----   By John J. Fialka   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA -- The next week in the Gulf warpromises to be much tougher and uglier than the first.   The U.S. plans to shift from attacking strategic airfieldsand buildings to concentrated bombardment of Iraqi troops dugin and awaiting battle in the desert of Kuwait and southernIraq. The television footage it produces won't be likened tovideo games. The bombing will be aimed at people, notbuildings; and its hallmark will be lethality, not precision.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;You're going to see extended B-52 strikes on the forwardarea of the Iraqis,&quot; says retired Gen. Edward C. Meyer,former Army chief of staff. The bombers will attempt toshatter the Iraqis' earthen fortifications, Gen. Meyerpredicts, burying some troops and leaving the others toemerge shocked and dazed.   The bombing campaign will be critical in determining thelength, intensity and cost of the war. The U.S. hope is thatIraqi forces can be bombed into submission, avoiding the needfor a messy and costly ground attack. If so, the war will beshorter and simpler than feared.   But Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the U.S. commander in SaudiArabia, was cautious in expressing that hope yesterday. &quot;Manypeople have said that we could win this with an air waralone,&quot; he said. &quot;That's entirely conceivable.&quot; But, headded, &quot;Many people have said that it's absolutely necessaryto have a ground war. That's entirely conceivable also.&quot;   Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein is clearly calculating that hecan withstand the air attacks, and turn the tide against theallied forces once a ground war begins. &quot;In the comingperiod, the response of Iraq will be on a larger scale, usingall the means and potential God has given us and which haveso far only been used in part,&quot; Saddam vowed yesterday. &quot;Whenthe confrontation begins with an all-out battle with allkinds of weapons and arms, the extent of death in the enemyranks will increase.&quot;   Despite the early success of the air assault on Iraq,Saddam Hussein continued yesterday to throw the allies offbalance by lobbing crude missiles out of Iraq from mobilelaunchers the U.S. hasn't yet located.   The latest Scud barrage focused on Saudi Arabia. In twowaves yesterday, 10 Scuds rocketed toward the importantmilitary and oil center of Dhahran and the Saudi capital ofRiyadh, where the U.S. military command is located. Batteriesof U.S.-made Patriot air defense missiles blew up nine of theIraqi missiles before they hit the ground. The tenth landedharmlessly in the Persian Gulf, a U.S. military spokesmansaid.   To head off Israeli retaliation for earlier Scud attacks,the Bush Administration moved over the weekend to provideIsrael with an American shield against further Iraqi missilebarrages. First, a small but unprecedented contingent ofAmerican soldiers arrived in the Jewish state withoperational Patriot missiles. Then the Pentagon said the U.S.is dispatching an aircraft carrier, the U.S.S. Forrestal, toIsrael's coast.   Also, Iraq displayed on television what it claimed arethree U.S. prisoners of war. Apparently under duress, onesaid, &quot;I think our leaders and our people have wronglyattacked the peaceful people of Iraq.&quot;   The U.S. hopes to build on its early battle successes withextensive &quot;carpet&quot; bombing in the desert to the south ofKuwait City, and in the area along the Iraqi-Kuwaiti borderwhere the 100,000 troops of the crack Republican Guard arebeing held in reserve.   Carpet bombing is brutally punishing. One raid can plow upa square mile of ground, and the concussions are so powerfulthat they can suffocate soldiers. But it works best againstassembled soldiers, and the Iraqis are believed to havedispersed their troops in Kuwait. The B-52 raids could alsopose higher risks for U.S. crews.   Nevertheless, the bombing raids and simultaneous shellingfrom Navy ships in the Persian Gulf will result in far fewerallied casualties than would an actual ground war. As aresult, the U.S. appears that it will be in no hurry to bringthis next phase of the war to an end. One of the lessons U.S.commanders learned in Vietnam, says Gen. Meyer, was to &quot;usefirepower instead of manpower. Get it over quickly -- but notso quickly that you lose people.&quot;   Gen. Schwarzkopf seemed to have that lesson in mindyesterday when he said that Saddam Hussein seemed to haveassumed that the U.S. air campaign would last only a fewdays. &quot;Of course we aren't limited to that at all,&quot; he said.&quot;Time is very definitely on our side.&quot;   Eventually, however, General Schwarzkopf may conclude thatthe war can't be won by bombardment alone. Many U.S. militaryexperts are skeptical that an air war can succeed. No war hasever been won solely with air power, they argue. Moreover,Army officials say the Air Force has a reputation foroverestimating the efficacy of aerial bombardment, as wasdemonstrated by postwar studies of Germany and Vietnam.   A U.S. Marine officer now in Saudi Arabia recalls that inVietnam, well dug-in troops survived even some of the mostintense U.S. bombings. They emerged from their holes withnoses bleeding but full of fight.   The U.S. hopes Iraqi soldiers will be quicker to losetheir nerve. But the relatively low level of Iraqi defectionsthus far indicates that Iraqi morale may be higher thanpreviously thought.   Moreover, U.S. military officials worry the Iraqi leadermay be playing a waiting game, husbanding his ammunition forthe ground war he wants. Marine First Lt. Gregory Anderson,who spent the weekend shooting at Iraqi outposts in Kuwaitfrom his Cobra helicopter gunship, thinks Iraqi gunners were&quot;deliberately withholding their fire&quot; so as not to revealtheir positions.   &quot;Once our ground forces make their move, {the Iraqis will}use all their stuff,&quot; predicts Lt. Anderson. &quot;Right nowthey're keeping it in their bunkers.&quot;   If it becomes clear that an air war can't do the jobalone, then the U.S. is likely to move to a mixed strategy inwhich air power is used to shape the fighting on the ground.At such a point, allied casualties may pick up sharply,posing a threat to support for the war effort at home. Buteven then, it won't be the hard-slogging trench warfare mostfeared by U.S. military planners.   The combined air and ground war is exactly the type of warthe U.S. has been planning for a decade -- although itenvisioned fighting against the Soviets' Red Army, notagainst Iraqis.   This combined air-and-ground phase could bring the mostsavage U.S. air attacks of the entire war, as the alliedbombers target elite Iraqi troops assembling to plug gaps inthe front lines.   Even as U.S. and allied ground forces became more engaged,they would strive to deny Saddam Hussein the bloody frontalassaults and trench warfare he has counted on. &quot;My guess,&quot;says Gen. Meyer, &quot;is that we'll envelop by sea, air and land.We don't want to fight them head on.&quot;   Arab members of the coalition would man the front againstIraqi troops in southern Kuwait, probing Iraqi lines. But thereal fighting would go on to the west and east. Along thewestern border of Kuwait, U.S. armored divisions probablywould swing along the Iraqi flank. If tank battles started,the U.S. would still rely heavily on its air advantage, usingattack aircraft to destroy Iraqi tank columns in the open.   And to the east, the U.S. Marines and allies would likelydrive up the Kuwaiti coastline. They would probably bebolstered by a Marine attack along the eastern coast by shipand helicopter. Finally, U.S. paratroops would land incentral Kuwait.   So far, the Iraqi missile attacks on Israel and SaudiArabia by Soviet-designed Scud missiles and Iraqi-modifiedmodels have had little or no actual military effect. Themissiles haven't carried poison gas. Their conventionalwarheads are small compared to the explosives carried by awarplane. And American Patriot air-defense missiles haveknocked down most of the Scuds fired at Saudi Arabia.   But the missile campaign, patterned after similar attacksin the Iran-Iraq war, has tarnished the image of the U.S. airarmada, and forced the Pentagon to divert some resources fromother targets to find the truck-mounted missile launchersfrom which the Scuds are flying.   The attacks also raised questions about the accuracy ofU.S. tactical intelligence, which has seemed awesome inlocating headquarters buildings and other targets. There issome confusion in the U.S. leadership about how much ofIraq's missile-launching force has survived. DefenseSecretary Dick Cheney said last night that &quot;we don't know howmany they have left, and there is some dispute as to how manythey had when they began.&quot; He said Iraq has &quot;30 or 40launchers, but that's just a rough guesstimate.&quot;   A Beirut newspaper quoted an unnamed Palestine LiberationOrganization official as saying that Iraq had 140 mobilelaunchers &quot;concealed in underground bunkers built in WesternIraq to be used in sporadic barrages against Israel.&quot; Theofficial also reportedly said Iraq has hidden hundreds ofwarplanes, as well as chemical and nuclear-weapons equipment,in bunkers in the mountains.   Throughout the weekend, waves of allied war jets swoopedover Iraq and occupied Kuwait, concentrating on 250 keytargets. The military said it had so far flown 7,000 missionsover Iraq and Kuwait. (There has been some limited bombing ofIraqi troops.) Bad weather now is slowing down the pace ofbombing missions somewhat. Eight U.S. planes have been downedby Iraq, while a ninth crashed due to mechanical problems.Gen. Schwarzkopf said he was &quot;astounded&quot; that the rate oflosses had been so low. Before the war began, some militaryplanners warned that allied aircraft losses might run to 10to 20 a day.   The U.S. now has 460,000 troops in the Gulf, and the Armyannounced it was calling up 20,000 more from a special poolof reserves who aren't members of regular reserve units.   Military statements revealed increasing confidence thatkey Iraqi military assets were being badly damaged, but itwas also becoming clear that it will take weeks, not days,for allied airpower to soften up Iraqi troops and damageIraqi defense systems before U.S. military leaders risk majorground action.   Gen. Schwarzkopf flatly asserted that Iraq's nuclear,chemical and biological weapons complexes had been crippledalready. But he said the military still isn't sure how muchof Iraq's air force and air-defense network remained intact.   In his appearance on Iraqi radio, Saddam Hussein alsourged Muslims everywhere to attack Western interests. TheIraqi leader is believed to be hiding out in safe civilianareas, Gen. Schwarzkopf said. The general added that the U.S.won't waste time on the difficult task of hunting him down,but will instead focus on cutting off his links to histroops.   Gen. Schwarzkopf reported that a small number of Iraqitroops have begun defecting across the war front, and thatthe U.S., in a psychological warfare move, plans to issue&quot;safe conduct passes&quot; to Iraqi soldiers to encourage moredefections.   ---   Walter S. Mossberg contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>