<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911004-0108</DOCNO><DOCID>911004-0108.</DOCID><HL>   Telecommunications (A Special Report)   ---   Crossed Wires:   Phone Service Overseas Provides   A Mixed Picture, Kodak Finds   ----   By Joan E. Rigdon</HL><DATE>10/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R6</SO><CO>   EK T TEF TFONY</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)</IN><RE>BRAZIL (BR)COLOMBIA (CL)CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)EUROPE (EU)MEXICO (MX)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PERU (PE)SCANDINAVIA (SCA)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)SPAIN (SP)SWEDEN (SW)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   ROCHESTER, N.Y. -- With phone, fax, modem, electronic mailand video conferencing at our fingertips, we can talk toanyone, anywhere, any time. We can send messages and datainstantaneously to all corners of the globe. Right?   Not always. Just ask Eastman Kodak Co.</LP><TEXT>   Kodak executives in Brazil often interrupt overseascallers because there's a delay of a few seconds before theyhear the begininning of the other person's comments. Thecompany still can't send computer files quickly to and fromSpain and most of South America. And it waited eight years tolease high-speed data-transmission lines between two citiesin Mexico.   &quot;In the U.S., you take for granted that the rest of theworld is like the U.S.,&quot; says Anthony J. DiBitetto,telecommunications coordinator for Kodak's European and NorthAmerican regions. &quot;Let me tell you frankly, it's not.&quot;   The hurdles differ around the globe. In some countries,there aren't enough data lines, which send computer filesmore quickly, reliably and cheaply than voice lines; inothers, even voice lines are lacking. And while mostcountries offer public lines, only some offer private lines,which big companies prefer. With private lines, companies paya fixed fee to move information over cables at a guaranteedspeed; using public lines means paying tolls for each calland risking the chance that the call may have to wait behindother calls during busy times.   There also are legal snags: Some countries restrict theimporting or exporting of electronic information -- making itdifficult, for instance, to use a computer to send payrollinformation back to headquarters where the checks are cut.   Whatever the obstacles, the quest for instantcommunications has never been more crucial. Any companylooking to compete globally must be able to communicate withits far-flung offices and factories on a moment's notice. Itmust alert them to currency changes and shifting productdemand. It must be able to send complicated data -- such asblueprints and updated product formulas -- across borders atthe touch of a button. Even the smallest delays -- of a fewhours or a few days -- can mean big increases in costs.   It may seem incongruous that communications snafus aboundin an age when an executive in Hungary can use a cellularphone to dial a dogsled at the North Pole or send a fax to anopen-air market in Pakistan. Cellular phones are indeed ahandy shortcut around poor infrastructure. But they'reinefficient for large-scale industrial use because they'revulnerable to eavesdroppers. Moreover, it takes enormousamounts of time and money to send huge batches of data overany voice lines.   Kodak, with operations in some 150 countries, provides avivid example of how far global communications has come --and how far it still has to go.   For starters, access to high-speed data lines can boostthe bottom line, as Kodak discovered in Brazil in themid-1980s. As soon as that government built data lines,Kodak's local sales force was able to place orders from homecomputers, instead of being tied to its office computers. Theresult: more time to sell, with market share for someproducts increasing by double digits, Kodak officials say.   Similarly, Kodak's distributors in the Caribbean andCentral America last year began using high-speed data linesto tap into Kodak's U.S. computers when placing orders.Distributors can now quickly check parts numbers, prices andavailability on a computer instead of rifling through manualsfor outdated information or placing myriad telephone calls.They can also see where a shipment is at any given moment.   Industrias Fotograficas S.A. in Costa Rica, an independentKodak distributor that claims an 82% market share in thatcountry, says the system has enabled it to slash inventory bytwo-thirds, thus reducing costs and improving service. &quot;Whenour customers come for a product, we have it there,&quot; saysIndustrias Fotograficas' general manager, Carlos R. Arias.   That's the good news. Unfortunately for Kodak, thosesuccess stories aren't universal. While high-speed data linescan revolutionize business activities, they don't existeverywhere. By far the biggest problem in building the globalvillage is getting governments and phone companies to investin new technology. That's especially true in debt-riddencountries struggling to pay for basic food and housing.   So Kodak's strategic telecommunications planners are morelike lobbyists than trouble-shooters. Instead of poring overbits and bytes, they spend most of their time trying toconvince everyone from politicians to their own employees --who can be reluctant to trade in answering machines for voicemail, let alone explore the mysteries of videoteleconferencing -- that a better communicationsinfrastructure pays big dividends.   It's a daunting task for a global giant -- not to mentionthe average entrepreneur. If you're a small company, &quot;you'reout of luck,&quot; says Marvin Sirbu, a Carnegie Mellon Universitypublic-policy professor who specializes intelecommunications.   Indeed, even big companies often find themselves out ofluck. At a recent telecommunications conference,public-policy professor Robert G. Harris met executives fromseveral large U.S. natural-resources companies who complainedthat they couldn't get access to high-speed data lines indeveloping countries unless they were willing to pay to laythe cable themselves and teach local phone experts how to doit.   Clout wasn't an issue. Many phone companies are &quot;sobureaucratic that they're just not capable of responding,&quot;says Mr. Harris, who teaches at the Haas School of Business,University of California, Berkeley.   The investment shortage shows up most often in inadequatedata lines. In Peru and Colombia, Kodak has been waitingalmost a year to lease private data lines so it can sendcomputer files without having to wait behind other traffic.It's unclear when the wait will end.   Even when data lines are available, companies don't alwaystake full advantage of them. Consider Kodak's experiencetrying to send certain software programs from Rochester toGermany and England. Unaware that Kodak has leased data linesto those countries, Rochester software developers sent theirprograms the old-fashioned way: They used a modem to dial avoice line and then left the phone off the hook for up toeight hours while the data trickled across. The result:annual phone bills of about $89,500. That cost was cut bymore than half in July when Kodak discovered the problem andthen developed a way to send the data on its own leasedlines.   Voice lines can also cause problems for multinationalcompanies -- both in terms of quantity and in quality. InVenezuela, to cite one example, there are only so many linesout of the country and operators must route the calls. SoKodak executives have to wait their turn for an operator.That might be just a few minutes or -- at a busy time of day-- up to an hour.   And forget trying to call an executive directly in Spainand Italy. Unless you're willing to use public lines -- whichcan sound scratchy or carry echoes of other conversations --all calls must be routed through company operators. That'sbecause the network of private lines isn't extensive enoughto allow multiple lines for each building in those countries.   Cost isn't the only obstacle multinational companies facein their communications struggle. Laws regarding importprotection also come into play.   In October 1984, Brazil said it would formally ban datatransmission across its borders unless companies couldprovide a detailed explanation of what the information wouldbe used for -- especially how it would benefit Brazil. But itdidn't enforce the ban right away. To get an exception to therule, David Glassman, who oversees telecommunications forKodak's Asian and Latin American regions, had to submit awritten argument showing how Kodak's plans would benefitBrazil's economy.   Without access to ever-changing quality-control data,Kodak's Brazilian film wouldn't match corporate standards,Mr. Glassman wrote. &quot;And oh, by the way,&quot; he recalls sneakinginto his argument, &quot;that $80 million worth of exports couldbe at risk.&quot; Not to mention production and administrationjobs. The exception was granted in 1986, without Kodak'shaving to disrupt its operations.   Many countries also fear that trade secrets or sensitivepolitical information will leak out once internationaltelecommunications lines are installed. In Sweden, forinstance, privacy laws make it illegal to transmitpersonnel-related data out of the country.   The Swedes say they are afraid that personal information,such as medical records, might be involved. But critics saythe law is a protectionist measure. They say it prevents aU.S. corporation with operations in Sweden from sendingpayroll information back to the U.S. to be processed.Instead, the company has to set up a data-processing centerin Sweden.   Not all countries and phone companies are unresponsive. Inmost parts of the world, telecommunications concerns meetwith corporations to discuss anticipated needs, such as whenand where high-speed data lines should be installed.Sometimes the meetings are fruitful. In one case, forinstance, a European phone company gave Kodak a new accountteam when the old one didn't respond to the company's needsquickly enough, Kodak officials say.   Kodak also is seeing improvement in Mexico. It waitedeight years -- from 1982 to 1990 -- to lease a line totransmit voice and data between Mexico City and Guadalajara.Now Mexico's Telefonos de Mexico S.A. is working closely withAmerican Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. to speed up installationof fiber-optic lines, so Kodak officials aren't anticipatingfuture waits there.   Kodak has had less luck in countries such as Spain, whereTelefonica de Espana S.A. has a monopoly. The carrier &quot;movesat a pace that's good for them,&quot; says Kodak's Mr. DiBitetto.&quot;But that's not necessarily the pace we agree to.&quot;   Soon, Kodak won't have that headache. The long-awaited1992 unification of the European Community will do away withmonopolies there. Once &quot;everybody is playing in everybodyelse's sandbox,&quot; Mr. DiBitetto says, &quot;we're not going to haveto do business with Telefonica.&quot;   ---   Ms. Rigdon is a staff reporter in The Wall StreetJournal's Pittsburgh bureau.</TEXT></DOC>