<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900511-0111</DOCNO><DOCID>900511-0111.</DOCID><HL>   MEDICINE andamp; HEALTH (A Special Report): Fixing It   ---   Agonizing Choices:   Medical Advances in Fighting Heart Disease Have Forced   The Patient to Make Difficult Decisions About Treatment   ----   By Ron Winslow and Michael Waldholz</HL><DATE>05/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R16</SO><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)</IN><LP>   FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS now the nation's greatest killerhas been giving ground, grudgingly at first but now withincreasing speed, before an onslaught by modern medicine andtechnology. But this very success has bred a problem all itsown, a problem of alternatives.   The killer is coronary-artery disease, which still takes ahalf-million lives annually, and the problem is this: Withevery refinement and new advance in its treatment, doctorsand patients alike now have choices they never had before --agonizing ones. The result has been increasing tension overtreatment options, particularly between cardiologists andsurgeons, and more anxiety and doctor-shopping among patientswhose lives depend on making the right decision.</LP><TEXT>   Granted, this is not the worst problem they could have.Nobody would want to go back to, say, the mid-60s, when adiagnosis of substantial artery disease was, as one physicianputs it, &quot;tantamount to a death sentence.&quot; Little could bedone. The patient might die tomorrow, next month, next year,10 years from now -- but he would die early unless somethingelse killed him even earlier.   Since then, millions of lives have been saved and greatlyextended by the principal developments of the past couple ofdecades: cardiac bypass surgery, angioplasty, and new drugregimens. But though these are impressive statistics, heartdisease is not about statistics. It is about the individualpatient and his doctor groping for answers to two universalquestions:   What is the best way to treat this particular case? Whatshould I do to save my life?   ---   In Hanover, N.H., the operating room atDartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center resonates with the harshbuzz of a hand-held jigsaw as cardiac surgeon Stephen Plumecuts open the chest of a 67-year-old man. Soon, three clearplastic tubes connecting the patient's heart to a nearbyheart-lung machine turn a deep crimson; the patient's bloodis now being pumped from outside his body. Moments later, atechnician turns a valve sending a potassium-based solutiondirectly to the heart. It stops cold.   This is coronary-artery bypass graft surgery, in which avein from another part of the patient's body will be used tocreate an alternative route around fat-clogged portions ofhis coronary arteries. Untreated, the arteries would clogcompletely or get plugged by a blood clot, triggering a heartattack.   Bypass surgery is the ultimate, most invasive and -- topatients --  the most frightening of all treatments forcoronary-artery disease. For almost 15 years after itsinception in 1968, it was also the only one available tosevere cases. Their choice was simple then: Have the surgeryor die.   That changed a decade ago with the advent of angioplasty,a safer and less invasive procedure (but in some ways a lesseffective one). With angioplasty, a needle-thin catheter isthreaded into the heart's arteries and a balloon at its tipis inflated, squashing the fatty deposits flat against theartery walls and allowing a freer flow of blood through them.Suddenly, there were two choices on the treatment menu.   And all along new drugs were being developed, and new usesfor old ones found. Today, 65% of newly diagnosed cases ofcoronary disease are initially treated by drugs, and for agood many of them drugs remain the only therapy prescribed.   No heart drug clears obstructions from blood vessels. Butthe beta-blocker compounds reduce the heart's workload, andhence its need for oxygen that the diseased arteries can'tdeliver. The calcium-channel antagonists keep narrowedarteries from closing due to spasms, and simple aspirin isnow widely prescribed to prevent blood clots.   Of course, for many patients, choosing among the threetreatment options -- surgery, angioplasty or drugs -- ispremature. The first thing doctors should do, says EugenePassamani, director of heart and vascular diseases at theNational Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, is demand thattheir patients reduce their heart-attack risk by changingtheir behavior: Quit smoking, reduce weight, and lower bloodpressure and cholesterol levels. &quot;Smokers have to beadmonished to stop smoking,&quot; says Dr. Passamani. &quot;The dataare incontrovertible.&quot;   But experienced cardiologists say they often know just bytalking to their patients that some treatment is needed.&quot;Patients take their fist and put it against their chest,&quot;says Gerald Weisfogel, a Metuchen, N.J., heart doctor. &quot;Whenthey use that description, it really sets off bells. It'sclassic angina&quot; -- pain caused when clogged arteries blockblood flow to the heart.   Prescribing treatment, however, is another matter. &quot;At theextremes, it's very easy,&quot; Dr. Passamani says. &quot;A severelydiseased left main artery {which feeds the left ventricle,the heart's pumping chamber} goes right to bypass. Mildangina can be treated with medicine.&quot;   That leaves a lot in between for doctors to disagree about-- and a lot for patients to be confused about. Thomas Noto,a cardiologist at the Cleveland Clinic Florida, in FortLauderdale, says: &quot;When you show a surgeon a case ofsignificant coronary disease, there's only one cure for it:surgery. When you show it to a cardiologist, there's only onecure for it: angioplasty.&quot;   Dr. Noto is admittedly exaggerating to make a point --that surgeons like to cut, that cardiologists like to avoidcutting, and that these ingrained biases sometimes affectdecision-making. A cardiologist he knows had a 42-year-oldmale patient with blockage in three arteries -- making him,says Dr. Noto, clearly a case for bypass. The cardiologistsold him on angioplasty instead. While it was being done, thepatient went into shock and his heart muscle was damagedbefore an emergency bypass, the backup procedure, could becompleted.   &quot;The patient's whole life expectancy was reduced,&quot; saysDr. Noto. &quot;This wasn't a malpractice thing, but it certainlywas bad judgment.&quot;   As for patients, it's not surprising that when given achoice, almost all will select angioplasty over bypass. Inthe balloon technique, patients are sedated and awake ratherthan anesthetized, they are not being torn open by surgicalsaws, and they're in the hospital for just a day or two andcan return to work within five days. Only about 1% ofpatients die during the procedure or soon after.   By contrast, bypass patients generally spend 10 days ormore in the hospital and three months recuperating. Theirdeath rate is 2% at medical centers where surgical teams do alarge number of such operations, and can be far higher wherethey don't. The cost is higher, too -- an average of $22,771,against $9,138 for angioplasty, according to a study done atEmory University in Atlanta.   But there are hidden hazards and other drawbacks toangioplasty. In 3% to 7% of cases, the vessel stretched openby the balloon collapses spontaneously and a bypass has to bedone anyway, either immediately or promptly. (For thisreason, doctors say it is imperative that angioplasty be doneonly in hospitals where heart surgeons are on standby.)   Finally, in 30% of cases the arteries treated clog againwithin six months. Only 10 weeks after his angioplasty,Walter Hermann, a 43-year-old ATandamp;T employee from Piscataway,N.J., felt a tightness in his chest while he was walking. &quot;Iknew it had closed,&quot; he says. He had angioplasty again, withthe vessels opened wider than before, and has been free ofsymptoms for two years though he jogs five miles a day.   It isn't unusual to perform the balloon treatment even athird time, but that's about the limit. Says cardiologistGeoffrey Hartzler of the Mid-America Heart Institute inKansas City: &quot;It isn't sane to do it every three or fourmonths. The time comes for surgery rather than keep floggingit with the balloon.&quot;   Surgeons, he adds, argue that with the high rate ofrecurrence a bypass might as well be done in the first place.Though the grafted vessels in that procedure often clog up,too, the process generally takes years rather than a fewmonths.   But variations on angioplasty are now being tested,variations that promise to make the procedure longer-lasting.They include tiny lasers that vaporize the fatty depositsinstead of just flattening them out, roto-rooter devices thatshave them away, and stents -- springy mesh coils that, leftinside the diseased artery by the angioplasty catheter,expand against the artery walls to keep them open.   This will certainly improve the therapy, but it will alsomake the choices for doctors and patients even more complex.Currently, there are no firm guidelines doctors can rely onto determine which patients would be best served by whichtreatment; studies are under way, but results are years off.   Even experienced physicians find that treating heartdisease is often more art than science. &quot;No two patients arealike,&quot; says Charles Bush, director of the cardiaccatheterization laboratory at Ohio State UniversityHospitals, Columbus. &quot;What happens to their father or theiruncle or their neighbor isn't what's going to happen to them,even if it sounds like exactly the same thing. That's whatmakes this business very difficult.&quot;   Fearing bypass even though their cases call for it, manypatients have to be talked out of angioplasty. When thepatient is elderly, the issue may be whether either procedureis worth doing. Dr. Noto, the cardiologist from FortLauderdale, says that the risk and the cost of bypass andangioplasty often outweigh the benefits that, say, a79-year-old might get. He believes many patients that ageshould be treated with nothing but medication.   &quot;I spend as much time talking people out of gettinginvaded as I do invading them,&quot; he says. &quot;We're using upresources with no regard whatever to their cost.&quot; In suchcases, he adds, not only medical judgment but ethical andmoral considerations must be involved in the treatmentdecision.   Such decisions are extraordinarily complex in any casewhere the remedy is not clear-cut, as it frequently is not.This is apparent at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center inHanover, where cardiologists and heart surgeons meet everyWednesday for a &quot;cath conference&quot; at which tough cases arereviewed.   One Wednesday they are watching films of an angiogram -- adiagnostic procedure in which dye is injected into thecoronary arteries to reveal their condition -- taken on a50-year-old saleswoman. Watching the dye course through herarteries, the doctors see that in some places they are 70% to90% blocked and look like twisted ribbon, each twistrepresenting a narrowed passage.   But this is only one consideration. The doctors in Hanoveralso factor into the risk-benefit equation such things asage, weight, personal habits and health history, existence ofcomplicating diseases like diabetes, condition of the heartmuscle itself, and more.   &quot;She continues to smoke, she has high cholesterol, and hasa {negative} family history,&quot; a cardiologist reports. Thebest he can say for her is that she doesn't have diabetes andthat she's trying to quit smoking. &quot;I don't think she's acandidate for angioplasty, but she wants something done,&quot; headds.   Using a complex risk formula, surgeon Stephen Plumecalculates her risk of death during bypass at 7% to 10% --far higher than the average 2% and more than he iscomfortable with. He is displeased that she is still smoking.But she is only 50, and he says he is &quot;uneasy&quot; at ruling herout. In the end, he puts her down for bypass.   Another patient is 76, less than five feet tall, andweighs 240 pounds. Looking at the films, a doctor murmurs,&quot;The LAD {left anterior descending artery, a criticallyimportant vessel} looks like 10 miles of bad road.&quot;   If she were younger or not obese, a bad LAD would probablysend her to bypass. But as it is, her risk of death on thetable is calculated at a sky-high 26%. &quot;And what do we gaineven if we have a {successful} result at surgery?&quot; one doctorasks. Dr. Plume says, &quot;We don't want to operate on her.&quot; Thecardiologists agree to try to open up her LAD with a balloon.   These kinds of decisions are being made every week incountless medical centers. But they are only preliminarydecisions; the patient must agree. And, with growingfrequency, anxious patients are demanding more informationfrom their doctors and more involvment in the whole processof weighing treatment options.   When they are dissatisfied, some of them godoctor-shopping. Michael Tobin, a 47-year-old lawyer who hadhad a bypass 10 years before, discovered last fall that hisarteries had become obstructed again. Told by his doctor thathe needed another bypass, he balked. &quot;Being cut down themiddle of your chest is a big deal,&quot; he says. &quot;I wasdetermined not to go through it again.&quot;   Mr. Tobin personally sent his angiograms to five of thenation's foremost balloon specialists, hoping at least onewould agree to try angioplasty. &quot;They told me to forget it,&quot;he says. He looked into laser angioplasty but found that itwas still viewed as experimental.   Mr. Tobin finally relented -- but only after he got DudleyJohnson, the Milwaukee surgeon who was a bypass pioneer andwho specializes in difficult cases, to take his case. &quot;Dr.Johnson said my situation wasn't so complicated,&quot; says Mr.Tobin, who is back at work in New Jersey following successfulsurgery. &quot;When he said that, I knew he was the one for me.&quot;   ---   Messrs. Winslow and Waldholz report on medicine and healthfrom The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.</TEXT></DOC>