<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920313-0029</DOCNO><DOCID>920313-0029.</DOCID><HL>   Explosive Issue:   U.S. Sees New Signs   Israel Resells Its Arms   To China, South Africa   ---   A Lack of Export Approvals   For Technology Is Found;   Missiles, Bombs and Radar   ---   Israel Denies Any Violations   ----   By Edward T. Pound   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/13/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)CHINA (CH)CHILE (CI)ETHIOPIA (ET)FAR EAST (FE)ISRAEL (ISR)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)SOUTH AFRICA (SF)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)THAILAND (TH)UNITED STATES (US)VENEZUELA (VE)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- U.S. intelligence agencies have developedstrong evidence indicating that Israel has been armingnations such as China and South Africa through unauthorizedsales of sensitive American weapons technology.   The classified intelligence provides &quot;overwhelming&quot;evidence, according to senior U.S. officials, that Israel hasre-exported weapons containing U.S. technology without firstobtaining Washington's approval for the sales, as the U.S.requires. The weapons include air-to-air missiles sold toChina, anti-tank missiles sold to South Africa and clusterbombs sent to Ethiopia and Chile, as well as varioussophisticated aircraft radars and jamming devices.</LP><TEXT>   Such evidence of unauthorized sales is certain to add tothe current tensions between the U.S. and Israel. Relationsbetween the allies have been strained recently, largely as aresult of President Bush's efforts to get Israel to stopsettlement construction in the occupied territories in returnfor $10 billion in U.S. loan guarantees.   Information obtained from government officials during asix-week investigation by this newspaper suggests Israel usesseveral schemes to transfer, or re-export, U.S. items toother countries. In some cases, they say, the Israelisacquire U.S. components, install them in their own systemsand sell the finished products to third countries. In others,Israel employs reverse engineering -- disassembling a weaponto acquire its design secrets -- and then copies it withchanges before selling the item to another country.   U.S. officials have privately been pressuring Israel formonths to halt the practice, officials say. But Israeliofficials have repeatedly denied any wrongdoing.   An Israeli government spokeswoman, Ruth Yaron, declines toanswer specific questions about arms sales, but she saysIsrael hasn't violated U.S. regulations. &quot;Our policy is toadhere strictly to the procurement and technology transferregulations,&quot; she adds.   The State Department's inspector general, Sherman Funk, isexpected to issue a report later this month that willsummarize intelligence reports of the apparent Israeliviolations of U.S. regulations and agreements, the officialssay. That report will exclude many of the sensitive detailsrevealed in classified intelligence, and it probably won'tlist Israel by name.   Mr. Funk's public report is also expected to criticize theState Department for failing to monitor defense salesadequately. Israel spends about $900 million in U.S. militaryaid each year to make commercial purchases from Americancontractors, including sophisticated weaponry and technology.But Mr. Funk's auditors last year found the State Departmentover several months hadn't checked on how high-tech itemssold to Israel were used, according to an official familiarwith the inquiry.   Mr. Funk will recommend disciplinary action againstRichard Clarke, assistant secretary of state in charge of thebureau of politico-military affairs. Such action couldinclude firing.   Separately, the Washington Times reported yesterday thatthe Bush administration is investigating intelligence reportsthat Israel secretly supplied a U.S. Patriot missile or itstechnology to China. Israeli officials strongly denied thereport, and U.S. officials say they are attempting to verifythe intelligence information.   Intelligence and State Department officials say thatphysical inspection and disassembly of Israeli militaryhardware would be required to prove unequivocally that Israelwas diverting U.S. technology and arms. But reports have beenso pervasive as to leave no doubt in the U.S. intelligencecommunity that Israel has repeatedly engaged in diversionschemes.   Israel's role in arming nations such as South Africa andChina has long been a matter of public knowledge. But at thehighest levels, Israel repeatedly has denied to the U.S. thatthe arms it exports involve unauthorized use of U.S.technology. Mr. Funk's report will mark the first time thegovernment has publicly released evidence that, withoutnaming Israel, will strongly suggest it has exported U.S.weapons technology without authorization.   The U.S. discourages trading with certain countries, insome cases because they promote terrorism or have poor humanrights records. The U.S., for instance, won't sell arms toSouth Africa's military or police and complies with a UnitedNations arms embargo of South Africa because of apartheidracial policies.   Mr. Funk didn't start out investigating Israelexclusively. His investigation began as a broad look at thedepartment's failure to prevent unauthorized diversions ofU.S. arms and technologies by companies in Brazil, SouthKorea and Singapore, as well as Israel. And his final reportwill cover some other countries. But the investigationeventually focused on Israel because, in the words of onesenior American official, &quot;bucketfuls of intelligence data&quot;tied companies owned by the Israeli government to illicitsales.   Mr. Funk briefed Secretary of State James Baker and DeputySecretary Lawrence Eagleburger on Israel's purportedactivities last June. Mr. Eagleburger began an immediatereview of Mr. Funk's preliminary findings. In an Aug. 24 memosent to 10 senior officials, Mr. Eagleburger ordered thatprocedures be adopted to ensure that information onunauthorized re-exports involving any arms purchaser beinvestigated and reported to Congress, department recordsshow. Mr. Eagleburger also went to Capitol Hill and at leasttwice briefed congressional leaders, including Speaker ThomasFoley and members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.   Soon after the meeting with Messrs. Baker and Eagleburger,documents show, the State Department began holding up exportlicenses for Israel, including U.S. equipment for Israel'sheat-seeking Python 3 air-to-air missile. Companies needexport licenses to ship arms that are on the official U.S.Munitions List. In a blunt letter, the department warned theIsraeli government that licenses wouldn't be granted forcertain high-tech equipment unless Israel could ensure thatthe technology wouldn't be diverted.   &quot;We would like to be assured you will seek the usual {U.S.government} approval before third-party transfer occurs,&quot;wrote Charles Duelfer, a State Department official. Israel'sDefense Ministry said it would do so, but the StateDepartment continues to closely scrutinize Israeli exportapplications, according to senior U.S. officials.   The only public hint of this tug-of-war came last October,when Mr. Bush slapped Israel on the wrist after the U.S.discovered that an Israeli-owned company had exportedballistic missile components to a South African governmentfirm. Mr. Bush imposed trading sanctions on the South Africanfirm, but waived them for the Israeli company. Under pressurefrom the U.S., however, Israel agreed to adhere tointernational missile controls aimed at preventing theproliferation of missiles capable of carrying nuclearwarheads.   The Israeli company wasn't publicly named, but accordingto U.S. officials, it was Israel Aircraft Industries, or IAI.U.S. sanctions would have crippled IAI, Israel's largestexporter of military items and the prime contractor on theIsrael-U.S. Arrow ground-to-air defense missile, which isbeing developed to protect Israeli cities from missileattacks. U.S. officials say the sanctions, if imposed, wouldhave barred IAI from receiving U.S. technology, obtainingexport licenses from the State and Commerce departments ordoing business with U.S. agencies.   Surrounded by hostile neighbors, Israel has steadily builtits defense industry, getting a helping hand from the U.S.,which provides a basic military grant of $1.8 billion a year.In the past decade, Israel acquired billions of dollars inweapons and technology from U.S. companies and also joinedthe ranks of the world's top exporters of military items.Government companies such as Israel Aircraft Industries andRafael are among the principal exporters. Rafael is part ofIsrael's defense ministry.   American officials with access to extremely sensitiveinformation say IAI and Rafael and a third, government-ownedcompany, Israel Military Industries, are among the Israeliconcerns listed in intelligence reports as having madeunauthorized transfers of U.S. technology.   Rafael, they say, has sold its Python 3 air-to-air missileto China and Thailand and is suspected of having sold themissile to South Africa. The Python 3, they say, is listed inintelligence reports as having a &quot;high degree&quot; of U.S.technology and was adapted from the U.S. AIM-9L Sidewinder.   China is Israel's largest arms customer, according to theofficials. Officials say China, itself a major arms exporter,sells arms to Iraq, including its own version of the Python3, called the &quot;PL-8.&quot; &quot;That shows you how the system breaksdown,&quot; says one senior official. &quot;Once you let the genie outof the bottle, there are no controls.&quot;   IMI, the officials say, has sold the Mapats anti-tankmissile to South Africa and Venezuela and is suspected ofhaving sold it to China. The Mapats, intelligence reportsshow, is a close copy of Hughes Aircraft Co.'s TOW-2 missile.Israel, they add, also has sold cluster bombs to Chile, SouthAfrica and Ethiopia. Intelligence reports list sales of manyother systems, including aircraft, airborne electroniccountermeasures systems and other sophisticated electronicsequipment.   Marvin Klemow, an IAI official in Washington, said hecouldn't comment on Mr. Funk's report or any allegations. AnIMI official here declined comment and referred all questionsto IMI officials in Tel Aviv, who weren't available lastnight.   Intelligence data reviewed by officials includes aSeptember 1990 report by the Technology Transfer IntelligenceCommittee, a group representing several U.S. agencies andheaded by the Central Intelligence Agency.   The classified report, entitled &quot;Israel: Marketing U.S.Strategic Technology,&quot; listed several countries -- includingSouth Africa, China, Venezuela, Chile, Ethiopia and Thailand-- to which Israel had sold weaponry allegedly containingU.S. technology. The report's authors include officials fromthe CIA, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the NationalSecurity Agency, the National Security Council and theFederal Bureau of Investigation.   In many cases, re-exports of high-tech defense itemsacquired from U.S. sources are forbidden by the Arms ExportControl Act, unless approved by the U.S. The law requiresreports to Congress whenever the State Department receivesreliable information on re-export violations.   Some State Department officials in the bureau ofpolitico-military affairs maintain that reportingrequirements apply only to re-export violations that involveequipment furnished directly by the U.S. government and noton commercial transactions. Moreover, they argue, U.S.sanctions, including termination of military aid, can beimposed only on violations that involve direct U.S.government sales. But Mr. Funk argues that sanctions can beimposed by the president as long as the items re-exported areon the official U.S. Munitions List, people familiar with hisinquiry say.   A senior State Department official says the CIA wasespecially helpful to Mr. Funk in his investigation. Hisauditors discovered that the CIA's intelligence reports onIsraeli sales weren't widely circulated within the StateDepartment.   Indeed, the State Department's Mr. Clarke wasn't convincedby the intelligence, although he occasionally filed protestswith the Israeli government, according to three Americanofficials. Mr. Clarke previously served as the department'sdeputy assistant secretary for intelligence and research,which initially receives U.S. intelligence from otheragencies and distributes it within the department.   One government agency, the Arms Control and DisarmamentAgency, has long been pressuring State Department licensingofficials to crack down on Israel.   Last spring, the ACDA notified licensing officials that itwanted to review export applications for U.S. components ifthey were to be used in certain Israeli weapons systems,State Department records show. The notification covered morethan a dozen systems, including the Phalcon Awacs aircraft(Airborne Warning and Control System), a lethal unmannedaerial vehicle, surface-to-air missiles and anti-missileflares used in combat aircraft, the records show. Severallicense applications were stopped as a result of ACDA'sinquiry, a U.S. official says. ACDA was among the agenciesthat cooperated with the inquiry by the State Departmentinspector general.   The State Department's Office of Defense Trade Controls,which is part of the bureau of politico-military affairs,issues more than 55,000 licenses a year for items on the U.S.Munitions List, and must enforce export laws, making surethat foreign end-users listed in license applicationsactually receive the items. In March 1989, the GeneralAccounting Office developed evidence that some countries weretransferring U.S. defense items without obtaining re-exportlicenses. In an inquiry later in 1989, Mr. Funk's inspectorsfound the office seldom did end-user checks to verify how theitems were put to use, and the State Department reorganizedthe office in January 1990.   Last spring, Mr. Funk sent his auditors back to see howthe office was doing, and found a curious pattern. Reviewinglicenses for shipments to several countries, they noticedthat end-user checks had improved markedly, except in thecase of Israel. Indeed, despite thousands of commercial salesto Israel, the State Department had done only three or fourend-user checks on exports to that country -- and noneinvolved significant major weapons systems, according topeople familiar with the inquiry.   The inspector general's auditors pulled togetherintelligence reports on Israeli arms activities and foundrepeated instances where Israel was reported to have madeunauthorized sales of U.S. technology, the people say.Further, they add, CIA officials briefed Mr. Funk, and StateDepartment files contained a 1990 letter from WilliamWebster, then the CIA director, confirming that U.S.intelligence on unauthorized Israeli sales was consideredhighly credible.   Israeli officials have hinted in the past that theyreceived tacit approval from the Reagan administration tore-export U.S. equipment without first seeking U.S. approval,according to current and former U.S. government officials.The subject came up at high levels of the Defense Departmentin mid-1990 after officials reviewed U.S. intelligencereports linking Israel to such schemes.   This prompted Henry Rowen, then assistant secretary ofdefense for international security affairs, to check out thestory. He was told by former Defense Secretary CasparWeinberger and Mr. Rowen's predecessor, Richard Armitage,that no such agreement had been made, these officials say.Mr. Rowen reported his findings to Defense Secretary RichardCheney.   In an interview, Mr. Armitage confirms there was no tacitunderstanding and says that more than once he told Israeliofficials of American suspicions that Israel was divertingU.S. technology. &quot;I do recall cautioning Israeli militaryattaches that if I found proof that Israel was involved indiverting technology, friendship aside, I would come downhard on the state of Israel,&quot; says Mr. Armitage, now a seniorState Department official.</TEXT></DOC>