<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910226-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>910226-0080.</DOCID><HL>   The One Great Lesson of the War   ----   By Mark Helprin</HL><DATE>02/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST EUROP</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   All signs point to the complete collapse of the Iraqiarmies of the south. The allies have penetrated, across widefronts, as deep as their accelerators were able to take them.They have cut off and surrounded enemy forces, isolating themfrom their heartland and boxing them into furthersub-envelopments. Resistance has been almost nonexistent, andin the few and uncoordinated instances of its occurrence, ithas been a matter of quickly ended desperation.   Allied air superiority is complete and devastating. TheIraqis have reached a state of internal disarray after morethan a month of starvation and bombardment. Surrender of theenemy appears to be increasing geometrically and coalitioncasualties have been far fewer than expected and, at thiswriting, unprecedentedly low.</LP><TEXT>   The much over-estimated Republican Guard cannot live up toits reputation. It is already half destroyed, it issurrounded, it has no refuge, it is faced by vastly superiorforces, and it is subject to air attack without constraint --on terrain that offers no cover. Even should it decide to goout in a blaze of glory, it will not be able to overcome thephysical limitations it faces and will not fundamentallyendanger the allied enterprise.   The potential of chemical attack remains, as does that ofa difficult struggle in Kuwait City, but neither will derailthe offensive, and the prospects of both recede as alliedmomentum increases.   In short, Iraq has gone the way of Egypt in the Six-DayWar. But just as in the Six-Day War, which left Nasserintact, in this war no guarantee exists that Saddam Husseinwill be toppled, though the chances are now better than ever.   The closest the coalition can come to such a guarantee isto drive on to Baghdad. As things are now, moving to withinshouting distance of the city's gates would carry no militarycost. Indeed, it would hasten the demise of lingeringresistance in the south.   Nor would it be an expansion of allied war aims, but,rather, simply a matter of coming out of the closet. Theproblem with a drive on Baghdad is that it should have beenstarted with the rest of the offensive, for if it followssuccess in the main theater it will appear exploitive andopportunistic rather than courageous and defiant, and thepolitical costs of this may verge on the unacceptable. (Onthe other hand, Saddam's survival would be far greater apenalty to pay.) But all in all, Baghdad is only 250 milesfrom the main body of the allied forces and the way throughthe desert is clear. Risk is still alive and risk is worthtaking.   Despite the many lessons this war will offer aboutAmerican will, advanced weaponry and desert tactics, anddespite the many comparisons soon to come of Desert Stormwith El Alamein and the Six-Day War, the one great lesson ofthe war applies not to these things but to a more chillingcircumstance in a colder clime. It is a lesson that, becauseof its difficulty, and because of the many demands that areimplicit in heeding it, very few will recognize or accept.   For the one great lesson of the war is that theconventional defense of Europe is inadequate and that,therefore, the nuclear threshold is unacceptably low.   During the flawless run of coalition victories in theGulf, &quot;Military officials in Moscow,&quot; we are told in a NewYork Times dispatch Saturday, &quot;have made derisive commentsabout the performance of allied forces.&quot;   Are these comments not astonishing, coming from the&quot;conquerors&quot; of Afghanistan, the stewards of tent cities, thecommanders of soldiers who sell belt buckles? After all, theSoviet military threat is rapidly becoming ancient history(as David Boren, the chairman of the Senate IntelligenceCommittee, has been quoted as saying), the Warsaw Pact hasdisintegrated and the Soviet Union's strategic buffer isgone. For Soviet military officials to criticize thecoalition in a moment of such brilliance, they must be ravinglike Saddam, who is the emptiest threat since the inventionof the barrel.   But do not discount the first reaction of the Sovietgenerals. They do not need war-gaming on computers as big asbattleships, for the assumptions upon which large-scalesimulations are based arise from an immediate intuition ofhistory. This intuition, and not the subsequent calculation,is what matters. Appraising an order of battle is likeunderstanding a market economy: You need not tally everytransaction, but only master the broadest generalities.   In this sense, a number of important military relations,clarified in the Gulf War, are easily and immediatelyapprehensible both to the Soviet generals and to us.   In an era of planned withdrawals it is clear that theAmerican capacity to reinforce Western Europe is inadequate.To move to Saudi Arabia approximately the same load that wewould have to send across the Atlantic in the first weeks ofa European war, we required many months. True, the distancewas far greater, but the operation was unopposed. If we werefighting the Soviets, our convoys would be harried by theworld's greatest submarine fleet, our transport planesattacked by fighters refueled in the air, our off-loadingfacilities destroyed in missile and bombing strikes and thewaters around them mined. We would be forced to use the navyeither to keep the sea lanes of communication clear, or tosupport operations on land, not both, not with only 450 majorcombatants.   To reach Saudi Arabia, our ships sailed on placid seas,unescorted, and arrived at a vast staging area almost bereftof population and untroubled by enemy attack or winterweather. The Russians perceive this, rightly, as a luxury.   So too they perceive the security of allied bases in theGulf, against which not a single bullet was fired and ofwhich not a single enemy soldier received a glimpse. Indeed,the Iraqis have been blind, and have not known what lies overthe horizon. In contrast, the Soviets enjoy a full range ofsignal, photographic and human intelligence, and are able toattack NATO bases with missiles, bombers, infiltration groupsand regular formations.   Almost half the allied air sorties in the Gulf have beenprotective or auxiliary. In light of the fact that the enemyair arm is non-operational, imagine the reduction ofaggressive sorties in favor of defensive action to counterthe Soviet Air Force, 10 times the size of its Iraqicounterpart, many times better and infinitely more willing toengage. To face this threat, NATO would not have 10 timeswhat the allies have in the Gulf, but only about twice orthree times as much.   An immense number of Soviet targets would come to NATO'sattention -- 60,000 tanks for example, as opposed to Iraq's5,000, and so on, all down the line. And, except for Iraq'sextraordinary inventory of air defense guns, an almostunimaginable disparity exists between the Soviet and Iraqiair defenses. (To compare them would be to compare the armedforces of Britain with the police department of Boca Raton.)In light of all this, the Soviets must think our sortie ratesin the Gulf are leisurely at best.   Over distances comparable to those of the Europeanbattlefield, they were approximately equivalent to our ratesin Vietnam, 1.5 to 2 sorties per aircraft per day. In theSix-Day War, Israeli pilots and aircraft averaged fivesorties per day. What would our rates have been in the Gulfhad our own planes, airfields, repair facilities, munitions,fuel supplies and command and control been under attack?   In the land battle we have been immensely favored by theIraqis' almost total neglect of the concept of maneuver, themost potent instrument of modern war. They are strangers toits almost metaphysical powers -- institutionally, culturallyand by predilection. There is no question that in maneuverwarfare the West is far superior to the Soviets, but theSoviets have been aware of the disparity for decades and haveembarked upon a giant Dale Carnegie course ofself-improvement.   Out of this have come their untested butnot-to-be-dismissed operational maneuver groups and formalrevisions of doctrine. Although these war with deep-seatedRussian and Soviet inclinations, they may, if properlyexecuted, end up putting the Soviet land forces on a par withours. If our performance in the Gulf is derided by Sovietmilitary professionals, the fact that we are fighing an enemythat has no notion of maneuver warfare may figure moststrongly in their derision.   Following closely on is probably their contempt of ourfear of casualties. We must appear to them now to beexceedingly delicate. They may well think that they couldhave liberated Kuwait after a few days' air and artillerypreparation and then a brutal armored assault, trading heavylosses for the golden efficiency in timing that, in a battlethat is part of a larger war, can make the difference betweenvictory and defeat.   And they probably are encouraged by the very sensitive andlatently powerful protest movements that threaten to robWestern governments of all patience and perseverance at thefirst sign of major difficulties, and are kept dormant solelyby conditions of battlefield success that are bothunprecedented and nearly perfect. If NATO operations arerestricted to such a tidy hothouse, the Soviets need onlybreak the glass, and they know it.   When the Soviet generals look our way, they see that weare embarking upon a 20% to 25% reduction in force levelsduring the next five years. In addition, they know of ourreluctance to replace the tremendous Gulf drawdown of hightechnology ordnance, and the likelihood of withdrawals fromEurope even beyond our stated intentions, for reasons ofpolitics, economy and laxity.   In the coming months, various Patricia Schroeders, intheir instinctual crusade to divest the U.S. of weapons underany and all circumstances, will point to the Gulf War asproof of the ineffectiveness of Soviet arms. Keep in mindthat the Iraqis did not have the best of the Soviet arsenal,that they hardly ever ventured to use what they had, and thatwhen they did they did not know how.   All this signifies that NATO's order of battle in Europeoffers less margin than has been generally accepted untilnow, and that the overall balance is such that the West wouldbe forced to turn to nuclear weapons early in a Sovietinvasion. Our record in the Gulf has been brilliant, butinitially it was also so finely run an operation that itseemed almost fragile.   In this regard, even if taken at face value, Soviet forcereductions are not great enough to counter NATO's obligingresponse. And if, in addition, Soviet reductions are lessthan they seem, the nuclear threshold is made even lower. Arethey less than they seem? I have argued in these pages thatthey are, and that neither the Communist Party, the KGB northe Soviet military is down for the count, but that rather,as in the 1930s, our perceptions are driven not by objectivereality but by simple exhaustion, fervent hope, and fear.   Among many imaginative phenomena severing links to thereal world is the attitude of Western intellectual elitestoward the tools of battle. They believe that the mereexistence of weapons is sufficient to propel nations to war.At budget time, however, they assert vigorously that the sameweapons cannot actually function. And, for these people, whenweapons are held in the hands of the enemy, their very massleaches into the atmosphere until they seem to disappear.   Perhaps this is why, for example, on Jan. 4, thisnewspaper carried the following information in a 2 1/2-inchstory on page four, under the headline &quot;A Factor in theSoviet Food Crisis&quot;: &quot;An enormous amount of equipment wenteast of the Urals&quot; (where it escaped the requirements of theconventional arms agreements that reassure us of the demiseof Soviet power), &quot;said a British defense official. `We'restill trying to tie down the figure, but it could be over70,000 pieces of equipment -- tanks, artillery, otherthings.'&quot;   Since Aug. 2, Americans have been quaking at the thoughtof Saddam's 5,000 tanks, and yet, for so many of us, thegreat mass of Soviet war materiel spirited beyond the rangeof paper treaties, is nothing.   That is one reason why, at the moment of our greatestbrilliance, we must turn from the exhilaration of victory toassess our performance in the colder light of what may lieahead.   ---   Mr. Helprin, a novelist and contributing editor of theJournal, is a graduate of Harvard's Center for Middle EasternStudies and served in the Israeli infantry and air force.</TEXT></DOC>