<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900702-0173</DOCNO><DOCID>900702-0173.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   The Franco-German Entente Looks Simple, But Isn't   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>07/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   Once when I was driving along the Autobahn in a rented carwith French license plates, a German driver roared past andturned around to shake his fist. Puzzling over what thishostile act could mean, I finally concluded that the Germanmust have thought I was French.   If the German-French relationship is touchy, history cansupply reasons. Of all national rivalries throughout time,this one has been among those costing the most blood. WorldWar I, that terrible and senseless slaughter pitting Franceand Germany as the central protagonists, was in partattributable to the bitterness still lingering after France'sdefeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. The rise ofHitler and the onset of World War II was in turn attributablein part to the harsh reparation and disarmament terms imposedon Germany after World War I, mainly at the insistence ofFrance's Georges Clemenceau.</LP><TEXT>   Even among intelligent and enlightened Germans andFrenchmen -- and after 45 years of peace -- a bit ofnationalist choler occasionally bubbles up during politicaldiscussions. Although the French maintain a close cooperativeliaison with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, theyhave chosen to keep their military forces free of NATO'sjoint command.   Which makes it all the more interesting that WestGermany's chancellor, Helmut Kohl, and French PresidentFrancois Mitterrand have lately become the Tweedledum andTweedledee of Europe. At the summit gathering of heads ofstate of the 12 European Community nations in Dublin a weekago, they made common cause against Britain's MargaretThatcher, a lady regarded by the one as &quot;ein grosserkopfschmerz&quot; and the other as &quot;un grand mal de tete&quot;. Inother words, she is a headache for both.   The French and Germans were united in Dublin, at leastsuperficially, on aid to the Soviet Union, creation of asingle European currency and EC political union. But Mrs.Thatcher demurred on all three, knowing that theFrench-German entente was not strong enough to overwhelm her.   Mr. Mitterrand gave his imprimatur to German unificationlast year well before the Berlin Wall came down. The Germanswere grateful but the French president knew that oppositionwould cost him more than he could gain. When theGerman-Polish border issue came up, however, he playedhardball with the Germans and won, helping force the Germansto guarantee the existing border. Some Germans wereresentful, but to little avail.   On the other hand, French-German monetary cooperation hasworked well for both sides. The French have for some yearsnow kept their franc in step with the strong deutsche mark,and have benefited enormously. Paris -- &quot;voila]&quot; -- suddenlyhas become an interesting financial center. French inflationhas been modest. There is no evidence at all that Frenchindustry has suffered from having a hard currency, a lessonthat Britain seems to have great trouble grasping.   This successful monetary partnership, based on thesolidity of a Bundesbank that enjoys significant politicalindependence, has helped strengthen Franco-German ties. Italso has hampered Mrs. Thatcher, who can't seem to getinflation under control, in trying to bring her influence tobear on the question of creating a European central bank anda common European currency. She nonetheless had some successin Dublin by offering a transitory step toward a singlecurrency, one that would not disturb national monetarysovereignty. It calls for creating a &quot;hard ECU&quot; for publicuse, thereby testing the market response to a singlecurrency. If acceptance will get England into the EC moneysystem, the others may buy it.   But the big issue in the EC is something called &quot;politicalunion,&quot; and it is in this area that the seeming Franco-Germancomity is the most interesting -- and in some sense, mostimplausible. When a BBC interviewer asked British ForeignSecretary Douglas Hurd if a summit decision to convene aconstitutional conference in Rome Dec. 15 meant the EC washeading toward political union, he seemed surprised at hercredulity. The foreign secretary wanted to know if she reallybelieved that Mr. Mitterrand was prepared to surrender hiscontrol over French foreign and security policy. The ECcountries probably will continue to do what they do now, hesaid, taking common positions on the things they can agreeabout and national positions on those that they can't.   Which brings us again to the Franco-German entente and itsfocus on political unification. It is precisely because of along history of emnity that the French and Germans have acommon interest in European political unity. That is not thesame thing as unification, but it more precisely defines whatMessrs. Kohl and Mitterrand have in mind. Both know -- andhave known for some time -- that activation of theGerman-German economic treaty today would represent de factoGerman reunification. Germany now has potential to be a majorpolitical power in addition to what it already is, thedominant economic power in Europe. Both leaders want to makesure this does not disturb the peaceful relationships thathave been built so painstakingly and successfully since WorldWar II. The Germans don't want a suspicious Europe makingcommon cause against Germany. The French don't want a newrise of German nationalism that might threaten France.   The EC and NATO are the answers to those fears. So long asGermany is part of an integrated Europe there can be a greatdeal of assurance -- even if not absolute -- that it will notattempt to follow an independent course in foreign policy.That there will be deviations, of course, was suggested atthe summit, where Mr. Kohl displayed much frustration with areluctance among his EC partners to come up with an aidpackage for the Soviet Union. Germany has more importantreasons than the others for wanting to round up money for theSoviets. It wants to induce the Soviets to pull their 360,000troops out of Germany as quickly as possible withoutconditions. The Soviets want money and the Germans want togive it to them, but preferably with other Europeans chippingin.   In short, the nations of Europe always will have certainforeign policy interests that cannot be reduced to a commonEC policy. The same goes for domestic policy, but perhaps toa lesser extent. But Herr Kohl and M. Mitterrand are tryingto make sure that the interests of their two countries do notdiverge in any way that might reawaken the nationalisticdemons of the past. It is a constructive effort and eventhough it sometimes yields up rhetorical fantasies about thepotential for political union, it offers strong hope thatEurope will achieve enough unity to avoid repeating thedarkest moments of its history.</TEXT></DOC>