<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900920-0041</DOCNO><DOCID>900920-0041.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Instron's Management May Suffer   Bad Side Effects From Poison Pill   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   ISN AMVC F</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY andamp; PRODUCTION, QUALITY CONTROL (ITC)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)FOREST PRODUCTS, PRODUCERS OF WOOD AND LUMBER (FOR)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Like all companies with &quot;poison pill&quot; provisions, InstronCorp. hoped that its takeover defense would protect thecompany from hostile suitors.   But now Instron may be getting a taste of its ownmedicine.</LP><TEXT>   Under the provisions of Instron's pill, stockholders gainthe right to purchase additional shares at below-marketprices whenever an individual or group gains control of 20%or more of the company's shares. This makes the company moreexpensive for a raider to buy.   But what happens when the existing management group,rather than a raider, breaks the 20% barrier with no intentto change the status quo?   A lawsuit filed earlier this month in a Massachusettsstate court claims it means that the rest of the shareholdersmust be granted the lucrative stock-purchase rightsguaranteed by the pill -- even if that outcome turns theobvious intent of the anti-takeover provision on its head.   In this case, the lawsuit alleges, Instron's own founderstriggered the poison pill when they declared in a newsrelease in July that they and family members owned about 39%of Instron's stock. Ironically, the purpose of the newsrelease was to oppose a takeover, not to start one.   While many companies' poison pills explicitly state thatofficers and controlling shareholders are exempt from thepill's provisions, Instron's pill contains no such exemption.Stephen Carr, a partner at Goodwin, Procter andamp; Hoar, whichdrafted the pill, said such a provision wasn't necessary. Hesaid no &quot;group&quot; of shareholders owns 20% or more and that thenews release didn't create such a group.   Takeover experts said the lawsuit apparently marks thefirst time that controlling shareholders or managers havebeen accused of triggering a poison pill.   &quot;This certainly is a new wrinkle,&quot; said Alan Bromberg, aprofessor of securities law at Southern Methodist Universityin Dallas. Mr. Bromberg said that if the Instron founders infact authorized the news release or were acting as a&quot;controlling group,&quot; as defined by the poison pill, the novelsuit might actually succeed.   Stephen Rabinovitz, a Boston investor, filed the lawsuiton behalf of himself and other Instron shareholders inSuperior Court in Boston. Mr. Rabinovitz's group had said ina filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission in Julythat they were interested in acquiring control of Instron, aCanton, Mass.-based maker of materials testing instruments.   Michael Schell, a partner at the New York firm of Skadden,Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom who is defending Instron, saidthat Mr. Rabinovitz is notorious for &quot;facilitating his ownpersonal objectives&quot; by &quot;making noise&quot; and filing suits. Mr.Schell said that Instron intends to vigorously defend againstthe suit, although he won't say on what grounds.   Mr. Schell added that Skadden Arps had no role in writingthe news release or the poison-pill provision.   ---   PLANNED PARENTHOOD loses appeal over limits on federalfunds abroad.   The U.S. appeals court in Manhattan upheld a federalpolicy banning the use of U.S. funds to &quot;perform or activelypromote abortions&quot; in foreign countries. The federal aidinvolved is family-planning assistance from the Agency forInternational Development. The money is distributed toforeign organizations through Planned Parenthood and othernongovernmental groups in the U.S.   Planned Parenthood claimed that the rule, adopted by theReagan administration in 1984, violated its free-speechrights by requiring it to enforce restrictions on speech inorder to qualify for the program. But the Second U.S. CircuitCourt of Appeals said no rights were violated because PlannedParenthood wasn't prohibited from using its own money for theactivities.   &quot;A policy of not subsidizing the exercise of a fundamentalright differs in an important respect from a prohibition onthe exercise of a fundamental right,&quot; the appeals-court panelsaid. The ruling upheld a lower-court decision dismissing thecase.   A Planned Parenthood spokeswoman said the organization isconsidering whether to appeal.   ---   BAN ON SOME TIMBER SUITS is rejected as unconstitutional.   The ban was contained in the so-called Northwest TimberCompromise. Congress enacted the law in 1989 to allow forlimited timber harvests for a year in certain old-growthforests in California and Oregon that are populated by thenorthern spotted owl. The law was designed as a temporary, ifforced, truce between warring environmental and timberinterests while a presidential commission developed a finalplan for protecting the owl, recently designated a threatenedspecies.   But the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals rejected aprovision of the legislation requiring federal courts todismiss suits challenging the timber sales. Reversing alower-court ruling, the appeals court said Congress hadviolated the constitutional separation of powers by requiringthe courts to rule in a particular way without changing theunderlying laws that would permit such suits.   The act expires on Sept. 30; Congress has been consideringextending the law for another year because the presidentialpanel report itself has been delayed.   Todd True, an attorney in Seattle for the Sierra ClubLegal Defense Fund, said environmental groups were stillassessing possible suits. He said the ruling would be auseful precedent in fighting other attempts by Congress tobar judicial review of environmental laws.   Mark Rutzick, an attorney in Portland for the NorthwestForest Resource Council, a timber industry consortium, added,however: &quot;To tie up a sale, one must prove that it will havean unlawful impact on the spotted owl.&quot; He also said thetimber group is mulling an appeal.   ---   FRANCHISEES bring civil racketeering suit against AmericanVision.   In a suit filed in U.S. District Court in New York, eightfranchisees in New York and Georgia allege that AmericanVision Centers Inc. profited from store-opening services thatit should have provided at cost and misrepresented thesuccess of company-owned stores that it sold to franchisees.The suit also alleges that American Vision claimedfranchisees would make money renewing contact-lens insurance,then started a division to renew the policies itself.   The franchisees also claim that American Vision Centersdidn't obtain regulatory approval to sell franchises in NewYork state and failed to account for advertising fees --equal to 6.5% of a franchisee's sales -- that it collectedfrom franchisees. The suit seeks to recover alleged losses ofmore than $1 million, plus treble damages.   Seth Poppel, American Vision Centers president and chiefoperating officer, says the suit is a response to legal andother actions American Vision Centers has taken againstseveral of the plaintiffs who allegedly owe his companymoney. &quot;The suit is totally without merit,&quot; Mr. Poppel says.&quot;The bulk of our franchisees are profitable and happy.&quot; OfAmerican Vision Centers' 82 stores, 36 are franchisees.   Mr. Poppel says the failure of numerous franchisees to payroyalties and other fees has contributed to American VisionCenters' financial problems.   The company has reported losses of more than $2.5 millionannually since 1987. During the first half of this year, itreported further losses of $1.8 million on $18.7 million inrevenue.   ---   NEWSPAPER loses bid to keep unpublished photographsconfidential.   The Albuquerque Journal's pictures were taken of a 1985highway accident in which 62-year-old Eleanor Barton waskilled. Her husband, John Barton, is suing Ford Motor Co. fornegligence and product liability, alleging that a defect inher car caused the accident. Both Mr. Barton and Ford soughtthe newspaper's unused photos and negatives, saying they wereneeded to help determine the relative position of thevehicles involved in the accident.   Attorneys for the Albuquerque Journal argued thatproducing the pictures interfered with the news process inviolation of the paper's First Amendment rights. But StateDistrict Judge Art Encinias in Santa Fe, N.M., ruled that thephotos are &quot;relevant, essential and material&quot; to deciding keyissues in the case. And the New Mexico Supreme Court refusedwithout comment the newspaper's request to block thelower-court order.   Kent Walz, assistant editor of the Albuquerque Journal,said the paper planned to comply with the order, but it wasstill considering an appeal aimed at clarifying the FirstAmendment question.   ---   HARVARD LAW SCHOOL reinstates public-interest lawcounseling post.   Harvard Law School Dean Robert C. Clark has appointedStacy DeBroff, a lawyer who isn't a member of the faculty, tothe position of public-interest law counselor. Elimination ofthe position last year prompted protests from students.   A Harvard Law School spokesman said &quot;over 100 students&quot;have already met with Ms. DeBroff. The keen interest infinding jobs in the public-interest field seems to be anindication that &quot;there is a new activism among studentshere,&quot; he said.   The counseling position was first established in the late1970s to help students tap the network of increasingly scarcepublic-interest jobs.   Public-interest law includes such areas as legal aid forthe poor, consumer advocacy and congressional staff work, allpaying much less than associate positions at top private lawfirms.   ---   Richard B. Schmitt and Michael Selz contributed to thiscolumn.</TEXT></DOC>