<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900827-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>900827-0008.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Subliminal Messages Didn't Cause   2 Shootings, Nevada Judge Finds   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   CBS SNE PNC</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES (SCR)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A state judge ruled that a British rock band and CBSRecords are not to blame for the actions of two young men whoshot themselves after listening to alleged hidden messages inheavy metal music.   In a ruling Friday, Washoe District Judge Jerry Whiteheadof Reno, Nev., found that hidden words do exist in the musicbut that the band had not placed them there intentionally.And Judge Whitehead ruled that the families of the two menfailed to prove that the subliminal messages caused theyouths' behavior.</LP><TEXT>   In addition, Judge Whitehead ordered CBS to pay $40,000 tothe plaintiffs' attorneys because the company did notproperly comply with a court order to supply the originalmaster tape of the album.   The case was closely watched because some legal expertsfeared that a ruling against CBS would open up mediacompanies and artists to liability concerning possible hiddenmessages in their work.   Shortly before Christmas 1985, Raymond Belknap and JamesVance shot themselves with a 12-gauge shotgun after drinkingbeer and listening to &quot;Stained Class,&quot; an album by the bandJudas Priest. Mr. Belknap, 18 years old, died instantly. Mr.Vance, 20, survived the shooting but died three years later.   The men's families contended in a lawsuit that subliminalmessages in the music induced their sons to shoot themselvesand that the band, CBS Records, which distributed the album,and CBS Inc. bore responsibility for the tragedy.   The suit is part of a growing trend of cases in whichplaintiffs attempt to spread the responsibility for tragicevents caused by their own behavior. Traditionally the makersof albums, unlike the makers of products such as power lawnmowers or swimming pools, have been shielded from such suitsby the First Amendment. But in a pre-trial ruling, JudgeWhitehead found that subliminal messages aren't protected bythe First Amendment.   Kenneth McKenna, a Reno lawyer representing the families,said that the case had been hampered by a lack of scientificstudies on the effect of subliminal messages on humanbehavior but should nevertheless send a signal to the musicindustry.   &quot;We've made major inroads with this decision. The judgeruled that subliminal messages do in fact exist on thisrecording and probably other heavy metal recordings. We'retwo-thirds of the way to victory,&quot; Mr. McKenna said. He saidhis clients had not decided yet whether to appeal.   CBS had argued that no subliminal messages exist on thealbum and that Mr. Belknap and Mr. Vance were troubled youthswho abused drugs and alcohol and whose behavior wasn'tconnected to the music.   In the decision, Judge Whitehead wrote that the subliminalmessage &quot;do it&quot; appeared throughout the album but that it wasthe result of a chance combination of sounds. But JudgeWhitehead wrote that after hearing all the evidence, hebelieved &quot;that the position taken by the plaintiffs in thisaction was an arguable one.&quot;   Gail Edwin, a CBS in-house lawyer, said the judge'sfinding that there was no proof of intentional hiddenmessages would dissuade other people from bringing suchsuits. She said the company is still reviewing whether toappeal the $40,000 in sanctions and said CBS &quot;did everythingappropriate at all times.&quot;   But Ben B. Mills Jr., who is representing plaintiffs intwo similar suits pending against the singer Ozzy Osbourne,said the ruling will help his cases. &quot;We've been fighting theissue of whether subliminals exist all along. We'll bebuilding on this ruling,&quot; said Mr. Mills of Fitzgerald, Ga.   Nonetheless, some experts say it will be difficult forplaintiffs to prove that hidden messages cause harmfulbehavior. &quot;There is still no scientific evidence that humanbehavior is affected by such messages,&quot; says AnthonyGreenwald, a professor of psychology at the University ofWashington who studied commercially available audiotapeprograms that claimed to improve memory or increaseself-esteem through subliminal messages.   Media lawyers said they are troubled by Judge Whitehead'sruling that subliminal messages are not protected by theFirst Amendment.   &quot;Once we start saying that certain types of messages areoff-limits in terms of First Amendment protection, we startdown a very treacherous road,&quot; said Floyd Abrams of the NewYork firm Cahill, Gordon andamp; Reindel, a media defense lawyer.   ---   A LAW FIRM PARTNER in New Jersey is indicted onracketeering charges.   A federal grand jury has indicted Richard P. Console, asenior partner with the Berlin, N.J., law firm of Console,Marmero andamp; Curcio, on charges of violating the RacketeerInfluenced and Corrupt Organizations law. He allegedlyparticipated in a scheme to defraud insurance companies byfabricating medical bills in personal-injury cases.   Kathleen Baldwin Sabath, a paralegal with the firm, alsowas charged in the RICO and fraud scheme.   Mr. Console was charged on 11 counts of fraud andracketeering. Ms. Sabath was charged on 12 counts, includingone alleged lying to a grand jury.   Mr. Console's attorney, Stephen Dunbar, said he assumesMr. Console will plead not guilty when he is arraigned inSeptember. &quot;He is innocent of all charges,&quot; Mr. Dunbar said.   Charles Nugent, Ms. Sabath's attorney, said his clientwill be vindicated. &quot;She is merely a secretary in theoffice,&quot; he said.   A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Newark saidthe indictment by a Camden, N.J., grand jury takes precedenceover related indictments filed last year that were &quot;the firstRICO charge that identified a law firm and a medical officeas a RICO enterprise.&quot;   In 1989, two other partners of Console Marmero;osteopathic physician Morton Markoff of Cherry Hill; the lawfirm's administrator; and a medical office employee wereindicted.   According to the U.S. attorney's office, alleged all thedefendants defrauded 26 insurance companies by inflatingmedical costs in personal-injury cases, creating falsemedical bills, and backdating treatment records.   Partner Philip J. Livolsi, one of the defendants chargedlast year, has pleaded guilty to one count of racketeering.Mr. Livolsi is cooperating with prosecutors and has agreed toforfeit his 20% interest in the law firm.   The law firm said that the indictments were a &quot;concertedcampaign to subdue or eliminate a law firm which hassuccessfully . . . vigorously and vigilantly defended thelegal and civil rights of its clients.&quot;   ---   INDICTED YEN TRADER switches Chicago law firms.   An indicted currency futures trader fired his attorneysfrom 275-lawyer Jenner andamp; Block over what he thought wereexorbitant fees and the apparent unwillingness of the lawfirm partner he originally retained to try the case, threeindividuals familiar with the case said.   Yen trader John M. Baker Jr., who is among 21 yen tradersindicted for alleged illegal trading practices at the ChicagoMercantile Exchange, told U.S. District Judge William T. Hartlast week that Joseph J. Duffy of 205-lawyer Schiff, Hardin andamp;Waite would represent him during the trial, scheduled tobegin Sept. 5. Mr. Baker was named in more than 100 of the393 counts in the indictment against the traders.   &quot;I fired Jenner andamp; Block due to circumstances,&quot; Mr. Bakertold the judge at a hearing. &quot;I don't wish Jenner andamp; Block tobe my attorney any more.&quot; Mr. Baker has paid Jenner andamp; Block$250,000 in legal fees and was facing about $500,000 more infees for the law firm's trial work, the three individualssaid.   When the indictments against the traders were announced ayear ago by former U.S. attorney Anton R. Valukas, now apartner at Jenner andamp; Block, Mr. Baker hired partner Thomas P.Sullivan. When Mr. Sullivan recently indicated that he wouldnot try the case himself, Mr. Baker began looking for anotherlawyer, the people familiar with the case said.   The judge ordered Jenner andamp; Block to assist Mr. Duffy inhis trial preparation and refused to postpone the trial date.   Mr. Sullivan wouldn't comment. Mr. Duffy said only thatMr. Baker &quot;just decided he wanted new counsel.&quot; Mr. Bakercouldn't be reached.   ---   EDUARDO MARTINEZ ROMERO pleads guilty to money-laundering.   Mr. Martinez, charged with laundering more than $1 billionin Colombian drug money, made the plea at an early-morninghearing that was unpublicized for security reasons. BeforeU.S. District Judge William C. O'Kelley of Atlanta, Mr.Martinez pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting the Medellincartel in the laundering of money through an organizationcalled La Mina, meaning &quot;the mine.&quot;   Mr. Martinez, who was extradited to the U.S. from Colombialast fall, faces a maximum sentence of 30 years withoutparole.   ---   FORMER LAWYER SENTENCED in Pittsburgh for stealing fromclients.   Charles M. Thorp III, who had losses of upward of $20million on the options market, was sentenced by a federaljudge in Pittsburgh to 57 months in prison for stealing about$2.6 million from clients.   U.S. District Judge Gustave Diamond also ordered Mr.Thorp, whose thefts occurred from 1982 to 1989, to payrestitution to his former clients. The 50-year-old Mr. Thorpwill remain under court supervision for three years after hisrelease, the judge ruled.   Mr. Thorp pleaded guilty in June to charges of interstatetransportation related to sending stolen cash and bonds toBoston and New York and bank fraud related to a $400,000 loanhe obtained from Pittsburgh National Bank by using a client'sname and credit. Pittsburgh National is a unit of PNCFinancial Corp.   Mr. Thorp is the grandson of the founder of one ofPittsburgh's prestigious law firms.</TEXT></DOC>