<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911223-0185</DOCNO><DOCID>911223-0185.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Privileged Information Protection   For Concerns Is Limited by Ruling   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   ASH ENST KIND WX</CO><MS>ENERGY (ENE)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CONSUMER andamp; HOUSEHOLD SERVICES (CSV)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)OIL-SECONDARY (OIS)PETROLEUM (PET)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>ALABAMA (AL)CALIFORNIA (CA)DELAWARE (DE)FAR EAST (FE)ILLINOIS (IL)KENTUCKY (KY)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)PHILIPPINES (RP)UNITED STATES (US)WEST VIRGINIA (WV)</RE><LP>   Companies may now think twice before they cooperate withgovernment investigators: A federal appeals court inPhiladelphia ruled last week that privileged informationvolunteered to federal authorities isn't protected from laterdisclosure in other suits.   The decision by the Third Circuit Court of Appeals inPhiladelphia is expected to strongly discourage companiesfrom turning over confidential information -- especially theresults of outside audits or investigations to federalagencies.</LP><TEXT>   The case involves a suit filed by the Republic of thePhilippines against Westinghouse Electric Corp. alleging thatthe company bribed the late Philippines president FerdinandMarcos to win a nuclear power plant contract. The SEC and theJustice Department launched investigations when theallegations surfaced in 1978 but later dropped them.   Westinghouse, which denies the allegations, cooperatedwith the government by handing over confidential notes andlegal documents. The Pittsburgh company was assured that theinformation would remain &quot;privileged&quot; because it was eitherprivate work product or the result of Westinghouse'srelationship with its lawyers.   Courts typically respect both privileges, except whencompanies disclose confidential material voluntarily, therebywaiving the protections. The question for the appeals courtin Philadelphia was whether Westinghouse made such a waiverwhen it handed over privileged information in the course of agovernment investigation. Two other appeals courts had issuedconflicting decisions on the issue.   Westinghouse argued for an exception to the waiverdoctrine because it was being investigated by the government.But the appellate court ruled that the company couldn't &quot;pickand choose among its opponents,&quot; deciding when to discloseinformation and when to assert its privilege.   Most of the suit against Westinghouse, filed in 1988, wasdismissed by an arbitration panel last week. The appealscourt decision affects a sole remaining civil bribery countset to go to trial in federal court in Newark Feb. 6.   The documents &quot;are important to the case because theycover important bribery evidence that heretofore has beenkept away from us,&quot; said Mark Augenblick, of the Washington,D.C., law firm Shaw, Pittman, Potts andamp; Trowbridge, whorepresents the Philippines.   Louis Briskman, deputy general counsel for Westinghouse,promised an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, saying thedecision puts at risk companies that rely on governmentassurances of confidentiality. In the future, such aguarantee won't be &quot;worth the paper it's written on,&quot; hesaid, adding that government agencies will have to go tocourt to get information. Westinghouse won't have to turnover the documents unless it loses its appeal.   Separately, the Hon. Emmanuel Pelaez, the Philippine'sambassador to the U.S., said his government was &quot;verydisappointed&quot; by the International Chamber of Commerce'sarbitration ruling last week and will &quot;press forward&quot; withthe remains of the suit.   (Westinghouse v. The Philippines, 3rd U.S. Circuit Courtof Appeals, 90-5920)   ---   IN-HOUSE LAWYERS cannot sue for retaliatory discharge,court rules.   The Illinois Supreme Court ruled that state law doesn'trecognize the right of in-house lawyers to sue for wrongfuldischarge when they are fired in retaliation for threateningto report corporate wrongdoings. The ruling is the first by atop-level state appeals court to address the issue.   The case has been closely followed by in-house lawyers andethics experts because courts have split on the issue. Courtsin Texas and Minnesota had ruled that in-house counsel had noright to sue. The Appellate Court of Illinois's ruling thatin-house lawyers do have the right to sue was reversed by theruling last week.   The case involved Roger J. Balla, an in-house lawyer firedin 1985 by Gambro Inc., a Lakewood, Colo., distributor ofkidney dialysis equipment. Mr. Balla had told the companythat a shipment of dialyzers was &quot;misbranded and/oradulterated&quot; and he threatened to &quot;do whatever necessary tostop the sale of the dialyzers,&quot; according to the opinion.   Mr. Balla argued in court papers that without a right tosue, in-house lawyers face a tough choice of losing theirjobs or &quot;the loss of a professional license and exposure tocriminal sanctions.&quot;   Gambro said it had an absolute right to fire Mr. Balla.   Justice William G. Clark wrote in the decision that givingin-house lawyers the right to sue might discourage employersfrom asking the lawyers &quot;for advice regarding potentiallyquestionable corporate conduct knowing that their in-housecounsel could use this information in a retaliatory dischargesuit.&quot;   Justice Charles Freeman dissented, arguing that in-houselawyers need to feel secure when they &quot;advise the clients asto, exactly, what conduct the law requires so that the clientcan then comply with the advice.&quot;   Gambro's attorney, Arthur Sternberg, of the Chicago lawfirm Pedersen andamp; Houpt, predicted that other courts will citethe majority and dissent opinions because they come from aninfluential court.   Alan O. Amos, Mr. Balla's attorney, couldn't be reached.   The American Corporate Counsel Association, a trade group,has taken the position that employers have a &quot;pre-eminent,not absolute privilege&quot; to fire whistleblowing in-houselawyers, says board member Lawrence A. Salibra.   ---   COURT REVERSES verdict compensating residents for refinerydischarge.   The West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals reversed the$10.32 million jury verdict against Ashland Oil Inc. The suitwas brought by four people who claimed that discharge fromthe company's Catlettsburgh, Ky., oil refinery hurt thequality of their lives.   Ashland saw the Kanawha County court trial, which ended inMay 1990, as a test of related suits that have been filed byabout 300 plaintiffs. The Ashland, Ky., company said theSupreme Court's decision strips the remaining suits of muchof their validity.   In the decision, the appeals court reversed $1.3 millionin compensatory damages and said the trial judge should havegranted Ashland's motion to throw out the jury verdict. Inrejecting the $9 million punitive damage award, the courtsaid the jury didn't have &quot;substantial evidence of Ashland'sconduct which demonstrated a `conscious wrongdoing' necessaryto award punitive damages.&quot;   Commenting on the plaintiffs' claim that the dischargecaused their property values to fall, the court noted thatthree of the four plaintiffs didn't own property but livedwith relatives. On the issue of whether Ashland emissions&quot;caused&quot; a nuisance to the plaintiffs, the court said the&quot;causation evidence presented appears very weak.&quot;   In addition, the justices said the lower court erred inrefusing to let Lee Thomas, former administrator of theEnvironmental Protection Agency, testify on Ashland's behalf.   P. Rodney Jackson, attorney for the plaintiffs, said atleast two of the four original plaintiffs -- those who own orlease property -- will seek a retrial in January. He calledthe decision &quot;a good road map for the retrial.&quot;   Charles R. McElwee, an attorney for Ashland, said, &quot;Theseplaintiffs presented the best case that could be presentedand failed. And I don't think any of the other plaintiffs cando any better.&quot;   ---   CLOGGED DOCKET is slowing corporate litigation inDelaware.   A report released last week calling for the appointment oftwo additional judges to the Delaware Superior Courthighlights concern about the state's ability to expeditiouslyprocess litigation involving companies incorporated there.   According to the report, the Superior Court docket isoverflowing with criminal cases, mostly drug prosecutions. Atthe same time, at least a dozen major corporations areenmeshed in time-consuming and complex litigation, includingdisputes over insurance coverage for environmental pollutionand product liability cases.   &quot;The need to service Delaware corporate citizens . . .lends added emphasis to the need for additional judicialresources,&quot; the 12-member committee of lawyers wrote in itsreport to the Delaware Supreme court. But two new judgeswould cost $500,000 a year, and Delaware, like many otherstates, is facing a severe budget crunch.   Delaware Governor Michael Castle said that while he agreedthat court overcrowding was a problem, the state can't affordtwo new judges right now. He said state officials areconsidering other ways to solve the problem, such asincreasing court fees.   Litigation involving shareholder and corporate governancelitigation is tried in Delaware's Chancery Court. Thatcourt's case load has become lighter as a result of thedownturn in takeover activity.   The report was issued a month after a Superior Court judgerefused to hear an environmental insurance coverage casefiled by American Home Products Corp., New York, against itsinsurers. In granting the defendants' request to move thecase, the judge noted the court's crowded calendar and thatAmerican Home has no operations in Delaware, although it isincorporated there.   &quot;The decision appears to draw a distinction betweennatural and corporate citizens in that it affords naturalcitizens greater access to Delaware courts,&quot; said R. FranklinBalotti, an attorney at Wilmington law firm Richards, Laytonandamp; Finger. Mr. Balotti, a member of the executive committee ofthe state's bar association, said the group is consideringasking the legislature to pass a statute forbidding such adistinction.   The stakes are high for corporations incorporated inDelaware. Court crowding means that litigation will be drawnout. And if the Superior Court refuses to hear a case, acorporation may find itself litigating whereever it hasoperations.   ---   EX-CHAIRMAN of Enstar is sentenced to three months inprison.   Richard Grassgreen, former chairman of Enstar Group Inc.,previously known as Kinder-Care Inc., pleaded guilty earlierthis year to two counts of securities fraud. Mr. Grassgreenis accused of receiving $654,468 from Drexel Burnham LambertInc. in return for arranging for Kinder-Care to invest indebt securities underwritten by Drexel, a unit of DrexelBurnham Lambert Group Inc.   At the sentencing in federal court in Manhattan, JudgeThomas Griesa characterized the payments to Mr. Grassgreen aspayoffs in return for funneling Kinder-Care investments intothe Drexel transactions. Mr. Grassgreen, of Orange Beach,Ala., previously turned over to Kinder-Care the money hereceived.   Judge Griesa praised Mr. Grassgreen for his cooperationwith prosecutors. Mr. Grassgreen, formerly a friend of Drexeljunk-bond chief Michael Milken, testified against Mr. Milkenin a pre-sentencing hearing in the Milken case.   Mr. Grassgreen's cohort in the alleged scheme, PerryMendel, formerly chief executive officer of Montgomery,Ala.-based Kinder-Care, earlier this year was sentenced toone year in prison on charges of tax evasion. He didn'tcooperate with prosecutors.   Mr. Grassgreen is scheduled to begin serving his sentenceApril 13, after a related civil trial ends. He is being suedby Enstar, which is in Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings, andby Kinder-Care Learning Centers Inc., a company now separatefrom Enstar. Judge Griesa said in court that Mr. Grassgreen'sviolations had nothing to do with Enstar or Kinder-CareLearning Centers' current financial difficulties.   ---   PSYCHIATRIST FLIP-FLOPS and again pleads guilty tosecurities fraud.   A month after withdrawing his guilty plea, Dr. RobertWillis reinstated his guilty plea to charges that heillegally traded on information he learned from a patient,the wife of financier Sanford Weill, during therapy.   In federal court in Manhattan Friday, Dr. Willis, 52 yearsold, of Tenafly, N.J., admitted that he traded on informationabout Mr. Weill's plans to become head of BankAmerica Corp.in early 1986. The patient, Joan Weill, has filed a civilsuit seeking $5.5 million in damages from the doctor.   In court, Dr. Willis said, &quot;I really did a disservice tomy patient and, as an extension of that, to my profession.&quot;Sentencing is set for Jan. 7 before told federal judge MiriamCedarbaum.</TEXT></DOC>