<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920121-0093</DOCNO><DOCID>920121-0093.</DOCID><HL>   Incentive Pay for Politicians   ----   By Joseph A. Grundfest</HL><DATE>01/21/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   One theme has rung consistently through this year'scacophony in Washington: Why is it that some corporateexecutives earn so much? Tenure and compensation seem to havebecome uncoupled from performance. The classic examplesinvolve corporations in which profits are down, revenues aredown, stock prices are down, employment is down andproductivity is down. The only things up are the CEO's salaryand stockholders' blood pressure.   If the problem were merely that CEOs are overcompensatedfor poor performance, that would be bad enough.Unfortunately, executives respond to perverse incentiveschemes by mismanaging their enterprises in rational pursuitof larger salaries and bonuses. In particular, executivesrespond to compensation that is often determined by the sizerather than the profitability of the company and toaccounting yardsticks that are calculated over relativelyshort times and that can be easily manipulated.</LP><TEXT>   Many of the factors that account for failure in corporateAmerica can also explain governmental failures at thefederal, state and local level. The challenge is toreintroduce a rational incentive structure that providesexecutives, politicians and regulators with motives tocompete and to innovate, rather than to focus on pettystrategies designed primarily to enhance their job securityand to increase their compensation regardless of theconsequences for society at large.   In political and corporate America alike, incumbents whowant to remain in office have an overwhelming advantage. In99.7% of all elections for boards of directors, management'sslate stands unopposed for re-election. In the remainingthree-tenths of 1% of elections, management prevails overchallengers 75% of time. In Congress, 96.9% of incumbents whostood for reelection in 1990 were successful. Almostthree-quarters of the House, 318 representatives, either ranunopposed or won more than 60% of the votes cast. Lower downthe ranks, the civil service system protects governmentemployees against many forms of favoritism and bias, but alsomakes it virtually impossible to pay for performance or todismiss poorly performing employees.   Political America's financial incentives can be asperverse as anything found in the corporate sector.Politicians are paid fixed salaries, and performance-relatedincentives provided by private parties are called &quot;bribes.&quot;That doesn't mean, however, that financial incentives areabsent in the public sector or that all elected officials ofequal rank receive equal reward: A politician's performanceaffects campaign contributions as well as payments in kind inthe form of junkets, luncheons and a host of small favorsthat can assume significance disproportionate to their dollarcost. Political behavior can also affect the availability ofemployment opportunities in the private sector after theofficial's retirement from public life.   These problems -- and a potential solution -- wereanalyzed quite succinctly by comedian Jackie Mason. &quot;Put thepoliticians on commission,&quot; Mr. Mason recommends, &quot;pay them apercentage and you'll see this country's economy grow likeElizabeth Taylor in a bakery.&quot;   Now there's an interesting thought. Obviously, incentivecompensation will not work everywhere in government. Payingprosecutors on the basis of the number of convictions theyobtain, for example, would pose serious moral hazard problemsand raise deep questions about the integrity of the criminaljustice system. Defining &quot;success&quot; or &quot;failure&quot; for a publicofficial can be much more difficult than for a corporateexecutive. Even when the objectives of a public serviceprogram can be specified, it is not a simple matter todevelop a social consensus about the priorities andweightings that would have to enter compensationcalculations.   But even with these and other difficulties fixed firmly inmind, there are rather remarkable opportunities for incentivecompensation in the public sector. Here are four examples:   Education. Why is it that American colleges anduniversities are generally recognized as the finest in theworld, yet we are widely condemned for the quality of ourprimary and secondary education? A large part of the answerlies in the difference between the incentive structures thatdrive colleges and universities on the one hand and primaryand secondary schools on the other. Colleges and universitiescompete. If a college or university falls behind in thequality of its programs, it suffers a decline in revenue andreputation as students shift to other schools that do abetter job. Primary and secondary school educators typicallyface no such competition. Is it any wonder that our primaryand secondary education system is a bureaucratic backwaterand national embarrassment? A dose of competition at theprimary and secondary level -- just as we now have at thecollege and university level -- might not solve all oureducational woes, but could go a long way toward improvingthem.   Food and drug regulation. Incentives at the Food and DrugAdministration have been biased for decades. The agency wasconsistently subject to political risk if it approved a drugthat later proved to have adverse side-effects, but was notrewarded it it moved promptly to bring to marketpharmaceuticals with expected benefits in excess of costs.   The solution to this problem is to reward the drugadministrators for accelerated approval of safe and effectivepharmaceuticals. Suppose the government licensed high-qualityindependent laboratories to assist the FDA in makingdeterminations, and also allowed drug companies to fund thisresearch. Suppose also that these private laboratories weresubject to civil liability for side effects of any drugs theymight approve as well as criminal liability for particularforms of misconduct.   Such laboratories could hire at pay scales above thegovernment's, and help accelerate drug approvals. Given thelarge number of qualified biomedical research institutions inthis country, it is entirely conceivable that a privatizedadjunct to the FDA could help the agency do a faster andbetter job, particularly if the agency were called to taskfor unwarranted delays just as it is properly chastised forimprudent approvals. Indeed, recent FDA scandals involvingbribery and falsification in the agency's generic drugapproval process underscore the potential for abuse in thecurrent system.   Predictive agencies. Many government agencies are in theprediction business and are thus vulnerable to the chargethat their forecasts are manipulated for political ends. TheCongressional Budget Office generates forecasts of the grossnational product, inflation, unemployment, interest rates anda variety of other economic variables. It is, rightly orwrongly, subject to the suspicion that its forecasts areslanted to suit the purposes of the congressional leadership.   The president's Council of Economic Advisers forecastsessentially the same statistics. It is, rightly or wrongly,subject to the suspicion that its forecasts are slanted tosuit the purposes of the president.   The Central Intelligence Agency generates a blinding rangeof predictions about foreign economic, social and militarydevelopments. It too is subject to suspicions ofpoliticization.   Why not tie a portion of each agency's compensation to itssuccess as a prognosticator? If CBO or CEA do a better jobthan the Blue Chip forecasts, then they could get a bonus. Ifthey perform worse, they would take a cut. Similarly, themore accurate the predictions of the CIA's analysts, thegreater their reward.   Congress. At first blush, the idea of incentivecompensation for members of Congress sounds totallyimpossible. How would we even begin measuring congressionalperformance? How would we measure the value of egalitariangoals, of civil justice, of the environment, of nationaldefense? And how could we fold all these objectives into asingle incentive plan?   But this makes the problem overly complex. There is abroad consensus that the U.S. is better off with a strong andgrowing GNP. A growing economy creates jobs and generatesrevenues that can be used to support social programs. Tyingcongressional pay to real GNP growth over a suitably longperiod, adjusted to correct for the effects of deficitfinancing, could have several benefits.   First, it could create an incentive for cooperation amongmembers of Congress and reduce the energy now devoted tospecial interest measures that benefit specific groups at theexpense of society as a whole. Second, it could causeCongress to pay increased attention to the cost ofregulation. Third, it could induce Congress to consider morecarefully the economic costs of social programs that wouldotherwise be adopted on the basis of wishful projections.   The shortcomings of even such a simple plan would belegion. The GNP does not calculate the value of clean air, ofquality of life or of a scenic vista. But the question is notwhether we can design a perfect incentive plan. We can't. Thequestion is, can we design a plan that works better than theone we now have in place. That is a far easier hurdle toclear.   ---   Mr. Grundfest, associate professor of law at Stanford, wasa commissioner on the Securities and Exchange Commission,1985-90. This is abridged from a speech to the AmericanEconomics Association.</TEXT></DOC>