<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900718-0135</DOCNO><DOCID>900718-0135.</DOCID><HL>   Technology:   Lens Imitating Human Eye Is in Sight   ----   By David Stipp   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   PRD</CO><LP>   There are eight kinds of eyes in nature -- ranging fromflies' multifaceted orbs to our own fast-focusing versions.Now researchers are working on a ninth.   A robot eye to emulate human vision remains a distantdream -- scientists still don't know much about the higherbrain-processing involved in seeing. But an emergingtechnology called binary optics promises to help replicatesome of the eye's basic, scene-interpreting functions,revolutionizing machine vision.</LP><TEXT>   That's just one of dozens of applications for thetechnology, say binary-optics researchers. Their to-do listincludes making advances in medical lasers, cameras,high-definition television, surgically implanted eye lensesand the creation of three-dimensional images. The advent ofbinary optics &quot;compares to the invention of the microchip inimportance,&quot; declares Jack Blais, president of Optical FilterCorp., Natick, Mass., which makes parts for militarynight-vision systems and other products based on thetechnology.   That remains to be seen. But the technology does representa leap in optics analogous to the leap in electronics whenresearchers began etching tiny circuits on silicon chips.During the past few years, companies such as TexasInstruments Inc., American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.,Minnesota Mining andamp; Manufacturing Co., Honeywell Inc.,Rockwell International Corp., Perkin-Elmer Corp., PolaroidCorp. and General Electric Co. have placed research bets onbinary optics. Largely an offshoot of federally fundeddefense research, the technology is rapidly becoming yetanother high-tech front on which U.S. companies will facestiff competition from Japanese and European concerns.   Sometimes called diffractive optics, it combinesrefraction, the bending of light by lenses, with diffraction,the breaking up of light waves by sharp edges or narrowapertures; credit-card holograms are based on diffraction.Among other things, the combination promises high-qualityoptics made with cheap, plastic lenses fabricated bycomputer-controlled machines.   For instance, single refractive lenses typically causeaberrations, such as bending blue light more than red.Engineers traditionally solve the problem in cameras andother devices by adding corrective lenses. With binaryoptics, however, the corrections are made by carvingdiffraction patterns -- many fine, staircase-like notches --on the surfaces of conventional lenses. That enables asingle, cheap lens to do what once required multiple,high-quality ones.   At Polaroid and other companies, for example, &quot;there'sbeen a big kick during the past two or three years&quot; todevelop inexpensive, plastic camera lenses based on binaryoptics, says Peter Clark, a Polaroid researcher. Similarly,various companies are working on cheaper lens systems forlaser printers, compact disk players and other devices inwhich light beams must be channeled and focused. Researcherscaution, however, that problems remain to be worked outbefore the new technology can be used commercially.   Another variation on binary optics involves placing arraysof microscopic, optical components on computer chip-likedevices to meld, redirect or otherwise manipulate light rays.This form of the technology is being explored by Rockwell,ATandamp;T and other companies for optical computing, in whichlight beams would be used to carry massive flows ofinformation without cumbersome wires.   The idea of combining refraction and diffraction isn'tnew, but the computer-design and fabrication technology tomake it practical &quot;really came together&quot; only recently, saysMichael Morris, a researcher at the University of Rochester'sInstitute of Optics. One of the enabling technologies is acomputer-driven, lathe-like machine that rotates lenses oncushions of air and notches them with diamond-tipped cuttingtools. Binary optics researchers also have borrowedtechniques from integrated-circuit-making to plant rows oftiny lenses and other optical parts on silicon chips.   One of first major consumer products based on the newtechnology is expected to be implantable replacements for eyelenses. Cataract and other patients whose damaged naturallenses are replaced by plastic ones can see distant objectsbut can't focus on nearby things without glasses. Usingbinary optics, Minnesota Mining's 3M Vision Care unit hasdeveloped &quot;dual-focus&quot; lenses enabling patients to clearlysee both near and far objects. The company says it plans tobegin marketing the lenses in the U.S. next year.   At the other end of the binary-optics spectrum, ChromatekInc., based in New York, plans to use the technology todistort vision. With the help of Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology's Lincoln Laboratory, a leader in binary-opticsresearch, it is developing eyeglasses that would give athree-dimensional look to specially colored television ormovie images. Chromatek, contends a spokesman, soon &quot;will beable to make glasses for pennies that are far better&quot; thanthe red-and-green spectacles previously used for 3-D effects.   Perhaps the technology's most intriguing prospect,however, is its potential for shedding light on problems thathave stymied progress in robot-vision research. For years,scientists have tried to simulate the eye's ability to pickout important things in images, such as edges and movingobjects, by translating thousands of dotlike pictureelements, or pixels, into numerical data and analyzing themwith sophisticated computer programs. But in the real world,scenes change much faster than computers can analyze them. Toreplicate only our edge-perceiving abilities with thisapproach, according to one estimate, would require millionsof personal computers working in parallel. And that's justfor one eye.   Binary optics promises seeing devices that work more likeour eyes, says Wilfrid Veldkamp, a researcher at MIT'sLincoln Lab who is spearheading work in the area. Heenvisions chip-like devices with thousands of tiny opticaland electronic components that would simulate certain of theeye's nerve cells, called the amacrine layer. The cells helppre-process and simplify images before they are sent to thebrain. The approach, which he has dubbed amacronics, woulddrastically cut the amount of data to be analyzed for motionand edge detection. &quot;We probably won't solve the mystery ofthe eye in my lifetime,&quot; he says. &quot;But we're building atechnology that will get us to the type of things the eyedoes.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>