<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900810-0086</DOCNO><DOCID>900810-0086.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   U.S. Challenges Georgia Election System   ----   By Paul M. Barrett and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   CHW BERS</CO><IN>STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   The Justice Department, in an action civil-rightsadvocates hailed as a landmark lawsuit, asked a federal courtto end Georgia's runoff election system, which requires acandidate to receive over 50% of the vote to be elected.   The majority-vote requirement, which is similar to that ofeight other southern states, was adopted in 1964 andmaintained as a means of preventing blacks from beingelected, the Justice Department charged in a suit filed inAtlanta.</LP><TEXT>   The suit is the department's first across-the-boardchallenge to a state's elections for federal, state andcounty positions. The Georgia system, the federal suitcharged, violates the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and the 14thand 15th Amendments to the Constitution. In a separatepending legal proceeding, the department claims that Georgiadiscriminates on racial grounds in the way it elects many ofits judges.   Perry Michael, Georgia's executive assistant attorneygeneral, declined to comment on the suit. But he said stateofficials were &quot;very surprised&quot; by the action, because agroup of Georgia citizens already had challenged the majorityrequirement in a similar suit filed in May.   The federal suit &quot;is very significant because it showsthat the Justice Department will be much more active than ithad been (under former President Reagan) in trying to stopdiscriminatory voting practices,&quot; said Robert McDuff, anattorney with the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights UnderLaw, a Washington advocacy group.   The majority-vote requirement has its most obvious impactin primaries in which black candidates win the most votes butdon't achieve an outright majority. In subsequent runoffelections, whites in Georgia typically have voted alongracial lines to defeat black candidates, the JusticeDepartment charged.   The Georgia system, said the department's civil-rightschief, John Dunne, &quot;has denied the state's black citizens anequal opportunity to participate in the political process.&quot;He said that 26.5% of Georgia's voters are black, accordingto 1980 census figures, but only 10% of the state's electedofficials are black.   Mr. Dunne said news reports at the time the Georgia systemwas created had described state legislators' desire toprevent &quot;Negro bloc voting.&quot; That purpose provides &quot;thesmoking gun&quot; in demonstrating the illegal discriminatoryintent behind the majority-vote requirement, Mr. Dunne said.   The other states with runoff systems similar to Georgia'sare: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Oklahoma,Mississippi, South Carolina and Texas. Mr. Dunne said thatthe Justice Department isn't aware of discriminatory resultsrelated to the majority-vote requirements in any of theseother states and that it isn't investigating them.   He added that the department's suit wouldn't affect thisyear's gubernatorial election in Georgia. In a Democraticprimary runoff this week, Lt. Gov. Zell Miller beat formerAtlanta mayor and congressman Andrew Young, who had sought tobe the state's first black governor.   ---   APPEALS COURT RULES Alabama hazardous-waste curbsunconstitutional.   The 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta ruledthat an Alabama law prohibiting disposal of out-of-statehazardous waste in Alabama -- unless the state where thewaste was generated has similar facilities -- violates thecommerce clause of the U.S. Constitution.   Under the law, Alabama issued a &quot;blacklist&quot; barring theacceptance of hazardous waste from 22 states and the Districtof Columbia. The law, passed last fall, forced many companiesto ship their hazardous waste to other disposal facilities,adding significantly to the companies' costs.   The appeals panel's decision had been closely watched bythe hazardous-waste industry, as well as legislators in otherstates considering adopting similar laws. The paneloverturned a ruling by a lower court in January upholding theconstitutionality of the law.   The case arose from a lawsuit filed by Chemical WasteManagement Inc., which runs the nation's largest andAlabama's only commercial hazardous-waste managementfacility, located in Emelle. The National Solid WastesManagement Association, a trade association for thewaste-management industry, is also a plaintiff in the case.   The appeals panel acknowledged that many states areconcerned about minimizing the dangers to public health andto the environment created by hazardous wastes. But the panelfound that Alabama's law barred the wastes only of certainstates, placing an unfair burden on interstate commerce andviolating the Constitution. In addition, the panel ruled thatAlabama's regulation of hazardous-waste land disposal waspre-empted by Congress's intention that those decisions beregulated by the Environmental Protection Agency on anationwide basis, in order to insure that certain states donot become dumping grounds.   In a prepared statement, Alabama Gov. Guy Hunt said thestate was still looking at the decision but intended to seeka rehearing or review by the U.S. Supreme Court. He said thatthe Alabama law had received &quot;broad support in this countryamong the states&quot; and that he felt each state should createtheir own hazardous-waste management program.   But Allen Moore, president of the National Solid WastesManagement Association, said in a statement that the decisionmeans that states cannot act on their own to create suchprograms.   &quot;This is not to say that only a few states should satisfythe nation's hazardous-waste disposal needs. There is a rolefor every state, and the federal government must assure thatall states do their part,&quot; Mr. Moore said.   ---   SEC ACCUSES BROKERS and company of teaming up tomanipulate IPO.   The Securities and Exchange Commission accused BeresIndustries Inc., two of its officers, the president of anow-defunct brokerage firm and four other individuals offraud and stock manipulation.   In the civil suit, filed in federal court in Newark, N.J.,the SEC said the scheme began with the over-the-countercompany's initial public offering in June 1986 and ended inMarch 1989 when the brokerage firm, Monmouth InvestmentsInc., went out of business. Beres' stock, which had tradedbetween $1 and $4 during the alleged scheme, immediatelycollapsed with the closing of Monmouth, the SEC said, andrecently traded as low as six cents a share.   The individual defendants include Charles Beres Sr., thefounder and chairman of Beres; Charles Beres Jr., chiefexecutive officer; and Arden Brown, formerly president ofMonmouth, which was based in Englishtown, N.J., before itclosed. Monmouth wasn't named in the lawsuit. Beres, whichmakes plastic molds, is based in Lakewood, N.J.   The SEC charged that Mr. Brown told Beres that Monmouthwould underwrite the initial public offering only if Mr.Brown was given 10% of the company's stock in addition to itsusual underwriting fees. The SEC charged that thisarrangement was never disclosed to investors.   Before the initial public offering, there were ninemillion restricted Beres shares, mainly held by Beresinsiders, the SEC said. About a third of those shares wereeventually sold to Monmouth for far less than the prevailingmarket price, the SEC alleged. Monmouth turned around andsold the stock at higher prices through misleadingboiler-room techniques, the lawsuit said.   The SEC said that during the initial stock offering,Monmouth solicited customers and arranged for later purchasesat preset, arbitrary prices. These arranged sales made itappear that the stock was in demand after the initial publicoffering, the SEC said. The defendants' lawyers couldn't bereached for comment.   The SEC is seeking a court order banning the defendantsfrom securities law violations. It also asked the court toorder them to turn over their allegedly illegal profits,estimated to total $4.5 million.   ---   STATE JUDGES begin effort to resolve asbestos litigation.   Although recent actions by federal judges have putasbestos personal-injury litigation in the news, the bulk ofthe cases are before state courts. Working in conjunctionwith some of the federal judges, three state judges from NewYork, Baltimore and Philadelphia have begun planning aconference for this fall at which about a dozen judges fromacross the country will meet to discuss the issue.   Several federal judges are meeting today in Washington todiscuss a possible asbestos personal-injury class action andother nationwide approaches to resolving the cases. New Yorkstate Justice Helen Freedman of Manhattan said the statejudges plan to focus on alternative ways to encourage theparties to settle the suits and avoid going to trial.   Many judges have become frustrated with the growingbacklog of asbestos cases, and some fear that the defendantsmay run out of funds before all the claims are paid.Asbestos, once widely used in shipbuilding and construction,causes cancer and respiratory ailments.   Justice Freedman, with 2,000 asbestos cases pending, saida claims-resolution system needs to be set up to ensure thatthe more seriously ill claimants are paid first and to speedup the compensation process.   ---   A FEMALE MINISTER charges that she was sexually harassedby a male pastor.   In a lawsuit believed to be the first of its kind, theRev. Susan E. Black alleges that the Rev. William R. Snyder,pastor of St. John's Lutheran Church in Minneapolis, madeunwelcome sexual advances toward her during the 15 months sheserved as the church's associate minister. She claims Mr.Snyder described the two of them as being &quot;in love.&quot;   In her suit, filed in Hennepin County District Court, Ms.Black is also charging Mr. Snyder, the church and itsdenomination, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America,with violating Minnesota's &quot;whistleblower statute,&quot; whichbars organizations from firing employees engaged in a legalaction against those organizations.   St. John's congregation dismissed Ms. Black in June, twomonths after she filed a complaint against Mr. Snyder withthe Minnesota Department of Human Rights.   In a statement, Bishop David W. Olsen of thedenomination's Minnesota Area Synod denied that churchofficials had retaliated against her for filing thecomplaint. He said a church committee, which investigated Ms.Black's charges earlier this year, concluded that Mr.Snyder's behavior was &quot;extremely inappropriate forprofessional relationships,&quot; but found no grounds for takingdisciplinary measures against the pastor.   Karl Cambronne, a lawyer for Mr. Snyder and St. John's,said he will file a motion to dismiss the suit on FirstAmendment grounds. He added, &quot;Factually, (Ms. Black's) claimis lacking.&quot;   ---   Wade Lambert and R. Gustav Niebuhr contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>