<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920128-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>920128-0008.</DOCID><HL>   Wounded Giant:   Union Carbide Offers   Some Sober Lessons   In Crisis Management   ---   Staggered by Bhopal Disaster,   It Grew Insular, Cautious;   Now, Its Future Is Unclear   ---   Costly New Safety Procedures   ----   By Scott McMurray   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/28/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR UK</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)</MS><IN>COMMODITY CHEMICALS (CHC)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)EARNINGS (ERN)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><NS>EARNINGS (ERN)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><RE>CONNECTICUT (CT)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   DANBURY, Conn. -- After seven years, Union Carbide Corp.still hasn't recovered from the disaster in Bhopal.   An internal study ranks its bedrock chemical operationsnear the back of the pack in nine of 10 key areas, fromproductivity to total return for investors. Its successfulconsumer lines have been sold. Its most profitable remainingunit, industrial gases, is being spun off. And speculationhas been rampant that the company may be ripe for a takeoveror merger offer within the next few months. Union Carbideofficials say they don't respond to rumors.</LP><TEXT>   Burdened with $70 million in pretax restructuring costslast quarter, Union Carbide yesterday reported losses of $63million in the fourth quarter and $28 million for the fullyear. A year ago, it earned $7 million in the quarter and$308 million in the full year.   Other large companies facing their own crises today -- DowCorning Corp. concerning breast implants, for instance, andUpjohn Co. on the disputed side effects of its Halcionsleeping pill -- tend to look to successful cases ofcrisis-management for guidance, such as Johnson andamp; Johnson'sresponse to the Tylenol poisonings in 1982. But UnionCarbide's case offers its own cogent lessons -- on somedangers to avoid.   &quot;Bhopal's effect on Carbide was very much like a shock tothe human nervous system. It changed the entire future ofthat company,&quot; says Gerald Meyers, a crisis-management expertand business professor at Carnegie-Mellon University.   Executives suddenly turned cautious and insular. Theyreacted defensively to threats and opportunities rather thantaking advantage of them. Instead of looking ahead to judgewhich parts of the company were best-positioned to prosper inthe future, Union Carbide saw itself as a chemical producerwith other, expendable business units tacked on.   In the early 1980s, Union Carbide was big, rich andmuscular. Its chemical division competed head-to-head withthe best in the business. And whenever chemical salessoftened, it flexed its market muscle in consumer andindustrial products. Its consumer division -- Evereadybatteries, Glad plastic bags and Prestone antifreeze -- aloneearned more some years than the chemical or plasticsoperations of several rivals.   Then, on the night of Dec. 3, 1984, a deadly cloud ofmethyl isocyanate gas seeped from a Union Carbide pesticideplant in Bhopal, India. More than 3,000 died and another20,000 were seriously injured. While the company hasmaintained that a disgruntled employee sabotaged the plant,it has accepted &quot;moral responsibility&quot; for the accident fromthe start. It also settled all civil claims for $470 million.   Before Bhopal, Union Carbide's strategic plan was simple:Keep the consumer, industrial and chemical units in balance.After all, it was a combination of those basic units thatoriginally formed the Union Carbide conglomerate in 1917. ButBhopal blew the simple plan apart. In its place Union Carbidehas followed a patchwork set of responses to external events.Its latest plan, to spin off its $2.4 billion Linde gasesbusiness to shareholders by midyear, will leave the companyalmost totally dependent on its cyclically depressed chemicaland plastics business.   As a stand-alone chemical producer, Union Carbide will bea $4.9 billion-a-year domestic company, half its size priorto Bhopal. At least five global chemical makers will be muchlarger, with domestic rivals Du Pont Co. and Dow Chemical Co.more than three times as large, leaving Union Carbide at adistinct disadvantage in competing for internationalcontracts.   As a result, Union Carbide faces the threat of beingforced into a takeover or merger with a stronger partner. &quot;Iwouldn't be surprised to see the name Union Carbide disappearas a public company in a few years,&quot; says Paul Leming, aKidder, Peabody andamp; Co. securities analyst.   Robert D. Kennedy, Union Carbide's chairman and chiefexecutive officer, is confident the chemical company and thegases business can survive separate and independent. &quot;Theseare quite different businesses. We determined that the bestway for them to operate is independently,&quot; he says.   For Union Carbide, the first test of its ability towithstand Bhopal's effects came just months after thetragedy. With its stock price depressed by liabilityuncertainty, it attracted a junk-bond-financed takeover bidfrom GAF Corp., a small specialty chemical company. UnionCarbide's response set the overwhelmingly defensive tone ofits post-Bhopal strategy.   Union Carbide fought off the bid by buying back 56% of itsstock -- thus saddling itself with $3.3 billion of new debt.And to ward off other suitors, it sold the highly profitableconsumer-products businesses, distributing the proceeds as aspecial dividend.   Mr. Kennedy, who was president of the chemicals divisionat the time, and other Union Carbide executives say theybelieved that if Union Carbide were to be broken up, as GAFproposed, the benefits should go to Union Carbideshareholders, not to GAF. Mr. Kennedy also says Union Carbidehadn't any alternative to some sort of breakup because GAF'sall-cash bid &quot;put a gun to our heads.&quot;   Mr. Kennedy became Union Carbide's chairman and chiefexecutive in 1986. He and other executives say they handledthe one-two blow of the Bhopal disaster and the GAF attack aswell as they could. &quot;I might wish we still had batteries, butwe don't. We have to deal with that,&quot; says Mr. Kennedy.   The crushing post-GAF debt load put Union Carbide at ahuge disadvantage in the rapidly evolving chemical industryduring the latter half of the 1980s. It couldn't afford tofollow rivals that were diversifying into other profitablebusinesses, rivals like Monsanto Co., which bought drug makerG.D. Searle Co. and its NutraSweet artificial sweetener, orlike Dow Chemical, which bought a controlling interest inMarion Laboratories to form the drug company Marion MerrellDow Inc.   Union Carbide's debt, which peaked at about 80% ofcapitalization in 1986, still hovers at just over 50% ofcapitalization. Following the planned sale of $500 million inassets, mainly among its specialty chemical businesses, debtwill be reduced to about 37% -- still slightly abovepre-Bhopal levels.   Being thrown on the defensive by the accident helpedfurther insulate Union Carbide's culture. One way that Mr.Kennedy, an affable life-time &quot;Carbider,&quot; helped keepdefections to a minimum after Bhopal and GAF was by favoringa consensus management style. Senior-level committees,including the 12-member president's council, were rejuvenatedand given expanded policy-making roles.   That focus on looking inward and rallying the troops cameat the expense of keeping close tabs on the changingcompetitive landscape. For instance, Union Carbide oftentouts its low-cost Unipol method of making polyethyleneplastic. But the company's own higher-than-averagedistribution costs eat up much of its cost advantage by thetime the plastic is delivered to the customer, a UnionCarbide insider says. Mr. Kennedy concedes that distributioncosts are too high and is trying to cut those costs.   By some accounts, Union Carbide officials focused on theirstrengths in particular areas without realizing that theoverall company was slipping. &quot;As recently as a year and ahalf ago, a lot of people here didn't think Carbide had aproblem,&quot; even though it was clear the entire industry washeading into a sharp downturn, the Union Carbide insidersays. Mr. Kennedy says he has known for years that thecompany had problems. &quot;Carbide has never worked as aconglomerate,&quot; he said last December, when the plan to spinoff of gases was announced.   The company's insular, go-it-alone bent led to anothermissed opportunity. In early 1990, directors passed on achance to sell to a Japanese chemical company, at a heftypremium to market value, about 15% of its chemicals business,say investment bankers familiar with the proposal. It alsorejected proposals that included selling its gases businessto the public. Mr. Kennedy says the board decided &quot;the timewasn't right&quot; for such moves. He declines to comment on thespecifics of the proposals.   Since then, chemical industry profits have collapsed andJapanese chemical makers have retreated from expansion plansaimed at the U.S. market.   With chemical profits today at sharply depressed levels,loss of the consumer businesses is especially painful. Sinceits early days as the developer of the first commercialdry-cell battery, Union Carbide had always had consumerproducts to help offset cyclical downturns in chemicals.Operating income last year just from Union Carbide's formerbattery business, now owned by Ralston Purina Co., totaledabout $180 million, analysts estimate. (Ralston Purina won'tcomment.)   Meanwhile, seeking to boost its performance, Union Carbidehas embarked on a sweeping plan to cut costs by $400 milliona year by the end of 1994. The chemical and gases operationsalready have cut about 5,500 jobs, or 15% of their combinedpayroll. After the spinoff of gases, the chemical companywill cut another 2,000 to 3,000 jobs. Union Carbide took a$121 million third-quarter charge relating to the costcutting plan, in addition to the fourth quarter chargeannounced yesterday.   Mr. Kennedy, 59 years old, says his biggest error at theUnion Carbide helm was not starting to trim costs in the late1980s, when chemical profits temporarily surged to recordlevels. At the time of the GAF bid, for example, UnionCarbide laid off more than 4,000 employees. But by 1988, thatnumber of employees and then some had been hired back atfacilities around the country as demand, and profits, soared.At year-end 1990, Union Carbide had 37,756 employees.   Costs also soared as Union Carbide, responding to concernstriggered by Bhopal, spent heavily on safety. It piled onsupervisory steps at the plant level. Mr. Kennedy concedesthat rivals have produced roughly equivalent safety levels attheir plants at a fraction of Carbide's costs.   Replacing an industrial pump seal, for instance, ought tobe a simple procedure. But Carbide turned it into a three- orfour-hour job through an 11-step process that includedmultiple reporting procedures, says Billy Powell, aproduction technician in the acrylics unit at the company'sTaft complex near New Orleans.   Consultants estimate Union Carbide could save $15 millionto $20 million a year at Taft alone by tightening suchmaintenance practices. Mr. Powell says that after a pilotprogram to overhaul maintenance was started at the Taft site,replacing a pump seal &quot;now takes 30 minutes.&quot;   Bhopal's effect on Union Carbide's proud culture was alsoswift and deep. At the time of the disaster, Robert Perry wasa vice president in Toronto. For several weeks after Bhopal,whenever he crossed the U.S.-Canadian border, customsofficials quizzed him about what Union Carbide had done. Sofor a while &quot;I quit admitting who I worked for&quot; on customsforms, he says. An associate, a district supervisor inCanada, stopped jogging in a Carbide warm-up jacket. &quot;He saidhe was ashamed to wear it,&quot; Mr. Perry recalls.   The result: a long-lasting impact on morale andproductivity. Union Carbide's pretax profit per employee wasjust $16,700 in 1990, 59% less than industry leader DowChemical's $41,200 per employee, says Fred Siemer, an analystwith Chemical Research for Wall Street. Certainly, not all ofthat problem can be attributed to Bhopal-indeed, UnionCarbide also significantly trailed Dow prior to Bhopal. Butit's notable that even though Carbide's total employmentdropped steeply between 1985 and 1991, its productivityremained rock bottom among major chemical companies.   Union Carbide employees admit they're still haunted byBhopal. Says Mr. Perry: &quot;I still have a hard time reconcilingmy pride in the company and what happened in Bhopal. It justdoesn't compute.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>