<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900913-0006</DOCNO><DOCID>900913-0006.</DOCID><HL>   REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):   Arms and Morality</HL><DATE>09/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   The world's moralists seem to have reached a consensusabout how to deal with Iraq. To wit, the moral course is tomount a blockade, the burden of which will fall onnoncombatants -- women, children, conquered Kuwaitis and theIraqi people. But, they say, do not think of bombing Iraqichemical-weapons sites, let alone trying to defeat the Iraqimilitary machine in open combat. Such &quot;unprovoked&quot; use offorce is immoral.   Of course it is preferable to achieve our purposes withoutviolence, without taking any casualties or inflicting any.But look unblinkingly at the purposes President Bush outlinedTuesday night: an immediate and unconditional Iraqiwithdrawal from Kuwait; measures to ensure more permanentpeace in the vital Persian Gulf; a halt to the spread ofchemical, biological, missile and nuclear weapons; theconsummation of a lesson that aggression will not betolerated. As the remarkable degree of world consensusattests, these purposes are both just and vital to stabilityand progress in the emerging, highly interdependent worldorder.</LP><TEXT>   The chance that Saddam Hussein will relent and withdrawunconditionally is, it should by now be apparent, highlytheoretical. There also is a chance that he would be replacedin a coup, but somehow dictators who rule by terror seldomare. And in either case, it is difficult to imagine anagreement to destroy chemical weapons, halt the Iraqi nuclearprogram and reduce the Iraqi military to a size that does notthreaten its neighbors, not to mention the return of the loottaken during the aggression. The &quot;moderate&quot; option ofcontaining Saddam over the next generation almost surelywould undermine our Arab allies, and is a de factorecognition of his conquest. If President Bush's purposes areto be achieved, the odds are overwhelming that they will haveto be achieved by force.   Naturally one should be prudent. While marshaling hisforces and building consensus, President Bush has allowedtime for diplomacy by the Arab states, the UN SecretaryGeneral and so on. With his first armored forces now deployedin Saudi Arabia, he may want to try again to achieve his aimswith the threat of force rather than its use -- for exampleby the blockade of Kuwaiti air space suggested on our pagesby Albert Wohlstetter and Fred Hoffman. But such optionsdepend on a willingness to use, sooner or later, whateverforce is necessary to achieve the full menu of thePresident's stated purposes.   The lesson of military history, indeed, is that if forcemust be used it should be used decisively. It is the instinctof the American people that military action is seriousbusiness -- to be avoided if possible but, when necessary,not to be invoked in half-hearted ways. We have beenstruggling since the end of World War II, to be sure, withthe issue of how to apply this lesson in an age of nuclearweapons, given their unimaginable destructiveness andpotential for carnage of noncombatants. In Korea, this issuecomprised the dispute between President Truman and GeneralMacArthur. In Vietnam we feared superpower conflict and itspotential for nuclear holocaust, so applied force throughincremental, gradual escalation. Our experience confirmed thewisdom of history's lesson.   The Iraqi invasion is the first aggression of a new eraprecisely because superpower competition no longer protectsthe local tyrant. The issue is whether the world will allowsuch brazenness even without superpower protection and thethreat of nuclear war; if so it will be a dark portent forthe future in general, and in particular for the potentialAmerican hostages throughout the world.   There is of course no thought of employing nuclearweapons, since we want to maintain moral and prudentialrestraints on their use. We would like if possible to extendsuch restraints to chemical and other weapons of massdestruction likely to take a huge toll of civilians. But toachieve the President's aims in Iraq we probably will need touse force decisively in the classic military sense ofdestroying the enemy's capacity and will to resist.   The American armed forces have digested the lesson of theVietnam escalation better than anyone, if anything perhapstoo well. The generals certainly are right in wanting a forcelarge enough to crack the Iraqi army swiftly, but there alsois a risk that unrealistically large requirements can becomean excuse for inaction. By now, after all, we haveoverwhelming air power, a Security Council blessing, controlof the seas, and some 20 allies committed. American armored,airborne and marine divisions now face Iraq, not to overlooka large Turkish army on its northern border. President Bushhas visited Chairman Gorbachev to make sure the Soviets standaside, and visited Congress to cement its backing and rallythe American people. Most of the pieces are in place for adecisive blow.   A few weeks more time would provide more tanks and moretroops, but also carry the risk of political complicationsand erosion of the alliance. The passage of time, above all,is likely to expose the moral ambiguity of the current policyof pseudo-war. The President already has said we will allowthe shipment of medicine to the sick and food to babies. Isit our policy to starve babies not to the point of death, butonly to malnutrition? How long can this be sustained, andwhat outcome might justify it?   President Bush, of course, must bear the decision ofbalancing the chances of avoiding further violence, thepressures of time and the need for decisive action. But hisdecision need not be clouded by sentimentality masqueradingas morality. When war looms, acting decisively and seeking aspeedy conclusion is not only the best military choice butthe best moral choice.</TEXT></DOC>