<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900531-0068</DOCNO><DOCID>900531-0068.</DOCID><HL>   Captive Nations and Western Security   ----   By Albert Wohlstetter</HL><DATE>05/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><IN>NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Brent Scowcroft has said that this week's meeting betweenPresident Bush and President Gorbachev &quot;will not be an armscontrol summit.&quot; It will have to do with &quot;what's going on inthe Soviet Union&quot; and &quot;with remaking a political map ofEurope.&quot;   That gets our priorities about right. Moves toward freeeconomic and political choice in the Soviet empire areredrawing the political map of all Eurasia. It is thesemovements -- not arms agreements -- that are transforming andreducing the Soviet threats that have preoccupied the West.</LP><TEXT>   U.S.-Soviet agreements to reduce arms and relocate troopsand equipment not only lag behind the reductions andwithdrawals demanded by the newly independent EasternEuropean states (and needed by the shattered Soviet economy)but have tended to slow them down. Second, arms agreementsfocus excessively on two far-fetched contingencies: anall-out conventional invasion through the center of Europeand an unrestricted nuclear attack on thousands of targets inthe U.S. They ignore other Soviet threats -- ones that werealways more plausible and now are more transparently so.   Third, they neglect the increasing dangers presented bythe spread to many countries of nuclear, chemical andbiological weapons. And last, arms agreements tryartificially to separate the strategic and the nuclearsystems from theater and nonnuclear systems, even when theyare essentially the same -- as in the Soviet attempt in theStrategic Arms Reduction Treaty to constrain conventionalcruise missiles we need to meet a wide range of conventionalthreats in any of several widely separated theaters.   Arms control bureaucracies treat arms control essentiallyas a technical matter of matching numbers on each side. Thatassumes wrongly that Soviet forces are in the center ofEurope only because our forces are there. It ignores the keydifference between NATO and the Warsaw Pact: The Soviets haveinserted troops in Eastern Europe by force, while NATO, avoluntary organization of free, sovereign democracies, askedfor U.S. troops and can tell them to leave knowing that theU.S. will do so -- as it did when it withdrew its forces fromFrance in the mid-1960s.   Unless U.S. and West European governments misguidedlynegotiate a continuance of the Soviet presence in EastEurope, the new democratic states there can make itimpossible for the Soviets to support their forceslogistically. The Soviets would have to use massive force tokeep them there. This is a most implausible course giventheir other troubles. (Agreements can't lock in future Sovietgovernments; the new political realities can lock them out.)It is primarily the governments of Czechoslovakia, Hungary,Poland and Germany that should negotiate the withdrawal ofSoviet forces. West Europe and the U.S. should help mainly byproviding moral support to these governments and perhaps,like West Germany, help in financing civilian housing andretraining in the Soviet Union for the demobilized soldiers.   The main aim of U.S. security policy in Europe should beto let the democracies in the region decide what foreignforces they will allow to be located within their ownboundaries. The same objective should animate the armsagreements the U.S. supports. If the U.S. achieves this goal,U.S. forces in West Germany will dwindle and Soviet forces inEast Europe will disappear without endangering Sovietcitizens.   U.S. arms control bureaucracies should also recognize thatit is the Soviet independence movements that will have thedominant effect, beyond the center of Europe, on Westerninterests world-wide.   In short, arguments that the U.S. must sacrifice thedemocratic independence movements inside the Soviet Union inorder to get arms control agreements get things exactlybackward. By doing so, the U.S. would sacrifice or seriouslycompromise the movements that are genuinely reducing threatsand making lower defense budgets feasible in return foragreements that do little or nothing for either purpose.   The nationalism that moves so many parts of the Sovietempire toward independence can have its flip side. The U.S.wants such moves to be peaceful, but they may well be violent-- especially if repressed.   The various nationalities are not only hostile to theircommunist rulers, but have many old antagonisms amongthemselves. But the Politburo is a very implausible defenderof any minority. In fact, it is Mr. Gorbachev's Politburothat has been stirring up ethnic violence:   -- In Georgia in April 1989, Moscow authorized the use ofpoison gas to end peaceful demonstrations and to inciteGeorgian Christians against Moslem Meshketians.   -- In Azerbaijan, Moscow sent troops to Baku several daysafter the Popular Front for Azerbaijan had stopped thepogroms against Armenians. Defense Minister Dmitri Yazovadmitted that the presence of the troops had nothing to dowith separating the Azeris and Armenians but with thedestruction of the Azerbaijanian independence movement.   -- In Lithuania, Moscow sent in armored personnel carriersostensibly to protect the civil rights of Russian minoritiesthere; dropped leaflets from helicopters in an attempt torally the Russian minorities against the Lithuanians; andimposed an economic blockade.   -- In Latvia and Estonia, the Soviet military ledsimultaneous unarmed assaults on the legislatures.   All of these examples provide evidence of Moscow'scontinuing attempts to stir ethnic antagonisms and to obscurethe fact that whatever reconciliation these nationalitiesneed to achieve with each other, they have in common anunquenchable desire to be free of their Soviet rulers.   Over the past 70 years, the Soviet Union's leaders havetried and failed to meld its citizens into one &quot;Homosovieticus.&quot; They are even less likely to succeed now. Sovietleaders have had little success in rallying even ethnicRussians in support of holding on to the empire. Just thisweek leaders in the Russian republic held the foundingmeeting of the Democratic Party of the Russian Federation,which favors immediate independence for all of the nationalrepublics and immediate privatization and transition to afree market.   The fanfare that greets every announcement by Mr.Gorbachev that he has sweetened his offer to negotiate aboutthe secession of various republics cannot conceal the factthat these concessions are so much smoke.   Take the case of Lithuania. Mr. Gorbachev has demandedthat before negotiations can begin the Lithuanians mustsuspend their declaration of independence, thus admittingthat they are subject to Soviet law. That is the main pointstalling negotiations, but it is sharpened by the fact thatMr. Gorbachev has designed the two laws that he rushedthrough this year so as to make secession essentiallyinfeasible. One, a new secession law, outlines a nightmareobstacle course.   First, it demands that a referendum on secession pass by amajority of more than two-thirds. This majority must obtainnot only in each republic at large, but in each autonomoussubdivision or &quot;place densely populated by an ethnic group&quot;within the republic. It's conceivable that Lithuania might beable to get over this obstacle, but Latvia and Estonia, whichhave been extensively colonized by the Soviets and whosepopulations have been subject to extensive deportations,might not.   Even if they did, independence would then have to beapproved by the Soviet Congress of People's Deputies, whose2,250 members were elected only after the Communist Party hadrigorously screened all proposed candidates. Miraculously, afew hundred free spirits slipped through the party net, butnot enough to give independence for one of the republics muchof a chance.   If somehow a republic cleared that second obstacle,however, Mr. Gorbachev could assure that an application forindependence was withdrawn by using another drastic new law.Under it, he has the power to impose direct presidential rulein any of the republics and to replace the local authoritieswith his own appointees. The Balts will remember how theSoviets &quot;replaced&quot; the Hungarian leaders with whom they werenegotiating in 1956 and the leaders of the Prague Spring in1968.   Finally, a new republic could secede only if it paidcompensation for Soviet investments in the territory. Inshort, Mr. Gorbachev would ask the prisoners to pay for thecosts of their imprisonment.   For sheer gall this last requirement is the top. Sovietauthorities assert this right of compensation not only in therelatively rich Baltic republics, but in other republics aswell, including -- as an example -- the impoverished Moslemrepublic of Uzbekistan, whose natural endowment Sovietplanners ruined by an enormous ecological disaster -- theshrinking of the largest inland sea in the world, the Sea ofAral -- by poisoning the soil with a huge overload ofpesticides, and by destroying human capital through theextensive use of child labor. Some accountant among thecentral planners no doubt is totting up the cost of thepesticides and the irrigation pipes and trenches that drainedthe Sea of Aral. It's as if, instead of paying compensationto the survivors of Hitler's Final Solution, Germany haddemanded compensation from Israel or from the Diaspora forthe expense of the gas ovens.   Mr. Gorbachev, as the Communist official answerable to theparty for the economy before he became its leader in March1985, deserves credit for recognizing the need for drasticeconomic restructuring. But he has swung wildly amongattempts to improve central planning, partial ventures intodecentralizing and halfway flirtations with the market andprivate ownership.   Though an increasing number of his advisers have madeclear that nothing short of rapidly freeing markets andinstituting private property rights will do, he hasvacillated and reversed course and never indicated clearlywhere he is headed. A master of oxymoron, he last weeklaunched his latest dash to &quot;free&quot; (regulated) markets. Forall his talk of pluralism and democracy, he has refused toface the fact that the economic crisis in the Soviet Unioncan be solved only by a move to economic freedom, and thateconomic freedom is not feasible without political freedom.   All this suggests that:   a) Western policy should support a path of evolution incommunist empires rather than specific leaders such as Mr.Gorbachev or Deng Xiaoping.   b) While there are sharp limits to what Westerngovernments can do to encourage paths of decolonizationfavorable to Western security and they are most unlikely tointervene militarily to counter crackdowns, they are nothelpless to affect events.   c) At a time when communist economies are in trouble,Western governments can make clear that suppression ofindependence movements will slow or stop access to Westerncapital markets, technology and other assistance -- just asthe Soviet invasion of Afghanistan reduced such access.(President Bush's statement this week that Soviet treatmentof Lithuania is delaying Most Favored Nation status is a stepin the right direction.)   d) Western governments can make this clear not only byprivate communications but by taking preliminary actions todelay help. Whatever they say in public should be phrased notonly to minimize the loss of face on the part of communistleaders, but the loss of credibility on the part of Westerngovernments.   e) Western governments should understand that even aSoviet Union limited to Great Russia would be the mostformidable military power in Eurasia. At the same time, sucha Soviet Union, perhaps joined by other republics in avoluntary confederation of states modeled on the BritishCommonwealth (as Mr. Gorbachev has sometimes suggested),would drastically reduce threats to U.S., European andJapanese interests not only in Europe but in Asia and theMideast as well in precisely the same way as independencemovements in East Europe have reduced the threat in thecenter of Europe.   ---   Mr. Wohlstetter is president of Pan Heuristics, a researchgroup in Los Angeles, and a fellow at the Rand GraduateSchool and Stanford's Hoover Institution.</TEXT></DOC>