<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910924-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>910924-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Show of Regained Confidence by Saddam Hussein   Could Escalate Tension Into U.S. Military Action   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><NS>UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)TURKEY (TU)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Saddam Hussein has rediscovered his swagger,which is a big reason the latest showdown over Iraqi behaviorcould lead to U.S. military action.   The cause of escalating tension is Iraq's interferencewith United Nations inspectors searching for weapons of massdestruction. Iraq is trying to impose conditions on the useof U.N. helicopters to carry out inspections, and as a resultthe U.S. and its allies were discussing a new joint stand.</LP><TEXT>   One possibility, diplomats said, is that the U.N. may seta 48-hour deadline for unrestricted helicopter flights anddeclare that U.S., French and British military aircraft willescort U.N. inspectors if the Iraqis don't comply.   Tensions escalated when Iraqi soldiers temporarilydetained a team of U.N. inspectors that found documentsexplaining Iraq's nuclear-weapons program. The inspectorswere expelled from the building by Iraqi soldiers, whorefused to let them keep the documents.   Saddam Hussein's resurgence grates on officials in theadministration, and it is one reason President Bush appearsprepared to draw a line on the U.N. inspection issue.Administration officials chafe at the Iraqi president'ssurvival, and they would love to find a way to be rid of himso he isn't around a year from now to gloat -- in the midstof the U.S. presidential election -- about his ability tosurvive Mr. Bush's best shots.   The latest confrontations are particularly alarmingbecause they are part of a pattern of aggressive behavior bySaddam Hussein, seven months after the U.S. and its alliesdrove his army out of Kuwait. Kurdish leaders say the Iraqiarmy once again is flexing its muscles in northern Iraq,precipitating a series of small clashes between the Iraqiarmy and Kurdish guerrillas in recent days. A group ofKurdish leaders has arrived in Washington to seek help.   On top of that, Iraq is hinting that it will spurn a planfor U.N.-supervised sales of its oil to pay for food and thatit will hold out for better terms. And Saddam Husseinrecently dismissed the prime minister he named after the war,suggesting he is ditching the plans for a more democraticsystem the minister was to implement.   &quot;The helicopter issue isn't in isolation&quot; says one senioradministration aide. &quot;There appears to be something of apattern.&quot;   Some officials think it's most likely that Saddam Husseinwill back down at the last minute, defusing the argument overU.N. inspections and ending the threat of renewed militaryaction. The Iraqi leader has a history of probing to see howfar he can go in defying the world without inciting action,they say.   The administration hasn't decided whether any new militaryaction would be designed to go after Saddam Hussein himself,a task that would be logistically difficult anddiplomatically dicey, officials say. But President Bush andhis aides wouldn't mind launching another military move thatknocked Saddam Hussein down a notch or two and rekindled thedebate within Iraq about whether the country can recover fromthe war while he remains in power.   Mr. Bush himself appeared to try to revive the internaldebate about Saddam Hussein's survival in his annual addressto the U.N. General Assembly. He declared that U.N. economicsanctions against Iraq may remain in place &quot;as long as heremains in power. And this also shows that we cannotcompromise for a moment in seeing that Iraq destroys all ofits weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliverthem.&quot;   But Mr. Bush said he hasn't yet decided whether to sendmore troops to Saudi Arabia to prepare for new militaryaction in Iraq, saying he still is trying to &quot;sort all thisout.&quot; He added, &quot;Until we know a little more, why, nodecisions will be made as to what the United States will do.&quot;   In the past few days, though, Pentagon planners havebecome more convinced that only a military move will bringabout full compliance with international inspections. &quot;As theinspections continue, we don't want to face a new trick, or anew stone wall every few days or weeks,&quot; says one seniorPentagon planner. &quot;This is a long-term proposition, and thegoal has to be good-faith compliance all the way down theroad.&quot;   It's unclear why Saddam Hussein seems to have got backself-confidence now. He has regained internal control of Iraqin the months since the Gulf War ended, but still has to copewith a disastrous economic situation and restive populationsof Shiite Muslims in the south and Kurds in the north.   And U.S. analysts think his standing in the Arab world hasdeclined in recent months, as workers from Arab countries andKurdish and Shiite refugees have poured out of Iraq withtales of bad treatment there.   But Saddam Hussein may have decided that he had to showIraqis that he will at least try to put an end to theircountry's humiliation at the hands of the internationalcommunity. Or he may be calculating that internationalattention has turned elsewhere.   The administration hopes to show in the next few days thatits attention hasn't waned. Considering the administration'seagerness to frighten Saddam Hussein, though, some analystsare perplexed that it isn't giving a warmer welcome to thedelegation of Kurds now in Washington. Acquaintances of JalalTalabani, leader of one of the two main Kurdish groups tryingto force Saddam Hussein into loosening his internal grip, sayhe isn't scheduled to meet any high-level administrationofficials during his visit here.   The Pentagon announced it is adding some F-111fighter-bombers to U.S. forces in Turkey to give Iraqsomething more to think about if it pursues its campaignagainst the Kurds.   A big question facing the administration is whether anymilitary action would be strictly limited to escorting U.N.inspection helicopters or would be expanded to include airstrikes at chemical, nuclear and biological weaponsfacilities that escaped attack in the war.   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and the Joint Chiefs ofStaff are poised to send more than 200 jet fighters,missile-toting helicopters and other aircraft to the PersianGulf to back up Mr. Bush's words. But military officialsemphasize that a final decision about launching the forcewon't come until consultations with U.S. allies arecompleted.   Even without additional firepower, the U.S. has aformidable military force to face off against Iraq. Twoaircraft carriers and about 30 other vessels are steaming inthe region, and the Navy's long-range A-6 attack planes arecapable of precision bombing at night and in poor weather.   Early helicopter-escort missions may be handled by Navywarplanes, and Marines may be airlifted from some vessels toprovide ground support and guard U.S. equipment. But Mr.Cheney and his top planners have told the White House theyneed a significantly larger force, including several top AirForce air-to-ground attack squadrons, if the U.S. and itsallies opt for a military solution. For sustained bombing andair cover, the U.S. would rely heavily on Air Force F-15 andF-16 jets.   The list of potential targets includes suspectedarms-making plants, research facilities and undergroundbunkers where the U.S. believes Iraq's military may be hidingmissile parts and equipment for other weapons. Some militarycommand centers and air-defense installations also areexpected to be prime targets if shooting breaks out.   In assembling the list of potential targets, militaryofficials say the Air Force and the Joint Chiefs are tryingto avoid sites that could lead to major loss of civilianlife.   Targeting Saddam Hussein himself is difficult, though.Officials say he moves around the country and often avoidsstaying at one location for more than a few hours.   Iraq's air force isn't expected to pose a serious threatto U.S. aircraft because most of Saddam Hussein's newest anddeadliest jet fighters fled to Iran during the war and remainthere. Those planes won't be a significant factor, accordingto U.S. analysts, because they haven't had proper maintenanceand lack spare parts, and many of their crews have dispersed.In addition, officials say, the administration has receivedassurances from Iran in the past that the Iraqi jets won't beallowed to take off if fighting resumes.   ---   Andy Pasztor contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>