<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900717-0123</DOCNO><DOCID>900717-0123.</DOCID><HL>   Bush Agonistes   ----   By Fred Barnes</HL><DATE>07/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   Far-reaching legislation that extends the power of thefederal government and burdens American business with newcosts cleared Congress Friday. But don't expect apresidential veto. On the contrary, the bill, which bansdiscrimination against the disabled, passed with PresidentBush's strong encouragement. Now Mr. Bush is eager to sign itinto law.   There's an echo of an earlier administration in thisepisode, as there is in the president's reversal on raisingtaxes -- Richard Nixon's. The Bush presidency is regularlylikened to Ronald Reagan's or Gerald Ford's, but it is theNixon model (pre-Watergate, of course) that Mr. Bush isfollowing. The result: a moderate-to-conservative president,but liberal government.</LP><TEXT>   Confronted with a hostile Congress dominated by liberalDemocrats, the Nixon-Bush strategy calls for selectiveendorsement of liberal themes. Mr. Nixon did this on civilrights, arms control, detente with the Soviet Union, theenvironment and taxes. Mr. Bush has done it on all these,plus disabled rights, minimum wage and child care. There's anunderstandable political motive behind the strategy. Mr. Bushwants to neutralize liberal issues that might be used againsthim in 1992. And he's succeeding at this quite well.   There's a downside. The conservative agenda that issupposed to be Mr. Bush's blueprint for government has fallenby the wayside. This wasn't Mr. Bush's intention, but it wasinevitable, given his strategy. Congress, controlled byliberals, has tossed aside conservative issues and seized onliberal ones that Mr. Bush supports (and thus are easier topass). So the Americans with Disabilities Act, the disabledrights bill, was approved by Congress overwhelmingly andextension of the Clean Air Act is nearing passage. But a cutin the tax rate on capital gains and a constitutionalamendment outlawing flag desecration were defeated. Democratscan argue, correctly, that they've been bipartisan and metMr. Bush halfway. They gobbled up the liberal half.   That doesn't mean that they've actually warmed up to Mr.Bush or are willing to give him any credit. They didn't likeMr. Nixon either, no matter what he did. &quot;In many ways Nixonturned out to be a liberal president, but one who infuriatedliberals in the process,&quot; writes political analyst MichaelBarone in &quot;Our Country,&quot; a political history of the past 60years. &quot;It is hard to think of things the federal governmentcould do which it wasn't already doing under Nixon,&quot; Mr.Barone says. Still, liberals &quot;were not inclined to chargewith overliberalism.&quot;   One source of their animosity was the way Mr. Nixoncampaigned. As a candidate, he pressed conservative hotbuttons -- crime, the flag, national defense. Mr. Bush didthe same in 1988, stigmatizing Democratic presidentialnominee Michael Dukakis as a liberal weenie. Once elected,these campaign themes did not become mandates driving theBush administration -- defense is an exception to this rule.But liberals nevertheless remain angry over the 1988campaign.   One legacy of the campaign, the &quot;no new taxes&quot; vow, waskept alive by Mr. Bush for 17 months. Liberals regarded it asdemagogic, and they had a point. The tax pledge was merely anappealing theme for the administration, not a policy. Mr.Bush's 1991 budget, for example, included nearly $14 billionin new tax revenues. Mr. Bush has refused to use his nationalpulpit to press Congress for enactment of a capital-gainscut. (Mr. Nixon campaigned as pro-business, then doubled thecapital-gains rate in 1969.) When the House Ways and MeansCommittee passed a cut in 1989, this was a spontaneous actionof Republicans and conservative Democrats. Mr. Bush had giventhem no encouragement.   Because only liberal issues succeed under the Nixon-Bushstrategy, Mr. Bush has been forced underground to pressconservative issues. Now his chief vehicle for protecting areasonable level of Pentagon spending, seeking domesticspending cuts or entitlement reform, and gaining budgetprocess changes is private talks with Democraticcongressional leaders. Just to get these talks going, Mr.Bush had to pay a price. He was required to drop his &quot;no newtaxes&quot; pledge. Even so, he got no promise from Democrats ofconcessions on conservative issues.   By relying on private negotiations, Mr. Bush avoids theneed to be publicly confrontional. Mr. Reagan, in contrast,relished confrontation, and so his strategy was different. Hestuck to the conservative agenda (lower taxes, less domesticspending, more military spending, an assertive,anti-communist foreign policy) and left liberal issues alone.He produced conservative government for six years.   In his last two years, Mr. Reagan faltered. He dabbled inthe Nixon strategy with disastrous results. In 1988, Mr.Reagan proposed a catastrophic health insurance program.Congress responded by expanding the size and cost of theprogram, but Mr. Reagan signed the bill anyway. Soon, elderlycitizens were staging noisy protests against the costly newpremiums required by the program.   That should have been a lesson to Mr. Bush, particularlyafter a coalition of conservatives and moderates in Congressrose up in 1989 and eliminated the program. It wasn't. At Mr.Bush's behest, White House chief of staff John Sununu now isdesperately seeking a compromise with liberals on the 1990Civil Rights Act. Mr. Bush insists he doesn't want a billthat will lead to quotas. But he doesn't want to veto thebill and alienate the black leaders he's been courtingeither. His solution is to split the difference by weakening,but retaining, a provision likely to promote quotas.   Like so many of Mr. Bush's policies, his stand on civilrights bears an eerie resemblance to Mr. Nixon's. Mr. Nixondidn't like quotas either, but in 1969, his administrationapproved the so-called Philadelphia Plan for building tradesunions. It set a quota for black membership, but called it agoal. &quot;It was under Nixon that first the executive branch andthen the Congress explicitly endorsed what amounted to aracial quota,&quot; Mr. Barone points out.   The same is true with clean air legislation. In 1969, Mr.Nixon proposed the creation of the Environmental ProtectionAgency. Now Mr. Bush has worked out a compromise withcongressional Democrats for widening the power of the agencythrough revisions of the Clean Air Act. EPA also will beraised to Cabinet status. The bill gives EPA authority toissue permits to as many as 150,000 American businesses, fromsmall dry cleaning shops to large industries, depending onhow well they contain any of 191 air pollutants. Without anEPA permit, the businesses will have to shut down.   Mr. Reagan managed to thwart new anti-pollution measuressimply by refusing to play along. He won re-election anyway.Mr. Reagan sent no major environmental legislation toCongress in his eight years, and none passed. Mr. Bush couldhave gotten by with this approach. (It might have worked ondisabled and civil rights, too.) Revisions of the Clean AirAct are not needed. The air, after all, is getting cleaner,not dirtier.   One irony of the Bush strategy is that the leadingconservative in the White House, Mr. Sununu, may havenegotiated the three most liberal pieces of legislation topass Congress in a decade -- the clean air, disabled rights,and civil rights bills. The first two are certain to becomelaw this year, and the civil rights bill has a better than50-50 chance.   In the face of a record like that, it is safe to say thatthe Nixon-Bush approach is not serving Republicans orconservatives well. It may backfire on Mr. Bush in 1992 aswell. Bush is well positioned to claim the political center,but the right is a potential trouble spot. Conservatives areincreasingly upset with the consequences of Mr. Bush'spresidency. He may face a challenge for the GOP nomination in1992 (as Mr. Nixon did in 1972). No doubt Mr. Bush will win(as Mr. Nixon did), but the fight won't aid his re-election.   Mr. Bush's strong suit now is foreign policy. &quot;He's gottena once-in-a-lifetime halo effect from events abroad,&quot; saysGOP consultant Jeffrey Bell. Mr. Bush is following Nixon'sdetente model and has developed strong ties to Soviet leaderMikhail Gorbachev. But what if Mr. Gorbachev falls, andevents take a turn for the worse in the Soviet Union andEastern Europe? &quot;A different trend abroad could bring asurprisingly sudden reversal of his overall rating,&quot; arguesMr. Bell.   Mr. Nixon was saved in 1972 by having an extraordinarilyweak Democratic opponent, George McGovern. Mr. Bush may nothave that luxury. If Gov. Cuomo of New York announces earlynext year for the Democratic nomination, he'll probably scareoff other candidates. Then, in 1992, he'd lead a unitedDemocratic party against divided Republicans. Would the folksMr. Bush has wooed with, say, the disabled rights bill, stickwith him against Mario Cuomo? Don't bet on it.   ---   Mr. Barnes writes the White House Watch column for the NewRepublic.</TEXT></DOC>