<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900725-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>900725-0122.</DOCID><HL>   Education:   Helping Schools Learn How to Teach   ----   By Gary Putka   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   SAII</CO><LP>   Schools in urban Compton, hard by the Watts section of LosAngeles, suffer from gang violence, teacher job actions, lowstudent achievement and budget shortfalls -- the usual litanyof inner-city education woes.   But hard-pressed as it is, Compton spends $210,000 a yearon an innovation that it hopes will help lead it out of themorass -- outside consultants. The consulting firm, SageAnalytics International Inc., of Provo, Utah, has interviewedhundreds of teachers, students and parents at 21 Comptonschools, diagnosed the system's ills with proprietarycomputer software, and is now helping revamp curriculum.</LP><TEXT>   Although problems still abound, school officials say theysee improvement in rising test scores, better attendance andfewer crimes at high schools. &quot;I would never say we couldn'thave done it without Sage . . . but they certainly made it agreat deal easier,&quot; says Oliver Miller, principal ofCompton's Centennial High School.   As concern about education grows, more schools are turningto consultants for help. The consultants acknowledge theypossess no wonder drugs for sick schools. Sometimes theirpresence becomes controversial. But they can be a valuablecatalyst for energizing schools with low morale, and theirfresh outside views often lead to policy changes.   In the past, schools have used outsiders such as localuniversities for management advice, usually at no cost andfor limited purposes. But a new breed of consultants hasemerged in the current push for school change. They takefees, paid by the schools themselves, government or privatebenefactors. They often aim for school turnarounds measurablein student performance. And whether run for profit or not,they actively seek new clients.   Last month, the Dade County, Fla., school system took theconsultancy idea to its ultimate, awarding a five-yearcontract to Education Alternatives Inc., a Minneapolisoperator of private schools, to create a public elementaryschool from the ground up. The school, expected to open inthe fall of 1991, will get the standard per-pupil outlay ofother Dade schools. Education Alternatives, which will designthe curriculum and pick its own principal and staff, ispromising higher student achievement.   Outsiders rarely get this much say, but their influence isspreading. In January, as part of its school-aid program,Citicorp said it would pay Sage $7.2 million over five yearsto advise 20 new schools, adding to its current total of 125.The Quality Education Project, a not-for-profit consultinggroup based in San Francisco, will advise 300 schools thisSeptember, up from 240 in the last school year. One of thebest-known school gurus, Brown University's Theodore Sizer,will add 50 schools to his 109-school network over the nextyear or so.   Much of the impetus comes from increased corporatephilanthropy. Mr. Sizer's Coalition for Essential Schools hasreceived $24 million in gifts or pledges since 1984 fromAetna, Coca-Cola, Citicorp, Exxon, General Foods, PacificTelesis, Xerox and UPS. These corporations say schools aretraining tomorrow's workers poorly.   Another spur is the increasing call for schools to showbetter results. The demand is coming from state educationdepartments, local businesses and media, and brutallycritical national reports.   &quot;School boards feel the pressure out there,&quot; says FrankLynch, principal of Petaluma High School in Petaluma, Calif.&quot;People are more willing to let {outside} people in, turn theplace topsy-turvy and start all over again.&quot;   &quot;Before, if the kids were doing poorly, you retained thekids,&quot; says Jeffry Schiller, director of program developmentfor the schools in Prince George's County, Md. &quot;Now you bringin outside help.&quot;   Prince George's County uses a variety of consultants,including Sage and Lawrence Lezotte, a $2,000-a-dayconsultant based in Okemos, Mich. Mr. Lezotte's ideas arebased on so-called effective-schools research, which stresseshigh goals for all students, frequent evaluations and strongprincipals.   John Murphy, the district's superintendent, says Mr.Lezotte's advice has led to improvements such as higherstandardized test scores and more rigor. The number ofstudents taking first-year algebra in the district, he says,has risen to 75% from 15% in 1984.   But to some teachers, the consultancy is a mixed blessing.Margaret Spirer, president of the district's teacher's union,says Mr. Lezotte's preachings can be used selectively as anunfair weapon against teachers whose students don't showtest-score improvement. She says the reviews don't take intoaccount students' family income and other social factors --even though those factors can, in Mr. Lezotte's view, affectlearning.   Despite those reservations, she says Mr. Lezotte has&quot;inspired a lot of people&quot; in the district to do better.   Consultants' philosophies vary as much as schools'problems do. Among Mr. Sizer's chief tenets is the teachingof a few subjects in depth, rather than offering widevariety. Sage, on the other hand, doesn't go in with aprepared prescription. Instead, it surveys school employees,students and parents for their gripes, then relies oncomputer software it designed to sort the complaints andidentify root problems.   The College for Human Services, a business college in NewYork that is a consultant to about a half-dozen schools,contends that schools are failing partly because they don'ttry hard enough to show students how lessons can help them inthe real world.   For P.S. 30, an elementary school in the Bronx whoseneighborhood suffers from heavy drug abuse, the collegehelped organize fourth-grade studies last school year arounda theme of improving community health. Supermarket foodlabels were studied and content disclosures used in studyingpercentages and fractions. Writing assignments covered thehazards of eating too much salt, Florence Nightingale'sbiography was used in reading, and doctors from AlbertEinstein Hospital were guest teachers in science classes. InApril, the Hasbro Children's Foundation gave the college $1million to add four schools outside New York to its network.   The Quality Education Project stresses parentalinvolvement. Once it is retained, it demands that parentssign cards pledging they will make their children go to bedby 9 p.m., do their homework, and read aloud 15 minutes aday. The parents also promise to provide a quiet studyingplace at home and to attend school parent-teacher nights andopen houses. Teachers are asked to phone parents and urgecompliance, and are given logs by QEP to keep track ofresults.   The requirements may seem elementary, but &quot;it's been anamazing success,&quot; says Robert Aguilar, a teacher atMontgomery High School in San Diego, where QEP has beenworking since the 1988-89 school year. He says thatattendance at parents night has gone up to 1,200 from 70,more homework is being turned in, and grades and state testscores are up.</TEXT></DOC>