<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910516-0143</DOCNO><DOCID>910516-0143.</DOCID><HL>   Shifting Fortunes:   PC Firms Are Roiled   By Changes as Clones   Gain on Brand Names   ---   Lack of Innovation Makes It   Hard for a Compaq or IBM   To Justify Higher Prices   ---   Workstations Cut Into Sales   ----   By Stephen Kreider Yoder and G. Pascal Zachary   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AAPL ASTA C C.LGG CPQ DELL HWP IBM INTC MSFT P SNE SUNWXRX</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)ENERGY (ENE)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)CONNECTICUT (CT)JAPAN (JA)MICHIGAN (MI)NEW YORK (NY)OKLAHOMA (OK)SOUTH KOREA (SK)TEXAS (TX)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   A sea change is roiling the personal-computer industry andespecially the market leaders, International BusinessMachines and Compaq Computer.   Compaq yesterday disclosed that it expects second-quartersales to drop a surprising 15%, causing an 80% drop inestimated earnings to 25 cents a share and contributing to aninventory glut. The news drove its stock down 27% as analystsslashed year-end projections. Last month, IBM said itspersonal-computer sales sagged 17% in the quarter.</LP><TEXT>   But meanwhile, sales are booming at clone makers such asAST Research and Dell Computer. Also faring well is SunMicrosystems, whose powerful desktop computers areincreasingly being used as PCs. Apple Computer reported an85% jump in unit sales of its Macintosh PCs, aided by pricecuts and its edge in software.   Ironically -- for a high-tech industry in which companies'main fear usually is competitors' innovations -- the twobiggest PC makers are being hurt because innovation isscarce. PCs have become so standardized around Intel'spowerful microprocessors and Microsoft's operating softwarethat Compaq and IBM have done little to differentiate theirdesktop machines from others, and so they can't justifyhigher prices and profit margins. In fact, user surveys findsome clones rated higher than Compaq and IBM machines inperformance and quality.   &quot;Almost everything we buy is a noname clone,&quot; says GlennThomas, information-services manager at Hudson Foods Inc., ofRogers, Ark. Mr. Thomas once bought almost exclusively fromIBM and Compaq but now buys clones from Gateway 2000, ofNorth Sioux City, S.D., and Taiwan's DTK Computer. Clones useessentially the same inner workings as more expensivebrethren do, he adds, and some &quot;have PCs that outperformIBM.&quot;   The trend is being greatly accelerated by the recession,which has caused large corporate buyers to either cut back oncomputer purchases or seek cheaper machines. In a recentsurvey, Robertson Stephens andamp; Co., a securities firm, foundthat these buyers planned to roll back purchases 21% thisyear.   Compaq and IBM are especially vulnerable to the cutbacksbecause they depend the most heavily on the big companies.Clone makers and Apple, on the other hand, derive a greaterpercentage of sales from individuals and small businesses.   AMR Corp.'s American Airlines says it plans to buy fewerPCs this year than last year. Ford Motor Co., which has70,000 desktop PCs, says it will purchase fewer than half asmany PCs this year as in previous years. Phillips PetroleumCo. plans to buy 1,100 PCs this year, 377 fewer than lastyear, because &quot;we have less places where we need them now,&quot;says John R. Smith, the Bartlesville, Okla., company'sprocurement manager.   Like Mr. Thomas, increasing numbers of companies arebypassing Compaq and IBM when they do buy. Chrysler Corp. hasadded clone makers to its approved-vendors list and last yearleased 3,000 PCs made by South Korea's Lucky Goldstar Group.Says Irene Hession, a PC buyer for Polaroid Corp.: &quot;We havedefinitely gone toward clones.&quot;   IBM and Compaq belatedly struck back at the clones lastmonth by cutting prices on popular machines as much as 34%.The move is too late, says Dennis Cox, marketing director atPackard Bell Electronics, a clone-maker and the nation'sfifth-largest PC seller last year. &quot;They've been forced tonarrow the gap.&quot;   Despite the turmoil, the PC industry's world-wide salesare expected to increase 11% this year, after a 9% gain lastyear, says Infocorp. However, Stella Kelly, an analyst at theSanta Clara, Calif., market-research firm, says that growth&quot;hinges on several factors,&quot; most notably continued highdemand for notebook PCs powered by Intel's 386sx chip,desktop models powered by Intel's 486 chip and Apple'slower-priced Macintosh models.   Apple has also slashed prices on its lowest-costMacintoshes, sparking a surge in sales that promises todouble its share of the PC market, to nearly 20%. Computerbuyers say Compaq and IBM will eventually benefit from theirprice cuts as well. &quot;We do expect that Compaq has essentiallyclosed the gap with the quality clones and that their demandwill come back,&quot; says Ed Anderson, president of ComputerLandCorp.'s USA retail chain.   Moreover, the worrisome inventory glut at Compaq and othercompanies may be magnified by a recent spate of mergersbetween big retail chains, which now are reducing combinedinventories. &quot;To do that, you stop buying for a littlewhile,&quot; Mr. Anderson says. &quot;We don't expect to turn it backon for 60 days. It isn't an inventory buildup in the sense ofdemand being stopped.&quot;   Joseph &quot;Rod&quot; Canion, Compaq's chief executive, says heisn't sure how much inventory is clogging the dealer channel,but he says &quot;the glut will certainly hurt us for the rest ofthe second quarter and well into the third quarter.&quot; Compaq'searnings comparisons also will suffer because of the strongEuropean business that boosted profits in the past.   Some industry analysts expect similar problems at Appleand IBM very soon. &quot;The dealer channel is all mucked up, andit's going to get more mucked up,&quot; says JoeAnn Stahel ofStoreboard/Computer Intelligence, which tracks PC salesthrough retailers. &quot;Compaq is not alone in having excessproduct in some categories.&quot;   But even when sales recover, Compaq and IBM can kiss theironce-juicy profit margins goodbye. Compaq, for instance, hastraditionally reported after-tax margins three to four timeshigher than those of Sun Microsystems. One omen: Apple'sslashing of its prices last fall led to an 11% decline inprofit margins in the first three months of this year.   And it will be increasingly difficult to generate steamygrowth in dollar sales after unusually sharp price cuts, evenif those cuts attract new computer users. Apple's dollarsales, for instance, grew only 19% in the last quarterdespite the 85% jump in unit sales. PC sales in the fiveyears between 1990 and 1994 will grow just 44%, down from theindustry's heady 100% growth in the five years preceding1989, says International Data Corp., market-research firm inFramingham, Mass.   All that's a big switch from the 1980s bonanza days forIBM and Compaq. Conservative corporate PC buyers, stillnervous about the new technology represented by the PCs theywere purchasing to replace typewriters, bought largely fromIBM. Meanwhile, Compaq racked up huge growth by offeringmachines with a technological edge over IBM's. Compaq beatout IBM and others by months with the first PC that usedIntel's new 80386 chip in 1986.   As long as Big Blue and Compaq were the first withinnovations and held a quality edge over the clones, whichtended to trail in the use of new technology, the two leaderscould charge 30%, 40% and 50% more for their PCs. But thatwas when desktop PCs were the site of the computer industry'smost striking innovations. In those early days, a slew ofinnovations conspired to make the desktop computer one of thehottest items around, a powerful new tool. The laser printer,floppy drive, mouse pointing device and other features wereintroduced between 1980 and 1985.   But the desktop PC is no longer awash in innovation. Since1985, its basic features have been essentially unchanged.There have been some innovations in software; for instance,both Apple and Microsoft have improved their system software,which controls the basic operations. But PC makers havemainly relied on weary standards, and their few initiativeshave centered on arcane features such as internal channelsinvisible to customers.   Innovations are occurring, but in portable computers andworkstations, the industry's fastest-growing segments. Inrecent years, new types of display screens, harddisk drives,semiconductor memory and communications devices have appearedfirst on notebook and hand-held computers. Compaq is havingtrouble keeping its 386 portable in stock, while its othermodels pile up in inventory. Apple and IBM are suffering fromthe relative unpopularity of their less-sleek portables.   Even as portables are stealing away desktop PC salesbecause of miniaturization, workstations are cutting into PCsales because they offer brute power and solid, if somewhatunimaginative, networking. Sun continues to post big gainspartly because of its inroads into PC rivals.   The same is true for Hewlett-Packard and IBM, which alsohave strong workstation products. &quot;We're at a turning point,&quot;says George Dodd, head of computer science at General Motors'research labs. &quot;Because of the drastically reduced prices ofthese machines,&quot; he says, GM engineers will soon be doingtasks they once only dreamed of, such as crash-testing carson desktop computers instead of smashing into concrete walls,or designing car parts completely by computer.   Even when change comes to the desktop PC, clone makers arequick to seize it. Nothing illustrated this better than whenIntel, the chief purveyor of the &quot;brain&quot; chips in PCs,introduced a cheaper version of its advanced chip, the 486.The next day, a dozen clone makers announced machines basedon the chip and so cheap that IBM, Compaq and others had toslash prices on older machines.   PC makers are realizing that standards such as Intel chipscut both ways and that, to prosper, they need to incorporatesome unique, tangible features in their PCs. Stewart Alsop,editor of PC Letter, says companies are focusing more oncompeting by design innovation than by putting togethercoalitions around different technical standards. &quot;They havebegun to realize that what customers want is new value, evenmore than standards,&quot; he says.   The race to innovate is most apparent in miniaturizationand graphics. Hewlett-Packard, an also-ran in PCs, wowed theindustry last month with a new $700 palmsized PC that cansend and receive data via satellite. Many computer makersdisparaged hand-held PCs as toys and left them to Japaneseconsumer-electronics concerns. Now they may followHewlett-Packard with similar devices.   IBM is planning a new emphasis as well. For instance, ithas a &quot;skunk works&quot; in Florida building a radically newcomputer designed to accept handwriting from an electronicpen. Like Apple a laggard in notebook PCs, IBM hopes itsfuture pen-based machine -- due out as early as next year --will revive its innovative image. Xerox is taking the powerof new microprocessors to a different dimension: Rather thancreate more powerful desktop machines, researchers at itsPalo Alto Research Center are designing computers the size oflegal pads and Post-it notes.   Even relatively successful Apple is eyeing fresh markets,particularly joint ventures with Sony of Japan to develop anew portable computer and a repackaged Macintosh for thehome-electronics market to compete with Nintendo. &quot;It's aquestion of bringing to market products people don't know usfor,&quot; says John Sculley, Apple's chief executive officer.   Mr. Sculley bluntly concedes that Apple has so far missedthe explosive wave in portable and, even smaller, notebookcomputers, but he vows that won't happen again. &quot;We areputting more attention on breakout areas,&quot; he says.   For these companies, and other traditional PC powerhousessuch as Tandy Corp., another key is mastering a diverse setof networking and multimedia technologies, which figures tobe the foundation for the desktop computer of the mid-1990s.Just this week, Digital Equipment, another also-ran in PCs,introduced a very fast PC based on Intel's 486 chip withnetworking capabilities and workstation quality graphicsbuilt in.   Future machines from some makers are expected to manageand transmit &quot;files&quot; of sound and images as easily as text ishandled today. While &quot;some hoary technical issues must beovercome, the big question is how do vendors stuff thesecapabilities into their machines without making them tooexpensive,&quot; Mr. Alsop says.   The extra wallop of computer power will bring sweepingchanges for the average PC user, too. With power to spare,computer and software designers say, PCs of the 1990s willtalk to users in human voices, show movie-quality videoimages, play 15-piece orchestra music in stereo.   The greater appeal of such machines may slow the trendtoward portables, which have been in such demand that someexperts predict the end of the desktop. Outfitted with newcapabilities, the desktop PC will reassert its dominance inpersonal computing, says William Gates, Microsoft's chiefexecutive. Mr. Gates doubts that a new class of notebook PCs,armed with built-in radio communicators, will satisfycustomers. &quot;What is so urgent that you can't wait to get backto your desktop machine?&quot; he asks.   ---   Jim Bartimo contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>