<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910510-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>910510-0049.</DOCID><HL>   Hazardous Duty:   Nucor Steel's Sheen   Is Marred by Deaths   Of Workers at Plants   ---   Efficient Mill Stresses Output   Over Safety, Some Claim;   Executives Defend Record   ---   `What a Terrible Way to Die'   ----   By Clare Ansberry   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR NUE</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)STEEL MANUFACTURERS (STL)</IN><NS>LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><GV>LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)</GV><RE>NORTH CAROLINA (NC)NEW YORK (NY)</RE><LP>   CHARLOTTE, N.C. -- Wall Street has been in love with NucorCorp., and why not?   Its maverick chief executive, F. Kenneth Iverson, hastransformed a backwater fabricator into America's seventhlargest steel company -- and become the latest darling of themanagement gurus by flying coach, working from spartanfourth-floor headquarters here and declaring war on corporatehierarchy.</LP><TEXT>   The company is terribly efficient, aggressively nonunionand quite profitable: It hasn't had a losing quarter in 20years, or a single layoff. Most of its 15 &quot;minimills&quot; andsteel fabrication operations are situated in small towns,where they have boosted local economies and trained all sortsof people who never thought they'd make so much money. AndNucor has developed a revolutionary new plant that spinsgleaming sheet steel out of scrapped cars and refrigerators.   &quot;Every manager who should be wondering what it will taketo compete in the 21st century needs to know the Nucorstory,&quot; Ann McLaughlin, former U.S. secretary of labor, hassaid.   But there is another side to the Nucor story. Its workerdeath rate since 1980 is the highest in the steel industry --in fact, more than double the industry average. Since 1980,11 Nucor workers have died as a result of accidents. In thesame period, National Steel Corp., with nearly twice as manyproduction workers in steel and fabricating operations, hadfive deaths. Allegheny Ludlum Corp., with about the samenumber of production workers as Nucor, had two.   Five more people died in accidents building Nucor plants,in which the company acted as general manager or contractor,including two at the innovative Crawfordsville, Ind., plant.After that plant began operating, another man, working for aNucor vendor, was killed last year when he was splashed withhot molten steel.   A review of court and safety documents and interviews withformer and current employees indicate that Nucor's go-go wayshave a human cost. Employees, who count on incentive bonusesthat can constitute more than half their weekly pay, seem todo just about anything to keep production going. &quot;You dothings at Nucor that you might not do anywhere else,&quot; saysAlan Riser, a former Nucor worker who now works at a Nucorplant for a subcontractor. &quot;If something's not right, and youcan fix it in a half hour the wrong way and two hours theright way, you take the shorter way.&quot;   Mr. Riser uses plywood to ward off heat from red-hotbillets that whir past him as he tries to make repairswithout shutting down the line. &quot;It works until the plywoodcatches fire,&quot; he says.   James Coblin, Nucor's senior personnel executive, saysworkers themselves want maintenance to be quick andefficient, but he adds: &quot;That doesn't lead to shortcuts ortrying to work too quickly to get things back running.&quot;   Nevertheless, Nucor's safety record is coming underincreasing scrutiny. A just-published book, &quot;American Steel&quot;by Richard Preston, which was excerpted in the New Yorkermagazine earlier this year, chronicles the start-up of theCrawfordsville plant and raises questions about Nucor'sdeaths. And the company's hometown newspaper, the CharlotteObserver, recently noted that the company had a large numberof fatalities.   Nucor is a highly decentralized company with littlecorporate structure. It doesn't have a corporate safetydirector or uniform training programs, leaving safety up toplant managers, who, the company says, are in the bestposition to set safety standards at each plant. SamuelSiegel, Nucor's chief financial officer, says allegations ofunsafe practices are unfounded. &quot;Nucor takes business risks,but we don't take risks with health, welfare and safety ofemployees,&quot; he says. &quot;It's wrong and it's not good business.&quot;   Executives of Nucor say the death-rate figures aremisleading. Because its work force is smaller and moreefficient, compared with unionized shops that may have morepeople doing the same work, the death rate is bound to lookhigh at Nucor, they say.   In addition, while other steelmakers haven't built a newplant in years, they say, Nucor is constantly gearing up newoperations, with a younger, less-experienced work force.&quot;We've been starting up an addition or plant at least everytwo years and that in itself is a period when safety is aproblem,&quot; says Mr. Iverson.   He also points out that Nucor pays about 65% of the steelindustry's average premium for its workers' compensationinsurance. &quot;How can we have fewer accidents and a betterrecord according to workers' compensation, but be an unsafecompany?&quot; he asks.   Richard McCullough, vice president of Marsh andamp; McLennan,Nucor's insurance carrier, says that in terms of workers'compensation claims, &quot;In the big picture, they are betterthan average in their industry.&quot;   But workers' compensation experts say the lower rates donot necessarily mean a better safety record. For instance, acompany can pay a lower premium because it operates in statesthat require lower workers' compensation payments. And infact, Nucor considers a state's workers' compensation programwhen deciding where to put a plant and has tended toconcentrate its factories in states where payments are low.And it is never clear, in Nucor's case or others', how manyworkplace accidents are never reported -- with any insuranceclaims being filed instead under general health insurance.   Heidi Yantes, whose husband, Bryan, was killed at a Nucorplant in Utah, recalls taking him to the hospital and doctorsseveral times for stitches and eye injuries and making claimsunder standard medical insurance, rather than workers'compensation. She says they never thought about making theclaims under workers' compensation. (Mr. Iverson says that'sagainst corporate policy, but he can't do anything aboutindividual cases.)   Nine days before Mr. Yantes, who was 27 years old, wascrushed to death, he took out a second life insurance policy.He'd been haunted by fears of steel caving in on him eversince co-worker Jan Gray, a 25-year-old mother of two, wasburied by four tons of steel in October 1987. When heattended her funeral, he whispered to his wife, &quot;What aterrible way to die.&quot;   The racks that store finished steel at Nucor's BrighamCity, Utah, plant had been removed before Mrs. Gray's death.They restricted the amount of finished steel that could bestacked, and Nucor was running out of storage room. Statesafety officials recommended that the racks be replaced afterMrs. Gray was crushed, but they weren't.   Mr. Yantes was in charge of stacking finished steelproducts, and repeatedly told his supervisors he had no moreroom, co-workers say. &quot;They said, `Find it,'&quot; says Mr. Riser,who worked with Mr. Yantes. So workers continued to stackbarrel-like steel bars higher and higher, using straps tokeep them in place.   On March 14, 1988, Mr. Yantes came home frightened. AsMrs. Yantes recalls it, &quot;He said, `Heidi, I don't know whatto do. I don't have anywhere to put the steel.' I asked whythey couldn't stop production until new storage space wasbuilt and he said, `You can't stop production. There's moneyin production.'&quot;   The next day, 30 tons of steel fell on Mr. Yantes, killinghim. Again, state safety officials urged that the restrainingracks be replaced. This time Nucor obliged. It also completednew storage space.   Mr. Iverson says the deaths were tragic and the companyshould have moved faster to replace the racks after the firstfatal accident. He says the plant manager wasn't satisfiedwith the existing racks and had taken them out to find waysto make them stronger and safer. &quot;Unfortunately, the plantgrew so fast that they had a method of stacking these {roundsteel bars} that was not satisfactory,&quot; he says.   Nucor typically builds plants in rural areas where peopleare hard-working and nonunion. It prides itself on turningfarmers, store clerks and even grandmothers intosteelworkers. Nucor prints the name of every one of its 5,500employees in tiny type on the cover of annual reports. And itoffers $1,800-a-year college scholarships to the children ofall employees. &quot;Around here all you have is minimum wages,&quot;says Jeff Law of tiny Blytheville, Ark., where Nucor operatesa scrap-based mill. &quot;If you weren't a farmer with land, youwere poor until Nucor came around.&quot;   Nucor sales per employee, an indication of productivity,rose 80% between 1980 and 1990 to $271,859, a high figure forthe industry. Much of the high productivity can be traced toa bonus system. Workers' base salary is roughly half of unionsteelworker wages, but they can more than double their$8-an-hour base pay with extra production.   There's peer pressure, too: Nucor employees work in teams,and if one person is absent or refuses to work for anyreason, the entire group can be penalized. Current and formeremployees claim that's why some are willing to work even whenthere are equipment problems.   Michael Joe Morman worked for Nucor at its plant inGrapeland, Texas, a town of about 1,500. A roller at theplant was broken, but he and his team decided to work anywaybecause repairs would take days, putting them behind inproduction and ruining their bonuses. When 500-pound piecesof steel began falling off the table because of the brokenroller, Mr. Morman tried to stop them -- and sufferedinjuries that left him disabled.   &quot;You've got 18 people on that line you're dealing with.Not just yourself. You had to make do,&quot; he said in adeposition in a suit filed in state court in Palestine,Texas, by the widow of Peter Hawthorne, a Nucor employeekilled on the job. Mr. Morman also said: &quot;It's not a terribleplace to work. It is a hard place to work.&quot;   In a deposition in the same suit, Michael Bridgestestified that when a roof was leaking at the Grapelandplant, he continued using his electric welding torch eventhough wet because no one wanted to stop work until the roofwas fixed. Mr. Bridges continued working in water for sixmonths, despite repeated shocks, until he made a makeshiftroof from a piece of tin. &quot;It was production first and thenwe worried about safety,&quot; he testified.   Mr. Hawthorne died on June 14, 1983. When he arrived at 6a.m. that day, a broken crane cable discovered the nightbefore was still unrepaired. He reported it to maintenancebut used the crane anyway. Thirty minutes later, two bundlesof steel, each weighing a ton, were knocked down by thedangling crane cable and fell on him, killing him instantly.   Workers testified in the case that the company inspectedand repaired all of the cranes before federal safetyofficials arrived to investigate the accident. Inspectorsfrom the Occupational Safety and Health Administration foundthe company had a policy of not working with faulty equipmentbut didn't always enforce it. Nucor was fined $420 forfailing to repair or replace the crane promptly.   Cleveland Thomas, a janitor at the plant, testified thatshortly after the accident, the production lines were movingagain, with huge pieces of steel sailing high above Mr.Hawthorne's body. &quot;It wasn't appropriate. Everyone is due acertain amount of respect. I don't care if he's a floorsweeper,&quot; Mr. Thomas said.   Following the accident, the plant safety director, anurse, drafted the plant's first guidelines for stackingsteel and operating certain heavy equipment. Supervisors alsobegan holding monthly safety meetings for employees. Nucorsettled the Hawthorne case out of court after six years, withan undisclosed payment to Mrs. Hawthorne.   The plant safety director said in a deposition that thebroken cable should have been reported the night before andthat the line supervisor should have followed through on therepair.   Mr. Coblin says he can't imagine the production linesrunning above Mr. Hawthorne's body. And while not commentingmore specifically on the Morman, Bridges or Hawthorneincidents, Nucor says in general that, as far as it knows,maintenance is done as soon as possible and faulty equipmentisn't used.   Mr. Coblin says bonuses and incentives do not contributeto accidents. In fact, he says, the plants seem to have fewerinjuries or accidents when they are operating at capacity.Moreover, he doesn't believe employees take short cuts withmaintenance because equipment must function properly soworkers can produce more and get a higher bonus. &quot;Maybe we'vehad an accident from that and I'm sure it's possible in ourhistory, but people don't want shortcuts because they don'twant the machines to go down again,&quot; he says.   Training is another issue. OSHA cited improper training inthe Nov. 17, 1990, death of 35-year-old Douglas Kenny at thecompany's Nebraska plant and fined Nucor $5,900, which wasreduced after negotiations. Mr. Kenny died when an electricmotor he was repairing fell on top of him. His colleaguescalled him Mr. Safety because if there was a rule in place,he'd follow it. Nucor says it is working with OSHA to updateits training procedures for people who work with suchequipment.   In addition, OSHA faulted the company for not trainingcertain heavy equipment operators at its South Carolina plantin 1986. The company has hired someone whose soleresponsibility is safety at the plant, who plans to beginrefresher forklift and crane training programs this summer.In 1989, after OSHA found numerous violations at its Arkansasplant, Nucor retained a safety consultant there.   The five people who have died building Nucor plants since1980 include two who fell to their deaths within months ofeach other while building the Crawfordsville plant. Thatplant is Nucor's glory, the first in the world to make thinsheets of metal with a continuous process; bigger steelmakersmake huge slabs of steel and then use separate rolling millsto transform them into sheets to make cars and appliances.Nucor wanted to complete the plant in a stunning 18 monthsand beat everyone to the market with the technology. BigSteel, the company liked to say, would take twice as long andspend twice as much as Nucor's $270 million.   Nucor steelworkers from other plants oversaw theconstruction and dubbed themselves Run-a-Muckers. Mr.Preston, whose book chronicles the plant's start-up, saysthey were smart, aggressive, risk-taking cowboys. EdwardBurton, a field supervisor for a subcontractor that providedductwork for the plant, contends that Nucor was moreinterested in completing the project quickly than doing itright or safely. &quot;I've been doing this for 26 years and I'venever seen safety so lax,&quot; he says.   The two men who died both worked for the samesubcontractor, and after each death OSHA cited that firm forfailing to provide safety nets and proper training. JohnMolovich, deputy commissioner of Indiana OSHA, says twofatalities at a project that size is unusual.   Mr. Iverson says he can't be responsible for accidentsinvolving subcontractors working in plants or building newones, even though the company acts as general contractor. &quot;Weemploy dozens of subcontractors, and I don't think we havethe responsibility for the safety of those organizations,&quot; hesays. Nucor construction managers conduct safety meetingswith contractors, but beyond that &quot;we don't have muchcontrol,&quot; Mr. Iverson says. Besides, he adds, Nucor isn'tversed in construction-related safety measures.   Mr. Molovich says it's unusual for a company to act as itsown general contractor for large projects; most prefer tohire a firm familiar with all areas of construction,including safety. When a company like Nucor decides to act asits own general contractor, it takes on additionalresponsibilities, including safety oversight, he says.   Nucor was sued following the death of John O'Hair, whoworked for a Nucor subcontractor and fell to his death whilebuilding the plant. The suit claimed that Nucor &quot;owned,operated, maintained, controlled, supervised, inspected andregulated&quot; the work and failed to provide a safe workingarea. Nucor recently settled the case with an undisclosedpayment to his widow.   Keith Busse, general manager for the Crawfordsville plant,says every construction site has numerous problems and heattributes much of the criticism to union sympathizers. &quot;Onmost any job site, there are probably hundreds of things youcan find wrong,&quot; he says.&quot;We don't live in a perfect world.&quot;   He and other Nucor executives deny that safety wassacrificed in order to build the plant quickly. &quot;We just wantto be efficient and get the plant built, but we are safe aswe can possibly be,&quot; says Mr. Coblin, the personnel chief.&quot;Within that framework, some things happen, but it's not likewe put safety in the back seat.&quot;   Last year, a ladle filled with 100 tons of red-hot steelfell at the newly completed Crawfordsville plant, causing ahuge explosion that engulfed the melt shop in flames and sentmolten steel cascading. Patrick Major, who worked for anoutside company that supplied parts for the plant, wassplashed by the steel, his skin turned to parchment. He dieda few weeks later.   Nucor was cited by OSHA for having standing water, whichhelped create a huge steam explosion, and failing to inspecta crane's ropes and hooks. While contesting those citations,Nucor is working out a settlement with Mr. Major's widow.   &quot;Those were hectic times,&quot; says Mr. Busse. &quot;We weren'tdoing a good job as a maintenance organization. We didn'thave enough training in a very complex issue.&quot; That haschanged, he says. Cranes are inspected twice a month, they'vebeen equipped with backup cables and no one is allowed in themelt shop while a ladle is moving. &quot;Those kind of thingsshake you up, and we want to see that it never happensagain,&quot; he says. &quot;Our employees here think this is the safeststeel mill in the country.&quot;   Workers' compensation claims at that plant are filed atjust half the rate of the total company, he says. Not onlythat but, remarkably, after just a year of operation, theCrawfordsville plant turned a profit.</TEXT></DOC>