<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910214-0047</DOCNO><DOCID>910214-0047.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Heavy Civilian Casualty Toll of Raid on Iraq   Has U.S. Scrambling to Keep Alliance United   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The precision-guided bombs that tore into abunker in Baghdad early yesterday simultaneously burst openthe Bush administration's festering problem with civiliancasualties in the war with Iraq.   The problem has been building for days. But it receivedsudden prominence when two U.S. bombs, dropped before dawnover western Baghdad, hit what Iraq called a civilian bombshelter -- and what the U.S. said was a hardened, camouflagedand increasingly important military communications center.</LP><TEXT>   After the attack -- and Iraq's immediate success atpublicizing what it said were hundreds of civilian casualtiesit caused -- U.S. officials suddenly are scrambling toprevent the issue from straining relations with other nationsallied against Iraq, complicating plans for prosecuting thewar or eroding domestic support.   As powerful images of dead and severely burned victimswere being televised back to the U.S., Bush administrationofficials didn't dispute that civilians were killed. Rather,they charged that the blame lies squarely with Iraqi leaderSaddam Hussein for bringing civilians into a sensitivemilitary facility where they, like thousands of other &quot;humanshields&quot; deployed before them, would be vulnerable to attack.   &quot;We don't know why civilians were at this location, but wedo know that Saddam Hussein does not share our value in thesanctity of life,&quot; said White House spokesman MarlinFitzwater. &quot;Indeed, he time and again has shown a willingnessto sacrifice civilian lives and property that further his waraims.&quot;   The Bush administration suspects that Saddam Hussein,unable to mount any effective military operations of his own,is waging a purely political conflict in which he hopes touse world opinion on issues such as civilian casualties toforce the U.S. to ratchet down its war effort.   For Mr. Bush, political problems are already cropping up.United Nations Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar,whose support for resolutions condemning Iraq's invasion ofKuwait has been crucial to the U.S., said through a spokesmanthat he is &quot;dismayed about the magnitude of casualties anddeplores the loss of civilian life.&quot; Iraq condemned thebombing as a &quot;savage criminal attack&quot; and asked the U.N. tocondemn it.   The administration can't conclusively explain whyintelligence agencies had failed to see that the bunker,struck by two F-117 Stealth fighters, was also being used toshelter civilians. The Pentagon concedes that the giantsubterranean structure, which reportedly was covered by 10feet or more of concrete, was originally built in 1985 as ashelter for civilians. But officials maintain that U.S.intelligence agencies had intercepted military radiotransmissions emanating from the shelter, and observedmilitary vehicles and the cars of Iraqi leaders parked there.   The failure to spot civilians may have occurred becausethey entered the shelter after dark, when photographicsatellites can't see things on the ground, intelligenceofficials say. Other officials say that as much as a week mayhave passed between the last aerial photos taken by U.S.intelligence of the bunker and the bombing raid. Interceptsof military communications from the shelter were monitoreduntil much closer to the bombing.   Pentagon officials say plans for future air raids --especially those close to the center of Baghdad -- are beingre-evaluated to try to determine if civilians will bepresent. One official says that as a result, as many as 100targets may be removed from the allies' high-priority list.   U.S. officials insist that their broader problem is Iraq'snew tactic of making military targets more difficult toattack by mingling them with innocent civilians.   Saddam Hussein, U.S. officials say, has parked tanks,artillery guns and more than 50 jet fighters in residentialareas. And Defense Secretary Dick Cheney charged that Iraqhas parked two MiG-21 jets next to an ancient structure inthe city of Ur, recorded in the Bible as the home of Abraham.U.S. officials say they have clear satellite photos of theplanes, and some are pushing for the Pentagon to release thepictures to graphically buttress the administration's case.   The tactic means President Bush now faces a starkquestion: Is the military gain achieved by attacking suchtargets worth the agony created when civilian casualtiesresult?   There isn't any doubt that significant civilian casualtieswill complicate Mr. Bush's efforts to sustain internationalsupport for the war. &quot;The more you bomb Iraq, the more callswe will have for pauses in the bombing and the morediplomatic activity will intensify,&quot; says Democratic Rep. LeeHamilton of Indiana, a senior member of the House ForeignAffairs Committee. And that, he notes, could increase thepressure on Mr. Bush to get on with a ground campaign todirectly push Iraqi forces out of Kuwait quickly -- acampaign that could create a whole new set of problems byproducing many U.S. casualties.   The television pictures of Iraqi bodies being pulled outof the rubble come at a particularly sensitive time for theBush administration. Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev,whose support was crucial in passing United Nationsresolutions authorizing use of force to drive Iraqi troopsout of Kuwait, already had been warning that the U.S.-led wareffort may be exceeding the U.N. mandate.   Mr. Gorbachev just sent an envoy to Baghdad to discusspeace plans, and Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz announcedyesterday that he will be traveling to Moscow. In addition,the U.N. Security Council began a previously scheduledmeeting on the war effort. Some council members seem likelyto question the heavy bombing campaign. Reflecting concernsin the U.S. and Britain that a public debate might beinterpreted as indicating the anti-Iraq coalition is losingits resolve, the council agreed to a U.S.-backed resolutionto meet in private today.   There also is a danger that civilian casualties couldengender more opposition to the war within the U.S. Rep.Hamilton says that, at meetings with constituents lastweekend in Indiana, a few already were voicing &quot;concernsabout the numbers of Iraqis being killed.&quot;   Some administration aides worry privately that yesterday'sincident could begin introducing a Vietnam-like mentality, inwhich U.S. commanders feel compelled to justify every bombingraid and to avoid too many potentially important targetsbecause of political concerns. For that reason, theseofficials argue that the administration should declare thatcivilian casualties can't be avoided as long as SaddamHussein stays in Kuwait.   For the moment, at least, Rep. Hamilton thinks the voterswho are focusing on the civilian-casualty issue still amountto a minority. And Peter Hart, a Democratic pollster, saysthe combination of the early evidence of accurate alliedbombing and the evil image of Saddam Hussein will reducepublic anxiety over civilian casualties. &quot;When he's throwinghis Scud missiles into the middle of Israel, which is anonaggressive nation, and into the middle of Riyadh, theAmerican public says `just a second,'&quot; Mr. Hart says.   The intense focus on civilian casualties already hasbecome a flashpoint in Bush administration relations with thepress. Privately, some administration aides charge bitterlythat news organizations are too readily carrying exaggeratedIraqi claims.   Still, there seemed little doubt that yesterday's newscoverage of the bunker bombing showed some actual civiliancasualties -- though there also was evidence supportingPentagon claims that the site was a military facility.   Pentagon officials say the bunker, stretching over atleast two square city blocks and situated near a school and amosque, has been a high-priority target of satellitesurveillance and communication intercepts for weeks. It isthe only one of five or six large shelters put up in Baghdadduring the Iran-Iraq war that has been identified as amilitary command center, according to Air Force officers andPentagon planners.   The Air Force has stepped up the bombing of Baghdad in thepast few days because it is going after harder-to-destroytargets, and pilots also are revisiting certain strategicsites to make sure they were destroyed during earlier raids.All this means that more than 150 targets remain in andaround Baghdad, according to one high-ranking Pentagonofficial.   The controversy over civilian casualties doesn't involvethe bunker alone. Iraq continues to charge that aninfant-formula plant in Baghdad was bombed early in the war;the U.S. says the plant produced biological weapons.   Pentagon officials don't dispute that some Jordaniantrucks and other civilian vehicles driving on the roadbetween Baghdad and Amman have been hit. Military officialsargue that they shouldn't be there because the road is usedfor transporting Scud missiles; U.S. pilots, they say, simplyaren't able to distinguish between the civilian trucks andthose used to fuel or service Scuds.   ---   Andy Pasztor and Walter S. Mossberg contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>