<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900816-0071</DOCNO><DOCID>900816-0071.</DOCID><HL>   Iraq Seeks to End Dispute With Iran   ---   Deal Could Bolster   Baghdad's Position   In Confronting U.S.   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Iraq's President Saddam Hussein, apparentlylooking for military security and economic help in hisconfrontation with the U.S., offered stunning concessionstoward ending his long dispute with Iran.   His offer -- to concede disputed territory to Iran andimmediately exchange prisoners of war -- seemed to be aneffort in the short run to guarantee that Iran doesn't makeany military moves that would complicate efforts to protectIraqi forces occupying Kuwait.</LP><TEXT>   But in the long run, Iraq may well be hoping that Iranwill agree to open up their border to shipments of food andother commodities, creating an enormous loophole ininternational economic sanctions against Iraq. &quot;There is veryclearly an Iraqi expectation that the Iranians won't go alongwith international sanctions as part of this deal,&quot; saidShaul Bakhash, an Iranian author and scholar. &quot;And it posesfor Iran a very, very difficult dilemma.&quot;   Tehran doesn't want Iraq to emerge from the crisis as thePersian Gulf's superpower, but also doesn't like the growingU.S. military presence in the Persian Gulf. In one sign thatIran may be sympathetic to overtures from Iraq, Iranianreligious leader Ali Khamenei blasted the U.S. militarybuildup in Saudi Arabia.   Meanwhile, as President Bush prepared for a long meetingtoday with Jordan's King Hussein, a potential mediator, theU.S. showed few signs of flexibility toward Iraq. The Bushadministration appeared headed toward activation of tens ofthousands of military reservists soon to ease strains createdby the big deployment of U.S. forces to the Persian Gulfregion.   And President Bush gave a tough speech in which he drew adirect parallel between Saddam Hussein and Adolf Hitler.   &quot;A half a century ago our nation and the world paid dearlyfor appeasing an aggressor who should -- and could -- havebeen stopped,&quot; Mr. Bush said in an appearance at the Pentagonfor briefings on the Iraq situation. &quot;We're not about to makethe same mistake twice.&quot;   Mr. Bush, using rhetoric that may make it difficult forhim to ease into a negotiated settlement later, said Iraqisoldiers who invaded Kuwait committed &quot;atrocities&quot; andasserted: &quot;Our jobs, our way of life, our own freedom and thefreedom of friendly countries around the world would allsuffer if control of the world's great oil reserves fell intothe hands of that one man, Saddam Hussein.&quot;   Mr. Bush plans to meet for as long as two hours today withJordan's King Hussein at the president's vacation home inMaine, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said. VariousJordanian and Iraqi officials have suggested that the king iscarrying a personal message from Saddam Hussein to Mr. Bush,but Mr. Fitzwater said the U.S. doesn't have any informationto confirm that.   (Late yesterday, the White House announced that Mr. Bushwould meet with Prince Saud-al-Faisal, the Saudi foreignminister, after his meeting with King Hussein. The foreignminister will be accompanied by Prince Bandar bin Sultan, theSaudi ambassador to the U.S.)   Some Jordanian officials met with national securityadviser Brent Scowcroft to prepare for today's meeting,although King Hussein himself kept a low profile inWashington. And while various Iraqi and Jordanian spokesmenhave suggested that King Hussein is carrying a personalmessage from Saddam Hussein to President Bush, U.S. officialssaid the king has suggested he wants a more generaldiscussion of how the U.S. plans to pursue its campaignagainst Iraq. &quot;I have no reason to believe he's coming overfor anything but that -- a general discussion of thesituation,&quot; said a senior U.S. official.   President Bush is sure to emphasize his insistence thatJordan shut down its Red Sea port of Aqaba to shipments ofgoods destined for Iraq, officials said. But they also addedthat Aqaba has been quiet in the past few days, suggestingthat while Jordan hasn't shut down the flow of goods, it hasbeen reduced. That route is one of a dwindling number ofIraqi commercial links to the rest of the world --particularly after reports indicated that Turkey, anotherIraqi neighbor, has stopped thousands of tons of food andother goods from entering Iraq.   The worsening freeze on Iraqi commerce may have promptedSaddam Hussein to gamble that he can win some relief fromIran in return for concessions that could cause Iraqis tocall into question the sacrifices they made during eightyears of war with Tehran.   Specifically, Iraq announced that Saddam Hussein sent aletter to Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani offering tosettle the two nations' longstanding border disputes, towithdraw Iraqi troops from the border starting tomorrow andto exchange prisoners of war, which the Red Cross hasestimated at 50,000 Iraqis and 19,000 Iranians.   Saddam Hussein's message essentially declared that Iranand Iraq should settle their differences to focus on battlingthe U.S. and other Western nations. He called for a &quot;new lifeof cooperation on the principles of Islam and respect of eachother's rights, so we can deter all those fishing in dirtywaters and cooperate to turn the gulf into a lake of peace,free of foreign fleets that harbor ill intentions againstus.&quot;   Though it wasn't clear from the letter precisely howSaddam Hussein was proposing to settle the border disputes,Iraq seemed to have capitulated to longstanding Iraniandemands. The message suggested returning to a 1975 borderagreement scrapped by Iraq at the start of the Iran-Iraq war.But it also referred to following some additional&quot;principles&quot; spelled out in other, undisclosed messages. Thatsuggested there may be strings attached to Iraq's offer thatpotentially could make it unacceptable to Iran.   Iraq still occupies some small pieces of Iranian territorytaken during the war. But far more important than return ofthose lands is Iraq's apparent willingness to cede to Iranpartial control of the crucial Shatt-al-Arab waterway, Iraq'sonly outlet to the Persian Gulf.   A dispute over that waterway was at the heart of theIran-Iraq war. Under a 1975 agreement, Iran and Iraq agreedto divide control of the waterway down its median line. ButSaddam Hussein abrogated that treaty in 1980 and assertedfull control of the Shatt, one of the actions that led to theoutbreak of war.   Iran immediately expressed glee over the Iraqi move,declaring that it amounted to a victory for Iran. But Iran'sleaders also were waiting for a delegation of Iraqi diplomatsto explain details.   The overture toward Iran suggested that Saddam Husseinfeels vulnerable to the international forces arrayed againsthim. He's in no position right now, for one thing, to worryabout a renewal of any military threat against him from Iran.   &quot;He's doing the same thing Hitler did, deciding not tofight a two-front war and protecting his flanks,&quot; said GeorgeCarver, a former official of the Central Intelligence Agencyand the State Department. Saddam Hussein may be hoping simplyfor a guarantee of peaceful relations so that he can freethousands of troops from the border with Iran and direct themtoward Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, the site of the biginternational military buildup.   But a real military threat didn't seem likely from Iran,which is economically and politically exhausted after itslong war with Iraq. So Saddam Hussein may be hoping forbroader political gains -- namely, Iranian help in gettingfood past the international economic embargo. But Iran maynot be interested in helping an enemy out of a tight spot.&quot;If they go along with Saddam Hussein and help him breaksanctions, he might emerge as a very militarily powerful andeconomically powerful gulf leader,&quot; says Mr. Bakhash. &quot;Mysense is that they may not go along.&quot;   For their part, U.S. officials dismissed Iraq's overtureto Iran and were skeptical that Iran would be of much help toSaddam Hussein. &quot;It's something that's long been in theworks,&quot; said one senior U.S. analyst. &quot;Both sides havestrategic reasons to want to calm that relationship.&quot; TheIranians, he added, &quot;may simply pocket this&quot; concession fromIraq without offering much in return.   In the long run, the concessions to Iran may make it evenmore important to Saddam Hussein that he keep control ofKuwait. He now has little to show for his attack on Iran, andcontrol of Kuwait may become increasingly important todemonstrate that he has secured a payoff from his militaryadventures.   In the meantime, the military pressure on Iraq doesn'tshow any sign of easing. Bangladesh joined the military forcein Saudi Arabia, and the U.S. continued diplomaticdiscussions with the Soviets and Western powers about forminga United Nations naval command to conduct interdiction ofIraqi shipping.   An expensive call-up of U.S. reservists grew more and morelikely, with Mr. Fitzwater noting that President Bush has thepower to call up 200,000 reservists for 180 days withoutcongressional action. Stressing that lawmakers alwaysintended heavy reliance on reservists during such a ThirdWorld crisis, Secretary Cheney apparently thinks that apresidential decision is necessary within the next week or soto avoid disrupting the flow of troops and hardware to theMiddle East. &quot;The decision simply hasn't been made yet,&quot; Mr.Cheney told reporters this week.   The U.S. Customs Service, meanwhile, said two Europeanarms brokers were indicted for trying to buy and smuggle10,000 TOW anti-tank weapons and 10,000 artillery shells forshipment to Iraq, Iran and Libya. Carol Hallett, commissionerof customs, said the shells -- ordered by the brokers from aU.S. company -- were the type used to carry chemical weapons.The company wasn't identified.   The two brokers, Claus Fuhler, 32, an opthalmologist fromMetten, West Germany, and Juan Martin Peche-Koesters, 43, abusinessman from Barcelona, Spain, were arrested in FloridaMonday. They were lured there as part of a yearlong federalsting operation.</TEXT></DOC>