<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910826-0073</DOCNO><DOCID>910826-0073.</DOCID><HL>   Fading Menace:   Eastern Germans Now   See the Soviet Threat   Only as Economic One   ---   Despite a Sagging of Industry   And Rising Joblessness,   Subsidies Boost Optimism   ---   The New Winners and Losers   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GERMANY (GE)SOVIET UNION (UR)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   ROSTOCK, Germany -- A Soviet military convoy lookedcuriously harmless as it rumbles up the Autobahn on its wayto the harbor here. No one pays much attention as the truckscarrying munitions, tanks and soldiers rolled by, continuingthe withdrawal of Russian troops that began even beforeGermany's unification.   At the harbor, some shipbuilders smirk at the suggestionthat unrest in Moscow might be dangerous to eastern Germany.&quot;That's all history -- all that Wall business,&quot; says LotharFahnig, a member of the labor council. Workers view theSoviet Union the way they would a divorced partner, he says-- sorry for its continued misery, but not threatened by it.</LP><TEXT>   Indeed, only a year after eastern Germany sealed its newties to western Germany, the only Soviet threat remaining iseconomic. Eastern Germany's industry has collapsed, andunemployment is growing, partly because of Moscow's inabilityto buy. The Soviets still account for nearly half of easternGermany's exports, but most of that business would havedisappeared if Bonn hadn't decided to guarantee 10 billionmarks in credits this year. That is a luxury not enjoyed inCzechoslovakia, Poland or Hungary, where Soviet economicproblems are hitting harder.   &quot;I cried when I saw the tanks on Moscow's streets, becauseI have so many friends there,&quot; says Juergen Enke, whooversees foreign trade at the chamber of commerce in Rostock.But what he most feared from the Soviets last week was theloss of the shipyard's largest market, and the threat thatnearly 300,000 Russians -- most of them soldiers -- due towithdraw by 1994 might remain instead.   In some ways, however, the attempted coup in Moscow haspromoted stability in Eastern Europe. The North AtlanticTreaty Organization is paying more attention to East Europeansecurity concerns, and the Common Market is moving morequickly toward granting former Soviet allies some kind ofassociate membership.   In eastern Germany, the Soviet crisis reminded members ofthe increasingly restless labor movement and the many peoplewho opposed Helmut Kohl, Germany's chancellor, of how righthe had been to push for quick unification. &quot;Now you see thatnothing could have been too fast,&quot; says Mr. Fahnig. &quot;If wehad waited until this year, we never would have hadunification.&quot;   Despite eastern Germany's generally gloomy economicstatistics, the country seems awash with prosperity. On July1, 1990, Mr. Kohl essentially quadrupled the value of easternGerman salaries and pensions by exchanging their Ostmarksone-to-one for Deutsche marks. Eastern Germans lined up fornew cars and video recorders. The cranes of a constructionboom fill city skylines, and small service companies areproliferating -- copy services, couriers, pizza delivery andteachers (of language, driving, accounting).   Meanwhile, despite rising unemployment, generousgovernment subsidies have kept many eastern Germans fromfeeling the crunch. But as the subsidies are phased out,eastern Germany will have to salvage its economy from theunprofitable smokestack industries such as steel, chemicalsand brown coal mining, that employ so many workers.   Most analysts say eastern Germany has already hit economicbottom. And although unemployment is expected to continue torise until year's end, the mood has already started shifting.On the day Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev was ousted, theFrankfurt stock market fell 9.5%, more than any other majorexchange. But many eastern Germans were buying. &quot;In theeastern part of Berlin, the people were primarily buyingstocks, and hardly any of my customers were selling,&quot; saysKai Machalz, an investment adviser at the Berliner Volksbank.Western Germans reacted far more nervously, he said. &quot;So yousee that people here aren't afraid but rather are positive.&quot;   Although the stock purchases were primarily small, theconfidence they reflected surprised Mr. Machalz. &quot;EasternGermans have proved to be more conservative investors thanwesterners,&quot; he says. At first, easterners were too trusting,Mr. Machalz says. But they were soon sobered by buyinginsurance policies they didn't need, mail-order goods thatdidn't last and lottery tickets for drawings that neverseemed to happen.   Recent polls by the respected Allensbach Institute showthat a surprising 65% of eastern Germans believe they will beas well off as westerners within 10 years and that 45% regardthe next 12 months as a time for hope. Most telling, a clearmajority don't believe the overnight transition to unityshould have gone more slowly.   &quot;From month to month, eastern Germany is becoming a morenormal and colorful country,&quot; says Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann,managing director of Allensbach.   Yet many people criticize Chancellor Kohl's economiccures. His goals of stopping the outflow of labor and winninga general election prompted him to institute monetary unionagainst the advice of his central bankers. The fallout hasbeen the collapse of manufacturing -- production is down morethan 60% in one year -- and broad unemployment andunderemployment, which has touched nearly a third of the workforce.   Mr. Kohl has cushioned suffering by creating jobs andtraining programs and awarding subsidies that are keepinginefficient industries alive. The Institute for Economics inCologne says government transfers this year (153 billionmarks) will account for 70% of eastern Germany's grossproduct. And Bonn is finding it far more difficult to phaseout the subsidies, which require vastly increased borrowingand higher taxes, than it was to phase them in.   But the most obvious effect of this new economy is thegrowing number of the so-called elite among eastern Germany's16 million people. Before, the elite was a relatively smallclass made up primarily of state loyalists and conformingartists and athletes whose primary advantage was theirfreedom to travel to the West. The rest were the masses --people who couldn't travel. Today, there are more winners andmore losers, and everyone is traveling.   This wanderlust has made Jens Hoernig, at age 27, one ofthe winners. The window of his small travel business, AzurReisen, has a large U-S-A stenciled across it. Open pamphletslure passers-by: &quot;Visit the Golden West, Come to SunnyFlorida, Try Hollywood.&quot; To eastern Germans, whose televisionsets have familiarized them with Walt Disney, NationalGeographic and &quot;Dallas,&quot; Florida is alluringly far off -- adistance they never imagined traveling. Mr. Hoernig'sbusiness is going so well that he has become a Floridabooking agent for Western travel companies and is searchingfor an American partner. He has opened a new company toarrange group trips to the U.S. with German-speaking guides.   Mr. Hoernig is one of eastern Germany's first Yuppies. Hehas used his profits to buy a computer and a telefax, and hepaid cash for a new, dark-blue Opel Vectra. &quot;It is a questionof image,&quot; he says, explaining that a company owner needs todrive a relatively large, dark car. &quot;It is like putting onthe right tie.&quot;   The losers in monetary union can be sensed in the air allaround. If it smells bad, problems are nearby. EasternGermany's smokestack industries are threatened by costly andpolluting production methods. Furthermore, many of them havelost one of their best customers -- the Soviet Union. EasternGerman exports to the Soviet Union fell 36% in the firstquarter, but new buyers can't be found. That has actuallyincreased the Soviet portion of a shrinking amount of exportsto 47% from 40%. Recent events make the Soviets' returnunlikely.   One plant sits like a red-brick industrial dinosaur ineastern Berlin -- the Berlin Metalworks and SemifinishedProducts Plant (Berlin Metallhuetten und HalbzeugwerkeG.m.b.H.). When asked how the mood has changed over the lastyear at the plant, the workers' council chairman, BerndSpieler says wryly: &quot;Winter and summer, day and night -- doesthat make it clear enough?&quot;   Management has cut the work force to 1,100 from 2,400.Half the company's remaining employees have been assigned togovernment-funded make-work projects that range from cleaningup polluted soil to tearing down outmoded plants. Otherprograms allow workers to continue receiving up to 90% oftheir salaries for &quot;short-time&quot; work even though they aresitting at home. &quot;It has been too easy for many workers,&quot;says Mr. Spieler. &quot;So many haven't done enough to takeadvantage of retraining programs yet because they were beingpaid so well for doing nothing.&quot;   Such government-funded projects camouflage the problemsawaiting eastern Germany. High salaries have made easternGermany's entire industrial sector uncompetitive, whileDeutsche Bank figures that the productivity of easternGermans averages just a third of their western counterparts.   At the metalworks company's aluminum cable plant, theworkers say they don't know where they will work when thefactory closes at the end of the year. Ernst Juergen, 29,guesses most workers will find jobs in construction -- theone booming industry in the East.   What has angered the eastern German rank-and-file most isthat even in the new world, the old guard often seems to dobest. Western companies have often chosen former managers ofstate companies and party officials to run their operations.One Dresdner Bank official apologizes that history repeatsitself -- just as the Americans kept on many former Nazisafter World War II because of their qualifications.   But while the way to get ahead in the past was to befriendthe Soviets, now the surest security is a friend at a Germanmultinational company. Werner Adler has placed his future inthe prosperous hands of Volkswagen. He opened a privatecar-repair shop in 1985 by getting a license to repair theeastern German Trabant, the two-cylinder car with the plasticbody and an engine that sounds like an angry lawn mower.   Today, his new VW-Audi dealership and repair shop willhave sales of three million marks this year at its currentpace -- more than 30 times the value of hispre-monetary-union turnover. He has expanded his work forceto 11 from six. Eastern Germans, who often tried to fix theirown simple Trabants, wouldn't dream of doing the same withthe complex VW's. &quot;The same things went wrong with theTrabant all the time -- every winter the brakes and theclutch went out,&quot; says Uwe Lewandowski, a 34-year-oldemployee. &quot;Our mechanics like the new work better -- it iscleaner, and many different things can go wrong, so the workis more varied.&quot;   On the heels of the defeat of the Soviet coup, it seemsironic that some of eastern Germany's most courageouscampaigners for democracy are among its losers. Jens Reichwas one of the intellectual leaders of the &quot;Octoberrevolution&quot; that preceded the fall of the Berlin Wall. Yetwhen eastern Germans shifted their interest from free speechto hard currency, Mr. Reich's importance declined. At the endof the year, the research institute where he has worked as amolecular biologist will probably close because of lack offunds.   Yet Mr. Reich understands why he hasn't been decorated andfeted. &quot;We intellectuals are being punished by the normalpeople who say we should have done something earlier againstthe regime,&quot; he says. &quot;In history, it isn't unusual thatpeople who open the revolution aren't the victors.&quot;   So Mr. Reich will spend much of the fall in the U.S.,lecturing at places such as Harvard University where he isoften better received than in his own country. He worriesabout the continuing &quot;brain drain&quot; from eastern Germany. Atcurrent levels, some 100,000 eastern Germans will leave thecountry this year for the West. Although that is only a fifthof the 1990 outflow, the quality of the people who are goingis much higher-skilled professionals who are recruited byWestern companies, universities and institutes. &quot;The IQ levelof eastern Germany is now leaving,&quot; he says. &quot;It is the usualbrain drain of the underdeveloped country -- but the talentedwho leave rarely come back.&quot;   But Mr. Reich isn't complaining about what has become ofeastern Germany. He can get his car repaired in a day, andbroken water pipes in his apartment this winter were fixedwithin hours by the new western management. &quot;I'm feeling calmand in a good mood,&quot; he says, a feeling shared by manyeastern Germans last week. &quot;How can you possibly be nostalgicfor a police state.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>