<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910524-0119</DOCNO><DOCID>910524-0119.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   The Historic Dimensions of Free Trade With Mexico   ----   By Enrique Krauze</HL><DATE>05/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>MEXICO (MX)</RE><LP>   MEXICO CITY -- In the universal history ofshortsightedness, the U.S.'s relations with Latin Americadeserve a special chapter. Cuba is now only a sinking islandand Nicaragua a rising democracy; both countries have ceasedto be news. But to remember the cost, the duration and thedepth of the trouble they brought about only a short whileago -- Cuba was on the point of provoking a nuclear war,Nicaragua a vast subversion -- is to realize that there hasbeen a fundamental error in the U.S. perception of theregion.   Decades earlier, in books, essays and articles, LatinAmerica's democratic voices had clearly warned of the perilsof growing resentment against the U.S. in their countries andoffered practical ways of prudently dispelling it. The U.S.did not listen to these voices. When the Cuban and Nicaraguanrevolutions finally broke out in 1959 and 1978, it was toolate to prevent them and even too late to redirect them.</LP><TEXT>   Until recently, something similar was happening withMexico. If there was an eruption in this volcanic country,the U.S. paid attention; if not, it ignored us. A natural orfinancial earthquake, an avalanche of corruption or drugabuse, these are the things that attracted the spotlight. Iflife went on peacefully, the spotlight faded. But somethingelse also faded: an accurate perception of the situation inMexico, and as a result the U.S. failed to take any actionsthat might encourage development within Mexico and a buildupof stronger relations between our two nations.   Yesterday's vote by the U.S. House of Representatives infavor of negotiating the Mexican-U.S. Free Trade Agreement(FTA) on fast-track signals a fundamental change in thathistorical perception. It acknowledges the quiet butrevolutionary changes that have taken place in Mexico in thepast two years. And perhaps even the U.S. isn't quite awareof how fundamental its recognition of those changes could bein helping to ensure a more positive future direction forMexico.   There are two diametrically opposed possible futures onthe Mexican horizon: By the year 2000, we will look eithermuch more like Spain or much more like Peru. Currentprobabilities, of course, point to the former.   Mexico is a country with a solid institutional structureand a profound culture. If the populist administrations ofLuis Echeverria (1970-1976) and Jose Lopez Portillo(1976-1982) had been a little less blessed with economicresources or more endowed with moral and intellectualresources, oil and credit would have been channeledproductively and Mexico could have stepped into the foyer ofthe First World. This did not happen.   Under Presidents Echeverria and Lopez Portillo, thesystem's defensive and authoritarian instincts took over andpushed the country into the Third World.   During the administration of Miguel de la Madrid(1982-1988), Mexico began to correct its economic course. Hissuccessor, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, has intensified thechanges. President Salinas's economic performance has beenoutstanding, and in many ways exemplary. He modified deeplyrooted tendencies through renegotiation of the foreign debt,control of inflation and reduction of the budget deficit. Buthis privatization policies (banks, the telephone company,steel mills, airlines) and the limits that he put on the mostpowerful labor unions from the very beginning have achievedsomething more important: overcoming statist taboos in asociety of taboos.   President Salinas's social policies also have chalked upnotable gains -- in particular, his advancing war againstdrug dealers and his implementation of effective aid programs-- potable water, electrification, schools, etc. -- for thepoorest Mexicans.   His political performance, on the other hand, has beenmuch less successful. In truth, Mexico is still far frombeing the &quot;federal, representative, democratic republic&quot;voiced by our Constitution. In many ways it is a centralistmonarchy, with a new king ascending the throne every sixyears.   Nevertheless, with our positive economic scenario, whyshould we speak of a remote possibility of a Peruvian future,one in which hunger, war and plague outweigh any progress?The reasons are many:   Aside from the frequent natural disasters, there is anancient tradition of violence in Mexico that in revolutionarytimes (1910 to 1929) took more than a million lives; there isa surviving populist temptation and a visible national leader(Cuauhtemoc Cardenas) who represents it; there is aninfluential class of young university students for whom thefailure of authoritarian socialism in Eastern Europe and theU.S.S.R. has no meaning and has provided no moral lesson (intheir judgment, the enemy is the U.S. &quot;neoliberalism&quot; thatthreatens our resources, culture and sovereignty); there is asector of the church that works with poor communities and notonly believes but also practices liberation theology; thereis a growing, justifiable irritation with the electoralfrauds committed by the ruling Institutional RevolutionaryParty; and there is, above all, a generalized feeling ofeconomic oppression. These are all elements that could leadto deterioration and backsliding.   In this context it is not an exaggeration to consider thefuture signing of the Free Trade Agreement as historic.Beyond its economic logic (clear for any intellectuallyconsistent American), its material benefits and its socialsense, the FTA will have at least two important additionaladvantages: It would favor the proliferation of a businessculture in Mexico, and it would have a ripple effect inCentral America, a region with which Mexico -- the Northerngiant -- already has proposed a free-trade agreement.   Spain was, until recently, an economically backwardcountry ruled by a dictator. Since 1975, thanks to years ofeconomic opening and development, Spain has become a normal,modern, European democracy that successfully sells itsproducts, its sun and its past -- exactly the things thatMexico will be able to offer more readily if we finallyovercome our greatest creed: &quot;Thou shall not trustAmericans.&quot;   As with Spain, the vast economic forces unleashed by freetrade will spur the transition to democracy. Doing businessin the private sector will become more profitable -- and lessrisky -- than doing business in the public sector.Transparency and accountability will be the norm, not theexception. These and other changes are not utopian: They areat hand in many areas of Mexico, and they are being demandedby growing sectors of our society.   A closed political system cannot survive long in an openeconomy. Chile and Spain have proved that. After the signingof the FTA, the unfinished chapter -- long-postponeddemocracy -- is for us Mexicans to write. With solid economicfoundations, the transition will take months, not years ordecades. Although he was the &quot;`caudillo' of Spain&quot; supposedly&quot;through the grace of God,&quot; Franco died. Mexico'sundemocratic political system, with or without the grace ofGod, will perish too.   ---   Mr. Krauze is co-editor of Vuelta, Mexico's leadingliterary magazine. He is the author of several books onMexican history, including &quot;Towards a Democracy WithoutAdjectives&quot; (1986).</TEXT></DOC>