<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900501-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>900501-0049.</DOCID><HL>   The Right Kind of Missile Ban for Europe   ----   By Richard Perle</HL><DATE>05/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><IN>NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   President Bush was right to stop pressing NATO plans for anew American short-range nuclear missile in Europe. Such amissile is militarily unnecessary and politically infeasible.But how the president and his NATO colleagues decide the morefundamental issue of the future of nuclear weapons in Europeis another matter.   American nuclear weapons in Europe, and specifically inWest Germany, are crucial to the safety and stability ofEurope. Without them, Germany would face the nuclear-armedSoviet Union with only non-nuclear forces. The result wouldbe a dangerous imbalance in the center of Europe. And,whatever Germany may say or think today, this imbalance wouldin time lead Germany to seek nuclear weapons of its own.</LP><TEXT>   The French and British understand the implications of thisand have strongly supported a continuing American nuclearpresence on German soil. The Germans, given as they are toromanticism, pacifism and self-absorption, aren't surewhether they will allow American nuclear weapons to remain inGermany much longer. Those Germans who don't want themissiles seem to believe one of two things: Either that noSoviet military threat exists any longer, or that even, ifthey send us and our weapons packing, the U.S. will continueto protect Germany with its American-based strategic weapons.   The signs from Germany are disquieting. A typicalstatement is the one made by Count Otto Lambsdorff, theleader of the Free Democrats, Foreign Minister Hans-DietrichGenscher's party. Count Lambsdorff has said that Germany mayhave to honor East German &quot;obligations&quot; even afterreunification. What this could mean is reimbursing Moscow forthe cost of keeping Soviet troops in Germany. With theleading figure of a centrist party saying that, anything ispossible]   When President Bush recently leaked the decision toreverse his earlier insistence on a missile to replace theaging Lance missile now deployed in Europe, he let it beknown that a new arms-control policy was being readied tomake the most of his unilateral change. After all, hereasoned, if the U.S. has got to give up short-range missilesin Europe because the Germans won't accept them, let's see ifthe Soviets can be made to give up theirs.   A treaty banning all short-range missiles would be a goodthing. But only if it covers all of them. A treaty thatallowed the Soviets to keep some limited number would behopelessly unverifiable. If they chose to cheat, there isn'ta prayer that we could know how many the Soviets had.   With a total ban on short-range missiles, however, wecould have substantially more confidence in Sovietcompliance. This is because the testing of short-rangemissiles and the training of troops to fire them would alsobe banned. Testing and training are much easier to verifythan the actual number of weapons. Weapons are easily hiddenwhile test and training activities are not.   Properly negotiated, the elimination of the entire classof short-range missiles world-wide could have the addedadvantage of taking them from the likes of Syria and Iraq,both of whom possess Soviet missiles and the potential to usethem with chemical weapons. A treaty banning the missilesshould require the Soviets to retrieve any sent abroad.   Without any short-range nuclear missiles in Europe, theU.S. would still have a sizable number of nuclear weapons inGermany and elsewhere in Europe. These include bombsdeliverable by European-based aircraft and artillery shells,some of which have been recently modernized. Moreover, theU.S. is developing improved weapons for tactical aircraft,the so-called &quot;tactical air-to-surface missile.&quot;   There is a justifiable fear among British, French and someAmerican policy makers that a treaty eliminating short-rangemissiles would intensify German pressure to remove theremaining nuclear weapons from German territory, especiallythe nuclear artillery. Presumably this is why President Bushsupported a successor to the Lance when he first took officeand why the administration has in the past argued -- wronglyin my view -- for an unverifiable limit on short-rangemissiles rather than a complete ban.   There is no doubt that the denuclearization of WesternEurope, a dream of Soviet foreign policy since Stalin's day,would give the Soviets the military predominance theyconsistently sought, but failed to achieve, during the longtwilight of the Cold War. It would be ironic indeed ifWestern victory in the Cold War were to bring Moscow its mostelusive Cold War goal.   Yet the unnamed sources who leaked the president'sdecision gave an argument which, more than any other, drivesthe Germans toward denuclearization: That short-range weaponscan strike targets only on German territory. This idea,expressed in the pernicious slogan &quot;the shorter the range,the deader the Germans,&quot; misses the central point: Nuclearweapons with small, controllable yields would be used onlyagainst invading forces (i.e. the Red Army) in thebattlefield. Properly developed, deployed and controlled,tactical nuclear weapons would be used only against militarytargets and, even then, only in the most extremecircumstances. The probability of an invasion that wouldwarrant their use has always been slight. With the Cold Warnow receding into history, it is smaller than ever. Thus theprincipal purpose of American nuclear weapons in Germanywould be to deter the use of nuclear weapons against Germanterritory.   Which should we suppose to be the greater threat? That amonopoly of theater nuclear weapons might one day tempt aSoviet leader or that maintaining a small number of Americannuclear weapons in Germany might somehow lead to theirunacceptable use on German territory?   President Bush should go no further down the path ofchanging American nuclear policy in Europe without anunderstanding with the German government that would providefor a continuing American nuclear presence there. Thisprobably means waiting until after the German elections inDecember. A negotiation on these issues now would becomecaught up in the emotional Sturm und Drang of Germanelectoral politics.   Even after the German elections, securing German approvalfor a continuing nuclear presence on German soil will not beeasy. But the Germans can hardly expect the U.S. (or Franceor Britain) to assume the risks entailed in a nuclearguarantee for Germany if they opt for the illusory securityof a nuclear-free zone.   A continuing American nuclear guarantee for NATO wouldmean a continuing American troop presence. The number oftroops could be substantially fewer than the 305,000 therenow. Almost any of the numbers now being discussed, from ahigh of 225,000, to figures on the order of 100,000, shouldbe considered. Whatever number of troops remain though, theU.S. should insist that they not face Soviet nuclear weaponswithout nuclear weapons of a similar nature close at hand.The issues of troops and weapons are inextricably bound uptogether. Both are in turn woven deep in the fabric of NATOstrategy.   That strategy can and should adapt to the collapse of theSoviet empire in Eastern Europe, and the disintegration ofthe Warsaw Pact. Reciprocal force reductions are part of theresponse. So is a reorientation of NATO's nuclear doctrineaway from a readiness to use nuclear weapons early in a warto compensate for conventional weakness. But without acontinuing nuclear presence, there is no NATO strategy atall.   The U.S. should take advantage of the movement towardNATO-Soviet parity in Europe by redeploying tactical nuclearweapons there. We should make the weapons more survivable bypulling them away from the front lines to more secure andflexible storage in the rear. This should go a long waytoward resolving the dilemma of the early use of weaponsdeployed in spots where they would be overrun before theiruse could be ordered.   The future of NATO's nuclear force and strategy is themost sensitive issue to arise from the profound changes nowsweeping Europe. The U.S. had better take its time and get itright. The Cold War was too important to be left to thegenerals. The way the world organizes for peace is tooimportant to be left to the diplomats. And neither Cold Warnor present peace should be left to the Germans.   ---   Mr. Perle, a resident fellow at the American EnterpriseInstitute, served as assistant secretary of defense in theReagan administration.</TEXT></DOC>