<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910524-0171</DOCNO><DOCID>910524-0171.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>05/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE SUPREME COURT RULED federally funded clinics can'tdiscuss abortion.   By a 5-4 vote, the high court upheld governmentregulations barring federally subsidized family planningclinics from providing women any information about abortion.The court said the regulations violate neither the freespeech rights of doctors and their patients nor women's rightto abortion. The decision, written by Rehnquist, was avictory for the Bush administration, which defended theregulations, and for the anti-abortion movement.Abortion-rights groups said the ruling will make it harder toobtain abortions for poor women or young women who may lackinformation about abortion and have no access to any othermedical counseling services.</LP><TEXT>   Yesterday's ruling marked the first vote on abortion bythe Supreme Court's newest member, Souter, who joinedRehnquist's opinion. O'Connor, Blackmun, Marshall and Stevensdissented.   ---   GANDHI'S WIDOW REJECTED an offer to become head of India'sCongress Party.   Sonia Gandhi's decision threw the future of the dominantparty into disarray, and its leaders said they would delaytheir decision on a new party president until after today'sfuneral for Gandhi, slain in a bomb attack Tuesday.Authorities in New Delhi said the explosion that killed the46-year-old former prime minister and party leader apparentlywas triggered by a female suicide assassin who could havebeen a Sri Lankan Tamil. A Tamil rebel group deniedresponsibility.   The sporadic violence that erupted after Gandhi's killingmostly subsided, though there was some vandalism and lootingin the city of Madras.   ---   Bush responded to increasingly open Soviet pleas forfinancial help, saying he would consider backing a Westernaid package tied to economic reform by Moscow. The presidentsaid he hasn't received a formal aid request, but noted thatGorbachev is sending an envoy to Washington next week todiscuss economic issues.   ---   Defeated Ethiopian troops straggled into Addis Ababa asthe government used tanks to protect the presidential palacefrom an attack by rebels, who said they were within 22 milesof the capital. Officials, hoping for a truce, freed 171prisoners, most of whom were arrested in a 1988 coup attemptagainst ex-leader Mengistu, who fled on Tuesday.   ---   Two research teams reported discovering the nature of agenetic defect responsible for a major type of mentalretardation. The groups independently found an abnormalsegment of DNA in people affected by the fragile X syndrome,which affects about one in every 1,500 boys born and one inevery 2,500 girls.   ---   Cuba expects to withdraw its remaining troops from Angolatoday, five weeks before a deadline. The Cubans backedAngola's Marxist regime in its 16-year war with U.S.backedUnita rebels. A peace pact is to be signed next week. In1988, there were 50,000 Cuban soldiers in Angola, but lastweek only 2,000 were still there.   ---   U.N. chief Perez de Cuellar said talks are &quot;progressing&quot;with Baghdad on establishing a U.N. police force in northernIraq, but he denied an earlier statement by a U.N. officialthat such a pact had been signed. The agreement is aimed atprotecting Kurdish refugees returning to their villages.   ---   The Senate passed, by a vote of 56-42, aDemocratic-sponsored bill overhauling the campaign financesystem. However, prospects remain dim for enactment of thelegislation, which Bush has pledged to veto.   ---   Bush said he will reappoint Gen. Colin Powell to a newtwo-year term as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff whenhis term expires Oct. 1. The step apparently was designed tosquelch reported differences between Bush and Powell over theearly use of force to expel Iraq from Kuwait.   ---   South Korea's Roh named a new premier in an attempt to endviolent nationwide protests that have plunged the governmentinto a political crisis. Chung Won Shik, a 62-year-old formercabinet minister, had been serving as a special envoy toAfrica. Meanwhile, Seoul granted amnesty to 258 peopleaccused or convicted of political crimes.   ---   Archbishop Tutu met with South Africa's de Klerk and saidthe president pledged to expedite the release of politicalprisoners who are in the fourth week of a hunger strike.Earlier, Cape Town police halted a march to Parliament,arresting an African National Congress aide and about 40others seeking the release of political prisoners.   ---   Hezbollah's new leader announced that his pro-IranianShiite Muslim faction was willing to exchange prisoners withIsrael, a move that could lead to the release of Westernhostages in Lebanon. Abbas Musawi made the statement inBeirut three days after he was elected secretary-general ofthe fundamentalist group.</TEXT></DOC>