<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910325-0102</DOCNO><DOCID>910325-0102.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Granting More Freedom Could Tame Ethnic Feuds   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>03/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   EUROP MDEST FREST</CO><LP>   ISTANBUL -- Turkey is at the center of a world that isbreaking up. To it's southeast, Arab socialist Saddam Husseinforgot that he no longer has Soviet protection and plungedIraq into bloody turmoil. To the east, the Russian empire isdisintegrating as Armenians, Azeris, Georgians, Moldavians,Ukrainians, and Uzbeks struggle successfully to loosenMoscow's grip on their republics. To the north, in Bulgariaand Romania, diehard communists under new &quot;socialist&quot; labelsare fighting a disorderly rear-guard action against popularpressures for democracy and economic reform. To thenorthwest, two fractious Yugoslav states, communist Serbiaand noncommunist Croatia, are on the verge of civil war.   Very much central to the conflicts arising from thisbreak-up are strong feelings of ethnicity. The Jews of Israelare by no means the only people in this part of the worldwith a well-preserved sense of identity. The Soviet Unionalone has hundreds of ethnic tribes and the Mideast is notfar behind. All have ancient roots. For example, one group inIraq claims descent from the Syrians who ruled one of theregion's earliest empires.</LP><TEXT>   There have been many empires since the Assyrians and eachbreak-up usually has been accompanied by war and disorder.The decline of the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarain empireshelped feed the fires of World War I. Arbitrary borders setby the Versailles Treaty after that war were part of anattempt to restore order but merely sowed the seeds for WorldWar II and today's disputes. Tensions that were suppressedfor many years by the iron hand of communism and Arabsocialist dictatorships are bubbling to the surface again ascommunism's failure and the Gulf War loosen the grip ofassorted tyrannies.   Because of the untidy borders, no nation in this regionlacks an aggrieved -- and often oppressed -- minority. Fewparts of the world can claim more hostility among peoplesliving in close proximity to one another. Bulgaria, forexample, has a large Turkish minority that was persecuted bythe communists, causing an exodus to Turkey. Turkey, Iran,Iraq and Syria all have Kurdish minorities, who number some20 million to 30 million people in all and retain a strongsense of national identity. Moldavians in the Soviet Unionconsider themselves to be Romanians.   Serbs look upon Serbs living in the borders of Croatia askith and kin, and that could be a &quot;causus beli&quot; if Croatiapersists in its efforts to separate from Yugoslavia. TheAlbanians who predominate in Yugoslavia's Kosovo provinceresent Serbian communist suzerainty. Hungarians in Romaniachafe under the rule of Bucharest, where a &quot;socialist&quot;government retains many communist characteristics. Turks inThrace are not especially happy about being a part of Greece.Then, of course, there are the Palestinian Arabs, who aresecond-class citizens not just in Israel, but wherever theylive, whether it be Syria, Kuwait or Jordan.   Reading the news from this part of the world, one mightget the idea that peace is impossible, that ancienthostilities will never die and that man's inhumanity to manwill be the defining characteristic of the region for manyyears to come. One man who does not share that view, however,is Turkey's President Turgut Ozal. Turkey has its own ethnicproblems. The Kurdish workers' party (PKK) has been wagingguerrilla war against the government for eight years, with anestimated 2,600 deaths. The party receives support fromDamascus, the home of one of the Middle East's most assiduoustroublemakers, Syrian President Hafez al Assad.   But despite these annoyances, President Ozal prefers tothink positively. In an interview in Ankara last Thursday, heoutlined his ideas on how to diffuse the tensions of theregion. The principles are fairly simple but they are not asnaive as they might sound to jaded viewers of the region'sproblems. Basically, he believes in giving peoples more localautonomy, more freedom of movement across borders, anddemocratic representation within loose federal systems. Whenminorities are represented in government, have the samerights as the majority and can own property, establishbusinesses and move freely throughout the region, they areunlikely to feel oppressed or to harbor deep hostilities.They are more likely to be assimilated into a larger whole.   President Ozal believes that Iraq's Kurds, who now haveseized at least temporary control of their region, mightaccept semi-autonomous status in a new Iraqi state. He doesnot want to see Iraq &quot;Lebanonized,&quot; that is, broken up intowarring factions. He knows full well that that would invitefurther intervention from Syria and Iran, neither of whichcan be regarded as a positive force. Mr. Ozal has taken somepolitical risks in a Turkey that is wary of Kurdishnationalism by making contact with the Kurdish nationalistsin Iraq to sound them out on their aspirations. AbdullahOcalan, head of the PKK, claimed last week that Mr. Ozal alsohas been in touch with him through mediators. No doubt theKurdish question figured into Mr. Ozal's discussions withPresident Bush this past weekend.   Cyprus is yet another site of ethnic feuding. When Turkeysent troops to the island in the mid-1970s to protect theTurkish minority against an attempted Greek takeover, it paida heavy political price. The U.S. Greek lobby workedsuccessfully to get Congress to withhold Turkish aid. Greecealso has played a key role in blocking Turkey's efforts tojoin the European Community. Mr. Ozal, applying his openborders formula, now turns the question around. Instead ofTurkey solving the Cyprus problem as a condition foradmission into the EC, he says that admitting both Turkey andCyprus to the EC would automatically solve the Cyprusproblem. Turkey and Greece could cooperate with each other inCyprus in guaranteeing the rights of the Turkish Cypriotminority and eliminating any need for Turkish troops. Again,he favors a loose federal system with the Turkish and Greekregions of the island exercising substantial autonomy. Hisideas on this subject also were discussed with Mr. Bush, whoseems to be prepared to lend his influence toward obtaining aCyprus settlement and Turkish membership in the EC.   Mr. Ozal thinks his formula also could work in the SovietUnion and he told Mikhail Gorbachev that during a six-hourconversation in Moscow a week ago. He suggested greaterautonomy for the restive Soviet republics within a looserfederation. He also described his Black Sea initiative,through which Turkey would work to set up commercial ties andtrade with all the countries around the Black Sea includingthe Soviet republics. Interestingly enough Mr. Gorbachev wasreceptive to this idea. He obviously has reached the pointwhere he welcomes any and all suggestions for solving hisproblems with the separatist republics. And of course, if hereally wants a solution, he could do a lot worse than tolisten to the free-market, free-peoples ideas of Turgut Ozal.</TEXT></DOC>