<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911114-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>911114-0084.</DOCID><HL>   Act Now in Yugoslavia   ----   By Alois Mock</HL><DATE>11/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><NS>UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><RE>AUSTRIA (AU)EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   For months Yugoslavia has been the scene of bloodyconflict. Thousands of people have lost their lives; tens ofthousands have been driven from their homes as refugees.Towns and villages have been reduced to rubble and ashes;every day irreplaceable cultural treasures are beingdestroyed. Even Dubrovnik, one of Europe's cultural jewels,is threatened with destruction.   All this is happening in the heart of Europe -- in themiddle of that &quot;Europe of democracy, peace and unity,&quot; towhich the heads of state and government of 35 nationsceremonially committed themselves less than two years ago inthe Charter of Paris. Day after day I receive innumerableletters from the scene of the conflict. What they all have incommon is the despairing question: &quot;Where is the New Europe?Why is it abandoning us?&quot;</LP><TEXT>   I believe that the dire conflict in Yugoslavia is puttingEurope to the test. The EC is now faced with the necessity oftranslating its often projected aim of a common securitypolicy into concrete practice. Europe's politicians will haveto demonstrate what significance they attach to theprinciples of self-determination, democracy and human rights.And Europe will have to show whether it can take care of itsown security.   Since the death of the dictator Tito, the people ofYugoslavia have sought freedom. They have demanded theirbasic political rights and freedoms, and, simultaneously thevarious nationalities that make up Yugoslavia have demandedtheir national freedom.   Unfortunately, the process of democratic renewal tookplace only at the level of individual republics -- except forthe Republic of Serbia, where the communists remained inpower, albeit within a somewhat altered framework. At thelevel of the Yugoslav federation absolutely nothing changed;the undemocratic structures remained unaltered. Yugoslavia'spolitical landscape has for a considerable time shown thetectonic symptoms of an earthquake region: Everything was inmovement underground, within the republics, while theoverlying federal layer stayed completely inflexible.   From the very beginning, Austria has observed thedevelopments in her southeastern neighbor with the greatestconcern. We became alarmed as early as 1990, when theRepublic of Serbia erected an initial barrier to thedemocratic renewal of Yugoslavia by depriving the autonomousprovinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina of their powers. Thisaction was accompanied by flagrant and continuing violationsof the human rights of the Albanian majority population inKosovo. As a result, Kosovo is now possibly the mostdangerous powder keg in the Yugoslavian minefield. Anexplosion here could endanger the security of the entireBalkans.   Some have accused Austria of pursuing its own interests inYugoslavia. Some have even voiced absurd allegations ofAustrian historical nostalgia. In fact, however, weoriginally had only one desire: That the peoples ofYugoslavia would succeed by their combined efforts increating a stable Yugoslavia, a Yugoslavia based ondemocracy, human rights and social market economy.   In the course of the year 1991, however, the centripetalforces in Yugoslavia became weaker and weaker, and finallydisappeared. Therefore, in the light of the major acts ofaggression at the beginning of May, I decided to make anoperational proposal.   I suggested setting up a &quot;Council of Sages.&quot; This body ofEuropean mediators would have kept the lines of dialogue openbetween the Yugoslav republics and the central government,while developing new security mechanisms to prevent thecontinual outbreak of local or regional conflict. Myreasoning was governed by one consideration above all: Aslong as people in Yugoslavia continued to talk they were notlikely to shoot.   Unfortunately, the Yugoslav side politely but firmlyrejected this suggestion. Federal Prime Minister AnteMarkovic and Foreign Minister Budimir Loncar both held theopinion that it was unnecessary to internationalize thecrisis; they wanted to solve it by their own efforts.   U.S. Secretary of State James Baker met with a similarreaction in June when he proposed that a group ofinternational constitutional experts draw up proposals for arenewal of Yugoslavia. Similarly, efforts by the republics ofSlovenia and Croatia to negotiate with the central governmenthad also met with no response.   And so Croatia and Slovenia finally decided to go theirown way. The declarations of independence on June 25 werebased on democratic decisions by the peoples of thoserepublics, and are a convincing expression of the right toself-determination.   The ensuing military operations by the Yugoslav federalarmy against Slovenia in fact sealed the fate of the Yugoslavfederation. By now, any attempt to maintain Yugoslavia as acoherent state must be seen as absolutely hopeless. The evenbloodier conflict in Croatia -- which still remains beyondany form of control -- has only served to confirm this.   The so-called &quot;People's Army&quot; has long since ceased to bean army of the peoples of Yugoslavia. It has thrown off anyvestige of political control. Time and again it hasdisregarded armistice agreements negotiated by the politicalauthorities. And Minister of Defense Veljko Kadijevic flatlyrefused to obey the demand for his resignation expressed byhis own head of government, Mr. Markovic.   There no longer exists even a formal legal federalauthority. The so-called &quot;Serbian bloc&quot; is now acting alonewithin the collective state presidium i.e. with the exclusionof Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Macedonia. Inthe manner of a coup d'etat, this group has declaredthemselves to be the sole authority in Yugoslavia, andaccordingly have attempted to assume the functions of bothgovernment and parliament.   How has the international community behaved in the face ofall these developments? Unfortunately, I believe that theinternational reactions to date can only be described as &quot;toolittle and too late. &quot;The international community at firstcompletely underestimated the strength of will among theSlovenes and Croats to take the path of independence.Ignoring all the evidence of clearly escalatingdisintegration, ignoring all the hostilities, the humanvictims and the material destruction, the internationalcommunity continued to believe that &quot;the territorialintegrity of Yugoslavia&quot; could be maintained. This, however,would have been possible only on the basis of voluntaryconsensus among the peoples of Yugoslavia. And all this timethe armed conflict never ceased.   The European Community did, in fact, succeed in helping tocalm the situation during the initial phase. With the firstthree &quot;troika&quot; missions and the Brioni agreement the ECsucceeded in obtaining the withdrawal of the Yugoslav armyfrom Slovenia. This initial success has often been overlookedin the light of the many setbacks the EC has had to accept inits attempt to mediate in Croatia. But it was shown then thatconsistent action can produce results.   In the meantime, however, the Yugoslav army has learnedthat it has to fear no practical consequences when it ignoresagreements with the European Community. Announcements fromseveral EC member countries that they would give diplomaticrecognition to Slovenia and Croatia if the fighting were notstopped have remained ineffective. The Community now hasagreed on concrete sanctions. However, it remains to be seenwhether they will be sufficiently sharp to induce thePeople's Army to modify its attitude: The nonchalance of theYugoslav military leaders toward agreements with the EuropeanCommunity has been repeatedly demonstrated.   On Oct. 10, the President of the EC Council, Hans van denBroek of the Netherlands, announced that he had negotiated anagreement between the presidents of Croatia and Serbia,Franjo Tudjman and Slobodan Milosevic, and federal defenseminister Kadijevic, on the withdrawal of the army fromCroatia. This was flatly contradicted just a few hours laterby a communique from the Yugoslav People's Army that statedthat a withdrawal was out of the question.   The disintegration of Yugoslavia now seems to beinevitable. At the moment Europe must have one principal aim:To use every possible political and economic means to put anend to the killing, the misery of refugees and thedestruction of entire regions.   We must not accept that the principles proclaimed by 35heads of state and government in the Charter of Paris can beopenly flouted. With Security Council Resolution 713 theUnited Nations lent its authority to all internationalefforts to obtain a solution to the Yugoslav conflict -- andthose of the European Community in particular.   It is precisely those actors on the international scenethat place special value on democracy, peace and human rights-- the U.S., the European Community and the other countriesof the West -- that are called upon to ensure the maintenanceof armistice agreements in Yugoslavia through appropriatepolitical and economic measures, and to provide effectiveinternational guarantees for the protection of minorities andethnic groups within the present area of Yugoslavia. Theyare, however, also called upon to offer internationalrecognition to those peoples of Yugoslavia who have exercisedtheir right to self-determination by democratic means.   ---   Mr. Mock is foreign minister of Austria.</TEXT></DOC>