<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920103-0015</DOCNO><DOCID>920103-0015.</DOCID><HL>   Land Mines for Democrats   ----   By Albert R. Hunt</HL><DATE>01/03/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Even with Mario Cuomo and most of the party's otherheavyweights sitting the contest out, Democrats are buoyantabout their prospects in this presidential election.   The glow of last year's war with Iraq has dimmed; at homethe economy is in sorry shape and voters think it's evenworse. George Bush's support among the American public provedto be wide but exceptionally shallow, and the Democrats'second team -- the so-called six-pack of current presidentialcandidates -- may be well-suited to the anti-establishmentenvironment of 1992.</LP><TEXT>   Moreover, the Democrats have a patron saint to guide thempolitically: Harris Wofford, the ivory-tower academician, whostaged a remarkable 55-point turnaround in three months toupset former Attorney General Richard Thornburgh and capturea Pennsylvania Senate seat eight weeks ago. The Woffordroadmap: Focus almost exclusively on the economy, health careand related concerns of middle-class voters.   Finally, many smart Democrats believe the currentconditions -- domestic frustration and diminishing interestin foreign affairs -- work to their advantage. &quot;Everyelection has a natural contour that it wants to follow,&quot; saysJames Carville, the Democratic strategist who orchestratedMr. Wofford's stunning upset. &quot;This time the groove thevoters want the election to fall in is good for us.&quot;   All of that is true. Yet the Democratic presidentialhopefuls still face some deadly land mines in the monthsahead that may make it very hard for them to follow thatcontour. These include:   -- The character test. None of these candidates, who amongthem have won dozens of elections, fully appreciate that theyare now playing in a much tougher league. Their entirebackgrounds, plus every word, every nuance and everyrelationship, will be subject to scrutiny.   There are two general ways a candidate can self-destruct:through a vivid character flaw, like Gary Hart in 1987, orvia a disqualifying gaffe, such as George Romney's 1967remark that he had been &quot;brainwashed&quot; on Vietnam. (&quot;A simplerinse&quot; would have been sufficient, Eugene McCarthy remarked.)   The danger is greater for these relatively unknown figuresprecisely because voters know so little about them. A RonaldReagan in 1980, perhaps even a Mario Cuomo this time, hadmore firmly formed perceptions in the public mind to serve asa buffer against any new embarrassments.   It's very difficult to gauge character vulnerability, butlittle if anything about politicians' backgrounds is offlimits now; if St. Francis of Assisi were a politicalcandidate today, he'd doubtless be subject to &quot;shocking&quot;rumors about his past.   Meanwhile, there are certain to be plenty of gaffes, evenby smart and seasoned politicians. &quot;It's very easy to thinkout loud and look foolish,&quot; notes Greg Schneiders, aDemocratic pollster and former top aide to President JimmyCarter. &quot;You also can say something that sounds perfectlyreasonable without knowing you've used an unacceptable codeword.&quot;   A variation happened a few months ago to one of the topcontenders, Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, when he told aprivate joke that was picked up by microphones. The jokeoffended some lesbian groups, and Sen. Kerrey spent thebetter part of a week apologizing, and over-apologizing, forit. In February, such an incident would be lethal.   When a candidate makes a gaffe, the first tough decisionis whether to backtrack; one key factor is whether the gaffereinforces an existing negative perception. The mostimportant thing, though, is to deal with the issue quickly --preferably within the same news cycle -- and then move ontosomething else. The model for how to handle such problemscame after the first presidential debate in 1988, in whichGeorge Bush suggested that doctors who perform abortionsmight be subject to criminal penalties. Within minutes afterthe debate, Bush campaign chairman James Baker had completelyreversed his candidate's position.   -- Social issues. The Wofford lesson to candidates is tostay focused on economicrelated issues and not to getsidetracked. Under the pressures of a lengthy campaign,though, a lot of interest groups will try to make that animpossible task. The gay lobby, for one, will push suchmeasures as spousal benefits for gays; that won't much appealto the broad working class.   Even issues that have merit can be politically dangerous.For instance, a strong case can be made for distributingcondoms to high-school students in certain areas to reducethe number of teen-age pregnancies and the spread of AIDS.But this would alienate those voters who already worry thatDemocrats are too soft on some cherished virtues and values.   On crime, the Democrats needn't abandon a commitment tojustice and civil liberties in order to express outrage overcriminals being allowed to walk the streets too easily, or toexpress empathy with their victims. In 1968, nobody wastougher on crime than Robert F. Kennedy -- and few coulddoubt his liberal credentials.   Abortion is a dicier question. As the courts chip away atabortion rights, it's clear the issue has swung from one thatmarginally helped pro-life presidential candidates --certainly Ronald Reagan in 1980, and probably George Bush in1988 -- to one that will marginally aid a pro-choicecandidate in 1992. But the Democrats will be tempted tooverdo it. &quot;There's no question that it's better politicallytoday to be pro-choice,&quot; says Mr. Carville, now an adviser tocandidate Bill Clinton. &quot;But it's not a very good reason towant to be president.&quot;   Pollster Schneiders warns that while most Americans &quot;aretolerant of people who want to have abortions or alternatelife styles, they personally don't favor many of thosedecisions. When you step over the line to seemingly advocateabortion or homosexuality or promiscuity, you're out of themainstream.&quot;   -- Foreign policy. With communism dead, Democrats feelfreed from the foreign-policy albatross that has plagued themsince the Vietnam War. Certainly, foreign policy is a lowpriority for the public; in a recent Wall Street Journal/NBCNews poll, only 12% of voters said national security shouldbe the president's most important priority.   But the world is full of dangers that easily could eruptover the next 10 months. The isolated North Korean regimecould create trouble out of desperation; an increasinglyassertive Iran could stage an incident to influence yetanother presidential campaign; terrorism remains a real fear.Of course, there's always the looming presence of SaddamHussein. Add to all that the possibility of problems,including ones with nuclear potential, in the looselystitched-together confederation of former Soviet republics.   When and if such incidents occur, Democrats have torespond and sound knowledgeable. Any repeat of thehand-wringing over the 1983 invasion of Grenada would bedisastrous. &quot;A person running for president has to sound likehe knows what he's talking about on foreign policy; that'sessential,&quot; notes Ed Rollins, who ran Ronald Reagan's 1984re-election campaign.   The Democrats don't have to convince voters they're betterthan George Bush in this area -- that's probably animpossible task. But they do have to convince voters they'retrustworthy and tough enough to be basically competent inforeign policy. Only then can the campaign be fought on thepreferred terrain of domestic and economic issues.   There will certainly be plenty of other tests for theDemocratic candidates during this campaign. Some are full ofpolitical danger: The specter of Jesse Jackson and hisattendant demands still worries party leaders. Others,though, are full of opportunity. For the first time in ageneration, the Supreme Court is an issue that helpsDemocrats, as voters plainly are worried about the high courtmoving too far to the right. In the friendly environs ofeconomics and health care, Democrats must convince voters notonly that the current policies are bad but that theirsolutions are better.   That's the burden of a challenging party -- first toconvince people that change is necessary, and then toconvince them it has the solution. &quot;The easiest case we haveis the case against Bush,&quot; says Mr. Carville. &quot;The tougherjob is to make the case for ourselves.&quot;   ---   Mr. Hunt is the Journal's Washington bureau chief.</TEXT></DOC>