<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910116-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>910116-0012.</DOCID><HL>   U.N. Makes Final Appeal Designed to Give   Iraq a Face-Saving Way to Leave Kuwait   ---   U.S. Issues Blunt Warning   As Baghdad Continues   To Fortify Its Positions   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Robert S. Greenberger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The United Nations issued a final appealdesigned to give Iraq a face-saving way to leave Kuwait andavoid war, as the Persian Gulf crisis reached the deadlinefor a peaceful solution.   It's far from clear that the carefully worded U.N.statement, which included a nod toward Iraq's demand that theworld address the occupation of Kuwait and the Palestinianissue simultaneously, will be enough to produce an Iraqipullout. The appeal's language was constrained by PresidentBush's continued insistence that an Iraqi pullout not belinked directly to a promise for an international conferenceto deal with the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.</LP><TEXT>   Still, if Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein is looking for alast-minute excuse to justify a pullback, the statement atleast gives him an opportunity.   &quot;As 15 January advances and the world stands poisedbetween peace and war, I most sincerely appeal to PresidentSaddam Hussein to turn the course of events away fromcatastrophe and toward a new era of justice and harmony basedon the principles of the United Nations Charter,&quot; said U.N.Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar. He crafted hisstatement after lengthy discussions with the the U.S. and thefour other permanent members of the Security Council, U.S.officials said.   In the statement's most significant passage, Mr. Perez deCuellar said: &quot;I have every assurance once again from thehighest levels of government that with the resolution of thepresent crisis, every effort will be made to address, in acomprehensive manner, the Arab-Israeli conflict, includingthe Palestinian question.&quot;   That represented a more overt link between an Iraqipullout and the Palestinian issue than President Bushpreviously had been willing to accept. Mr. Bush persistentlyhas resisted tying an Iraqi withdrawal to a Middle Eastconference to address the Palestinian issue, arguing thatsuch a connection would reward Iraq for invading Kuwait.   Even if Saddam Hussein isn't searching for a last-minuteway to back down from his confrontation with theinternational military force facing Iraq, the Bushadministration apparently hopes the U.N. statement will makeit appear that Iraqi intransigence is to blame for the comingwar.   There wasn't any hint, though, that Iraq is looking for away out. Saddam Hussein yesterday visited Iraqi troops inKuwait and was quoted by Baghdad Radio as saying, &quot;There willbe no compromise on Iraq's and the Arab nation's rights.&quot; Andthe Pentagon reported that Iraq has moved in recent days tostrengthen its defenses in Kuwait.   Late last night, several administration officialsindicated that the U.S. in recent days has moved giant B-52bombers to bases in friendly countries closer to Iraq. Thebombers had been waiting several thousand miles away, at abase on the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia.Administration officials have been planning for months tomove the planes to bases closer to the Gulf if hostilitiesappeared to be near. U.S. officials have considered Egypt,Saudi Arabia, Oman or Turkey as possible sites. The movementof B-52s, along with the arrival in the region this week of asixth aircraft carrier, gives President Bush a full array ofair power to conduct the opening stages of a war with Iraq.   There were pressures on the U.S.-led internationalmilitary force to let a few days pass beyond last night'smidnight EST deadline, on the chance that Saddam Husseinintends to back down once he has defied the world's deadline.   Vice President Dan Quayle reported to President Bush thateven some Republican senators who back the president's policydon't think Mr. Bush should feel compelled to move quickly tomilitary action, officials said. And Senate Minority LeaderRobert Dole, who visited Iraq last April and is regarded ashaving some credibility with the government in Baghdad,yesterday voiced continued hope that Saddam Hussein stillwill make a conciliatory move. &quot;I still think the guy's goingto do something,&quot; the Kansas Republican said. &quot;I don't thinkthe guy's crazy.&quot;   But Mr. Bush, National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroftand Defense Secretary Dick Cheney all favor moving fairlyquickly to military action if Iraq doesn't withdrawimmediately, officials familiar with their thinking said.   Before the U.N. action late yesterday, diplomatic effortsto end the crisis had been fizzling. France abandoned itslast-minute peace plan, and French Prime Minister MichelRocard declared that the time had arrived to use force toexpel Iraqi troops from Kuwait.   The French plan would have promised that an internationalconference on Middle East issues, particularly thePalestinian issue, be called after an Iraqi pullout. But boththe Bush administration and Britain resisted backing the plananyway, complaining that its &quot;linkage&quot; of the Kuwait invasionand an international conference on the Middle East wouldamount to rewarding Saddam Hussein for taking over Kuwait.   At the same time, France complained that Iraq neverdisplayed any interest in its peace proposal. &quot;Initiativesfrom France have not found the least response from the Iraqiside,&quot; Mr. Rocard told a group of Socialist lawmakers inParis.   The U.S. rejection of France's proposal raised the risk ofa rift between Washington and Paris on the eve of war, whichwould be a serious blow to the U.S.-led internationalmilitary force in the Gulf region. But U.S. officials saidthat they were sure that France remained committed tomilitary action after the deadline, and a European diplomatsaid that France would &quot;fight on the side of the Americans.&quot;   Meanwhile, concerns were easing that Monday night'sassassination in Tunis of two top Palestine LiberationOrganization officials might touch off a Middle East war bygiving Iraq a pretext to attack Israel. The killingsincreasingly appeared to be the result of a feud between thePLO and Palestinian terrorist Abu Nidal. Reports from Tunisiaidentified the gunman as a Palestinian activist with ties toAbu Nidal, who has been a rival of PLO chief Yasser Arafat.   U.S. officials said they saw no signs Iraq was preparingto use the killings as an excuse for attacking Israel.   But the killings still exacerbated tensions on the eve ofa possible war. Many Palestinians blamed Israel for thekillings, further inflaming passions already aroused byIraq's campaign to link its occupation of Kuwait to Israel'soccupation of Palestinian lands. And if the killings signal aresurgence of the Abu Nidal terrorist organization, it couldbe bad news for U.S. troops stationed in Saudi Arabia. AbuNidal once was an oil-company worker in Saudi Arabia'sEastern Province and is believed to have kept a network ofcontacts there, according to a former associate.   The Bush administration was bluntly warning of war. &quot;Asthe clock ticks down to midnight, we feel the obligation toremind everyone that this is a truly very dangeroussituation,&quot; said State Department spokesman MargaretTutwiler.   She refused to say whether the U.S. would be willing totalk to Iraq after the deadline. &quot;This deadline is veryreal,&quot; she repeated in response to questions. A senior StateDepartment official said later that &quot;it weakens the deadline&quot;to talk about what might happen after it.   The Pentagon reported that Iraq continues to strengthenits defensive positions in Kuwait and adjust them for battle.Spokesman Pete Williams said that in the past five days Iraqhas moved an additional 5,000 troops into Kuwait, bringingits total deployment there to more than 545,000. At the sametime, Iraqi forces have been extending their lines ofdefenses westward, apparently in anticipation of a possibleend-sweep by U.S. and other allied units.   In addition, Iraq in the past five days has reinforced itsdug-in armored units with 200 tanks, 100 artillery pieces and100 armored personnel carriers and infantry fightingvehicles, Mr. Williams said.   &quot;We don't see any evidence that they are in any waypulling out of Kuwait,&quot; Mr. Williams said.   He said that the U.S. now has more than 415,000 troops inthe Persian Gulf region, up 45,000 from last Thursday, whilethe number of allied troops has grown 20,000 to more than265,000.   ---   Bruce Ingersoll contributed to this article.   (See related story: &quot;Fears of Terrorist Attacks BringIraqis, Other Arabs Under Close Surveillance&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 16,1991)</TEXT></DOC>