<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910311-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>910311-0081.</DOCID><HL>   Strictly Business:   Oil Man Oscar Wyatt   Kept Ties With Iraq   Despite Gulf Conflict   ---   Coastal Founder Met Leaders,   Tried to Pick Up Crude,   Spoke Against the War   ---   Cozy Chats at OPEC Session   ----   By Caleb Solomon and Allanna Sullivan   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CGP MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)PIPELINE OPERATORS (PIP)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   HOUSTON -- The way Oscar Wyatt figures it, war or no war,embargo or no embargo, Iraq has at least 100 billion barrelsof crude oil in the ground.   So throughout the Persian Gulf crisis, the controversialTexas oil man has made sure Iraq knows he's a friend. BeforeSaddam Hussein invaded Kuwait, Mr. Wyatt's company was one ofthe world's biggest buyers of Iraqi crude. Now that there'speace, he wants at that oil again.</LP><TEXT>   Since August, he has maintained ties with Iraq, travelingto Baghdad to meet with officials and bring home hostages,and sending subtle and not-so-subtle signals that he wasn'tjumping on the anti-Iraqi bandwagon in the U.S. It hasn'tbeen a popular stance. Corpus Christi Chamber of Commercemembers were shocked, for instance, when he declared in aspeech to them: &quot;The Bush administration has not come up witha reasonable explanation of why we should spill our blood forthe emir of Kuwait.&quot;   Most companies and their executives, not daring to buckthe national wave of patriotism -- and constrained by thegovernment's bans on business with Iraq -- have shied awayfrom any contact with Saddam Hussein's country.   But for Mr. Wyatt, the 66-year-old chairman of publiclyheld Coastal Corp. based here, the point isn't patriotism orpolitics. It's business. &quot;Oscar doesn't play with the samerules as everybody else,&quot; says Dale Steffes, a Houston energyconsultant. &quot;Just about everything is business with him.&quot;   Mr. Wyatt declined repeated requests to be interviewed forthis article. But he and his socialite family are used tocontroversy. Just last week, People magazine's cover featuredthe Duchess of York and this headline: &quot;Fergie and thePlayboy.&quot; The playboy is Mr. Wyatt's stepson, Steve, the sonof his fourth wife, Lynn.   Even with the war over, it could be months before Mr.Wyatt and Coastal reap much benefit from their dangerousliaison with Iraq. United Nations sanctions are still inplace. Besides, after six weeks of allied bombing, Iraq's oilindustry is a shambles, and it's unlikely that significantexports will resume any time soon. Civil unrest has had partsof the country in chaos.   In fact, some oil industry observers wonder whether Mr.Wyatt might have chosen his loyalties unwisely. A victoriousSaudi Arabia and its military ally, the U.S., will have moreof a say than ever in Persian Gulf matters, including oilexport quotas. Oil men figure Mr. Wyatt has poisoned the wellwith the Saudis, the world's largest oil exporter. And someof his actions during the crisis riled Washington, too.   None of which may matter much to Mr. Wyatt. &quot;My job isn'tto win a popularity contest,&quot; he's been known to say. &quot;My jobis to win a profitability contest.&quot;   His chumminess has worked before. Primarily because hekept up relations, Mr. Wyatt's Coastal was first in line totake delivery of Iraq's desirable Fao Blend crude when thatcountry started to export large volumes of oil againfollowing its eight-year war with Iran.   And Mr. Wyatt's gamble may yet pay off. His primary Iraqiassociate, Ramzi Salman, director of Iraq's State OilMarketing Organization, assumes duties today as deputysecretary-general of the Organization of Petroleum ExportingCountries. Such a post gives Mr. Salman, and his country, achance at more than a token role in postwar OPEC.   Mr. Wyatt had been negotiating for some time to sell Iraqa half-interest in Coastal's oil refining and marketingnetwork for $800 million. The prospect of a joint venturewith Iraq has certainly been dimmed by recent events in theGulf, but Mr. Wyatt still wants to make it happen. It wouldcrown a 19-year relationship with the Iraqis and guarantee along-term source of affordable crude for Coastal'srefineries, which are already geared specifically for Iraq'ssulfur-laden oil.   Those operations account for 5% of all the petroleumproducts sold in the U.S., making Coastal, which has $9billion in annual revenue, one of the country's biggestrefiners. It sells gasoline at more than 850 service stationsin 23 states, and has nearly finished rebranding its oldDerby, Pester and Joy stations under the Coastal name.   Mr. Wyatt has quite a bit of practice overcoming embargoes-- and going his own way. A former drill-bit salesman whoused to pack a gun, Mr. Wyatt began building Coastal in themid-1950s by battling entrenched and much larger companies.In the 1980s, Coastal grew through often-hostile takeovers.Few people are willing to cross the tough-talking Mr. Wyatt.He is extremely litigious; a few years ago, he sued his ownbrother-in-law.   So it may not be surprising that he doesn't let events onthe international scene get in the way of business. Coastalowns and operates a 100,000 barrel-a-day refinery in Hamburg,Germany, with Libya, which supplies the crude. Coastal hasskirted U.S. trade sanctions against Libya by putting theplant's ownership in the hands of a Bermuda subsidiary andshipping products made from the Libyan crude to places otherthan the U.S.   Similarly, Coastal has bought crude from Iran despite U.S.embargoes against that country, getting around the sanctionsby never bringing the oil or products refined from it to U.S.shores.   In an investigation called &quot;Greased Lightning,&quot; CustomsService agents have examined Coastal records to see if thecompany's Corpus Christi refinery violated trade embargoes byimporting Libyan, Iraqi or Iranian petroleum, government andrefinery officials say. Coastal spokesmen deny anyimproprieties, and the Customs investigation, which iscontinuing, has led to no action.   After the U.S. embargo was slapped on Iraqi crude on Aug.2, several companies, including Coastal, persuaded the U.S.to let them take delivery of Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude that hadleft the Mideast by that date. But Coastal tried to takethings further.   Three days after the embargo against Iraq went intoeffect, a Coastal tanker chugged into the Persian Gulf topick up a shipment of Iraqi crude stored in a Saudi oilterminal. Coastal, acting alone this time, tried an argumentsimilar to the one that had worked for the industry on thoseearlier shipments: The crude had already left Iraq. &quot;That oilis of no benefit to Iraq,&quot; a Coastal spokesman said at thetime, when gasoline prices were headed skyward. &quot;But it is abenefit to Coastal and to U.S. consumers.&quot;   Authorities didn't buy it. The tanker was turned back.   Coastal immediately set its legal and regulatory expertsto work to determine if there was a way around the embargo. Aconfidential two-page document from the Treasury Department'sOffice of Foreign Assets Control shows that by Sept. 5, thatagency had received an application for a special license toimport the crude.   Again, in the application, Coastal argued that anexemption to the embargo was warranted because the crude wasshipped to Saudi Arabia by pipeline before Aug. 2. Coastalpointed out that it had a contract to buy the Iraqi oilbefore the embargo. And it agreed to make payment into a typeof escrow account to which the Iraqi government had noaccess.   On Oct. 10, Coastal got its exemption from the TreasuryDepartment to bring the shipment of 2.6 million barrels ofIraqi crude to the U.S. Apparently, the escrow accountpayment helped sway federal officials. A Treasury spokeswomansaid of the exemption, &quot;Not one red cent goes to Iraq.&quot; But,she added, &quot;It's the only instance of oil being allowed inthat was covered by the general embargo.&quot; The Saudis,however, fearful that Coastal's exemption would breach theintegrity of the embargo and encourage other exceptions,forbade Coastal to pick up the oil.   In December, while other U.S. oil executives gave theIraqi delegation a wide berth because of the trade sanctions,Mr. Wyatt continued cozy social relations with them at thewinter OPEC meeting in Vienna. Mr. Wyatt chatted with Mr.Salman, the oil marketing director. Mr. Wyatt apparentlyholds Mr. Salman in high regard. Before the war, he was heardto say, &quot;If that regime ever goes sour, I'm going to get inmy plane and fly to Iraq to pick up Ramzi. But only Ramzi.&quot;   Mr. Wyatt also raised eyebrows with his &quot;mission of mercy&quot;to Baghdad with former Treasury secretary John Connally, aCoastal director, ostensibly to bring hostages home.   Sources with ties to the federal government say Mr. Wyattwas asked not to make the December trip to Iraq to collecthostages, but he did, leaving the White House furious. Rep.Charles Wilson, a friend of Mr. Wyatt's, had been invited tojoin him on board the executive's Boeing 707 to Baghdad. Hedidn't go. &quot;If the commander-in-chief tells you not to dosomething,&quot; the Texas Democrat says, &quot;you don't.&quot;   Snubbing the State Department and the U.S. Embassy inBaghdad, Mr. Wyatt arranged on his own to meet with ForeignMinister Tariq Aziz and for an hour with Saddam Hussein. Atthe time, Mr. Wyatt said he made the trip because &quot;I didn'twant to see Americans killed.&quot;   The morning his plane returned to Texas, Mr. Wyatt criedas he spoke to the press. He said he had learned that thePentagon had ordered tens of thousands of body bags flown toSaudi Arabia and he was afraid President Bush -- whom hestrongly dislikes -- would see that those bags were filled.&quot;I am 100% behind our troops in the Persian Gulf,&quot; he said ata speech soon after the trip. &quot;But I cannot be 100% sure Ican support the reason why they are there. Their lives aretoo precious to me.&quot;   But even his friends believe his motives went beyondhumanitarian. Rep. Wilson says that Mr. Wyatt also wanted tosignal his continued loyalty to Iraq. &quot;That's obvious,&quot; Mr.Wilson says, hastening to add, &quot;That's not against the law,best I can tell.&quot;   On the other hand, Mr. Wyatt is a hero to the two dozenhostages he brought home from Baghdad. &quot;He did somethinggreat for us,&quot; says Allan Lawson, who was held for fourmonths in Iraq.   On Jan. 22, anti-war sentiments critical of President Bushgot Mr. Wyatt booed in Corpus Christi, Texas, where 100people in the audience of 1,200 walked out on the speech hegave to a Chamber of Commerce meeting. In a city with hugeNavy and Army installations, Mr. Wyatt asked why the U.S. wasfighting the war and added: &quot;The {Arab} monarchies supportingthe U.S. will not stand, and when they fall, we fall.&quot;   The chamber issued a statement the next day saying, &quot;Werespect Oscar Wyatt's right to express his views, although wedon't feel that the Chamber of Commerce Banquet was theappropriate forum.&quot; Once the city leaders' views of hisspeech became public, Mr. Wyatt mailed back a key to the cityhe had been given. His 88-year-old mother, also an oilexecutive, quit the Chamber of Commerce to show support forher son.   The speech became the subject of radio talk shows andnewspaper stories. A San Antonio newspaper editorialized that&quot;greed, not the milk of human kindness,&quot; was behind thehostage trip and Mr. Wyatt's blast against the war. Coastalwas flooded with angry calls.   Coastal's contact with Iraq during the crisis is in sharpcontrast with the actions of other oil companies. Tradingwith Iraq before the Kuwaiti invasion was commonplace in theoil industry, of course; at least 16 U.S. companies boughtcrude oil from Iraq last year. And after the sanctions arelifted, most will do so again. But for now, executivescontinue to avoid even cursory contact. &quot;I cut off allcommunication with the Iraqis,&quot; says Neil Chandi, presidentof Crescent International Petroleum Ltd., an oil tradingfirm. &quot;I had to. I'm a U.S. citizen. The way I read theregulations {U.N. sanctions}, they're prettyall-encompassing.&quot;   Ron Haddock, chairman of American Petrofina Inc., a bigbuyer of Iraqi crude before the invasion, wouldn't evenacknowledge receipt of facsimile messages from Baghdad sentto the company's Dallas headquarters over the past months.&quot;We felt it was more appropriate to be completely hands off,&quot;he says.   He isn't alone. Amoco Corp. executives cut off alldiscussions. So did a number of international oil companiesthat were holding &quot;serious&quot; talks with Iraq about possiblejoint exploration and production ventures, says JosephStanislaw, Paris-based director of consultants CambridgeEnergy Research Associates. &quot;There are friendships,&quot; he says,&quot;but you don't usually go against national interest forfriendship.&quot;   But Mr. Wyatt and the Iraqis argue that they're just beingpragmatic. As Ramzi Salman, Mr. Wyatt's Iraqi associate, saidrecently: &quot;We presume that when the time comes, the customerswill come back.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>