<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910304-0056</DOCNO><DOCID>910304-0056.</DOCID><HL>   Back to the Race:   Mideast Arms Outlays   Seem Unlikely to Face   Any Tough New Curbs   ---   Even White House Indicates   That It Will Help Allies,   Squeezed Weapons Firms   ---   A Popular Item: the Patriot   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and Rick Wartzman   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST ML GM GMH FREST LATAM MD LTV BA RTN FMC UTX EUROP GDHSC</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- It could happen again.   The U.S. and its allies smashed Iraq's huge militarymachine with alacrity. But far more elusive will be successin preventing the warlike states of the Mideast, includingIraq itself, from building deadlier new arsenals in thefuture.</LP><TEXT>   The renewed urge to control the spread of arms is runningheadlong into two powerful forces. One is strong demand:Mideast nations are eager to purchase some of the powerfulhigh-tech gadgetry that won the Persian Gulf war. The otheris ample supply: The profit motive remains undiminished bythe recent bloodshed.   &quot;People who are talking about limiting arms sales to theMiddle East are living in a dream world,&quot; says GregoryFetter, senior defense analyst at Forecast International/DMS,a consulting concern that compiles data on the global weaponsbusiness. &quot;It's a shame to have to say it, but it's true.Everybody wants to sell there, and it would take aworld-wide, airtight effort to stop that.&quot;   Nevertheless, the Bush administration says it isdetermined to build on its battlefield victory by curbing theproliferation of modern arms, not only to Iraq but to theentire Mideast. Shutting down the arms bazaar will rank amongthe top issues on the agenda when Secretary of State JamesBaker flies to the region this week. During the crisis, Mr.Baker promised Congress he would &quot;mount a majornonproliferation effort for this area of the world,&quot; callingfor &quot;very, very intrusive measures of inspection andverification.&quot;   But experts and government officials agree that the mostthat Mr. Baker can hope for might be a continued arms-salesembargo against Iraq alone for a while, coupled with thestart of a vague, drawn-out diplomatic quest for a regionalarms-control system.   The problem starts with the U.S. itself. Theadministration is hinting that its approach will beselective: While talking nonproliferation, it will pour armsinto the region to help its allies and weapons makers. At anews conference Friday, President Bush declared: &quot;Let's hopethat out of all this, there will be less proliferation of allkinds of weapons, not just unconventional weapons.&quot; But headded: &quot;I don't think there will be any arms embargo&quot; by theU.S.   American defense contractors, pinched by Pentagon budgetcuts at home and convinced that the war has given them greatadvertising abroad, are salivating over the prospect of bigMideast sales. The Mideast is a crucial market because, alongwith the Pacific Rim, it is about the only place wheredefense budgets are expanding.   In addition, Mideast countries tend to buy weapons off theshelf rather than demanding a role in producing them, as manyAsian countries do; as a result, the companies can keep theiremployment and supplier bases intact.   &quot;American equipment performed so doggone well comparedwith that of the French and Soviets, there ought to be somevery hot prospects&quot; for sales throughout the Mideast, says D.Kenneth Richardson, the president of Hughes Aircraft Co. Forhis Los Angeles company, a subsidiary of General MotorsCorp., Mr. Richardson foresees an opportunity to peddlebattlefield navigation systems, radar for F-15 and F/A-18 jetfighters, air-launched Maverick missiles, and night-visiondevices and laser range-finders for the M-1 tank.   Martin Marietta Corp., which produces part of the Patriotmissile plus night-fighting gear for Apache helicopters andfighter planes, expects its overseas sales to double, withmuch of that volume going to the Mideast. &quot;If there is a needto step up the defenses of countries in the Middle East,Martin Marietta is one of those contractors that would wantto be very much involved,&quot; a company spokesman says.   But for the moment, many weapons companies are lying low.Most depend on the government to sell their deadliestproducts in government-to-government deals. They also thinkthat this isn't the time to get too pushy. &quot;If the governmentdecides for us to stay out of the area for a while, nobody isgoing to fight it very hard,&quot; says Peter Oram, president ofGrumman Corp.'s aircraft division.   However, the companies are vowing to fight any U.S. salescurbs that aren't matched by competing arms-making countries.If the U.S. acts alone, &quot;the Europeans will look at us andsay, `By gosh, you guys are moral. But we're going to seewhat our Middle Eastern comrades-in-arms need. We're open forbusiness,'&quot; says Joel Johnson, vice president ofinternational activities for the Aerospace IndustriesAssociation, a trade group.   A White House aide acknowledges: &quot;The problems are very,very large, and it's not obvious how to solve&quot; them.   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney recently warned Congressthat, by the end of this decade, at least 15 developingcountries will probably be able to build and deploy ballisticmissiles. Even scarier, eight of those countries, he added,&quot;either have or are near to acquiring nuclear capabilities.&quot;He also estimated that by then, 30 countries will havechemical weapons, and 10 will have germ weapons.   Right now, Soviet-designed Scud missiles remain in thearsenals of Syria, Egypt, Iran, Libya and Yemen. Even Iraq isbelieved to have retained scores of Scuds and home-builtmobile launchers. The Central Intelligence Agency predictsthat by the year 2000 at least six countries will havemissiles able to fly nearly 2,000 miles, with threeadditional nations able to reach targets almost 3,500 milesaway. That could put U.S. territory within reach of someLatin American countries, and the Soviet Union in the sightsof many Muslim nations.   However, administration officials do expect someincremental progress in controlling proliferation in theMideast. There's a good chance Iraq can be quarantined, atleast for a while. And throughout the region, nuclear-weaponsdevelopment can be slowed because the technology is socomplex and expensive -- and thus somewhat controllable.   But further progress will be minimal to nonexistent, manyexperts say -- and the U.S. itself won't be blameless.   Last November, even with the huge U.S. military buildupunder way in the Gulf, the White House vetoed a bipartisanbill that would have imposed sanctions on companies exportingchemical-weapons components. The administration contendedthat the bill lacked a &quot;national security&quot; waiver enablingthe president to allow such sales in rare cases.   After the veto, the administration drafted its own toughcontrols on a wide variety of products and technical datathat could be used to fabricate these terror weapons, as wellas the missiles for delivering them. The program wouldincrease to 50 from 11 the number of &quot;precursor&quot; chemicalssubject to export controls. New controls would be imposed onexports of certain equipment and even benign supplies --potentially down to pencils and paper clips -- being shippedto suspicious manufacturing plants. U.S. exporters could besubject to criminal penalties.   But business groups have so sharply criticized thisprogram -- called the Enhanced Proliferation ControlInitiative -- that its release has been delayed for more thantwo weeks. Until other countries adopt similar rules,business groups say, target countries will remain free to buyfrom other sources.   &quot;Draconian measures without a multilateral approach havenever worked out,&quot; argues Peter McCloskey, president of theElectronic Industries Association. Howard Lewis, a NationalAssociation of Manufacturers trade expert, wonders whethersuch controls could &quot;unilaterally take the U.S. out ofmarkets in Brazil and India.&quot;   The Mideast business opportunity, and the politicalpressure it generates, will severely limit Mr. Baker'seffectiveness in putting together a multilateral plan to curbMideast armaments. In fact, the U.S. will be preachingrestraint to other supplier nations just when it is preparingto make some huge arms sales of its own. Kuwait's rulers havealready quietly notified the U.S. that they intend to acquirefar more military punch than they had when Iraq invaded lastAugust, though details haven't yet been determined.   In addition, according to the administration, Egypt wantsRaytheon Co.'s Hawk missiles and General Dynamics Corp. M-60tank upgrades and F-16 fighter jets. Israel is said to belooking for hand-held battlefield navigation systems, plusupgrades to its McDonnell Douglas Corp. F-15 fighters and itsHarsco Corp. M-109 artillery pieces. The United Arab Emiratesis interested in General Dynamics' M-1 tanks and Raytheon'sPatriot missiles. Bahrain and Turkey are said to beinterested in the Patriot.   But the biggest arms-control buster is a pendingarms-buying spree by Saudi Arabia. The Arab kingdom is inline for a package of $15 billion worth of the U.S. weaponsthat won the war. Included are F-15 fighters and McDonnellDouglas Apache helicopters, M-1 tanks, LTV Corp. MultipleLaunch Rocket Systems, Patriot missiles and Boeing Co. AWACSradar planes. Also being eyed by Riyadh: United TechnologiesCorp. Seahawk helicopters, FMC Corp. Bradley FightingVehicles, and Maverick infrared missiles.   For some U.S. contractors, Mideast sales may be crucial toeven continuing their product lines because the Pentagon isplanning to phase out buying numerous systems that starred inthe Gulf war. McDonnell Douglas says that, without foreignbuyers, it will have to halt F-15 production in May 1993.   Even under the best of circumstances, Nathan Higginbotham,director of government program development for McDonnellDouglas's jet-fighter division, doesn't envision a clearadministration policy emerging on weapons transfers to theMideast until late in the year. &quot;The challenge is going to beto bridge the gap,&quot; he adds. He notes that the company hasalready stopped ordering certain long-lead-time items fromits F-15 suppliers, some of which could go out of business.   Boeing is in a similar bind. C.G. King, executive vicepresident of its military aircraft division, says thatalthough Saudi Arabia has indicated it wants more AWACSplanes, the Seattle company must find more AWACS buyers bythe end of the month or it will have to shut down the 707airframe line that serves as the backbone of the program.&quot;We're getting very close to where it doesn't make economicsense to keep it going,&quot; Mr. King says.   Some contractors argue that selling defensive weaponswon't spur the Mideast arms race. &quot;That area is too ancientand too tribal not to give countries the ability to defendthemselves,&quot; asserts Lawrence Skantze, a retired Air Forcegeneral and now a board member at Loral Corp., which makeselectronic gadgetry.   But others say the highly visible success of defensivesystems such as the Patriot speeds up proliferation. As morenations buy the anti-missile system, their enemies will bespurred to seek even more sophisticated offensive weaponsthat can break through the knockdown systems.   Administration officials insist that Mr. Baker isn't goingto the Mideast with any grand arms-control plan in hispocket. But several ideas are floating around Washington andother Western capitals.   There is talk of forming a &quot;suppliers' committee&quot; to cutoff or cut back sales to Mideastern states of nuclear,chemical, biological and conventional weapons and weaponcomponents, especially missiles. Officials also are studyinga plan to begin gradually by introducing &quot;confidence-buildingmeasures&quot; between Israel and its Arab enemies --announcements in advance of military maneuvers, swaps ofmilitary data, or an easing of the Arab boycott of the Jewishstate.   Italy is proposing that the Mideast nations emulate Europeby forming a &quot;conference on security and cooperation&quot; thatmight, over the years, bring about arms control. But Europe,unhampered by any states of war, still took 15 years toproduce last year's conventional arms treaty.   For Mr. Baker, Israel is also a big arms-control problem.The country is not only one of America's strongest allies inthe Mideast but also the best-armed nation in the region, nowthat Iraq's military machine has been dismantled. It is theregion's only nuclear power, with an estimated 100 atomicwarheads. And Israel's Jericho II missile is no clumsy,short-range Scud: It can fly 900 miles and is accurate.Israel also has an awesome conventional arsenal and is saidto possess chemical weapons.   Thus, to win Arab support, any broad U.S. arms-controlplan must somehow scale back Israel's might. Jerusalem hasrecently hinted that it would favor regional arms control,State Department officials say. But, if controls cut toodeeply, tiny Israel, surround by 21 Arab lands, isn't likelyto want to go along -- and neither are Israel's vocal friendsin Congress.   ---   Eduardo Lachica contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>