<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900913-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>900913-0008.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>09/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   SIX NATIONS SIGNED a treaty restoring full sovereignty toa united Germany.   The treaty, signed in Moscow by the two Germanys and thefour World War II victors, endorses the unified Germanyscheduled to come into being Oct. 3. The new Germany canremain in NATO, but no non-German NATO forces will bepermanently stationed on the territory of the former EastGerman state. In return, the treaty declares that the unitedGermany &quot;has no territorial claims whatsoever against otherstates.&quot; As part of a side accord, Bonn agreed to providebillions of dollars in aid to Moscow and help build housingin the U.S.S.R. for the nearly 400,000 Soviet troops thatwill leave German territory.</LP><TEXT>   Under the treaty, Germany will reduce its armed forces to370,000 troops, and pledges not to acquire nuclear, chemicalor biological weapons. Germany also will sign a treaty withPoland guaranteeing their current border.   ---   IRAN CALLED FOR a holy war against American forces in thePersian Gulf.   The speech by Iranian spiritual leader Khamenei came amidreports Tehran had agreed to help break a U.N. embargo bygiving Baghdad food and medicine in return for Iraqi oil. InWashington, Bush prepared a videotaped message to Iraq'scitizens in which he said they should blame their owngovernment for the hardships that have resulted from thetrade embargo.   The State Department urged U.S. women and children inKuwait to contact the embassy immediately to arrange theirdeparture, saying &quot;we cannot guarantee&quot; how much longerevacuation flights can continue.   ---   The House voted to require heftier military spending byU.S. allies in Europe and the Pacific as part of post-ColdWar defense arrangements. The provisions, approved duringdebate on a $283 billion defense authorization bill forfiscal 1991, include a requirement that Tokyo pay the fullcost of U.S. forces in Japan.   Gorbachev said a plan for converting the Soviet Union to amarket economy has been submitted to the national Parliamentand those of the 15 republics. The president, saying theentire nation should debate the issue, confirmed that theplan he submitted to legislators was based on a radicalproposal submitted by economist Shatalin.   ---   A state judge in New York signed an order temporarilybarring St. Martin's Press from continuing to sell a bookabout the Israeli intelligence service, known as the Mossad.Lawyers for the Israeli government argued that publication ofthe book would endanger lives and disclose confidentialinformation.   ---   The Senate adopted a mandatory inspection plan for thenation's $30 billion seafood industry. The landmarkfood-safety measure was approved after lawmakers rejected arival inspection plan favored by the Bush administration.   ---   South Africa appealed to the U.N. for help in ending awave of black violence in Johannesburg's townships that haskilled 700 people in a month. Pretoria called forinternational pressure to arrange a meeting between two blackrivals, Mandela of the African National Congress andButhelezi, leader of the Zulu-based Inkatha movement.   ---   A research team reported that different cases ofAlzheimer's disease can spring from different causes, showingthat it is a group of closely associated disorders ratherthan a single disease. An estimated four million Americanssuffer from Alzheimer's disease, which results in theprogressive loss of mental powers.   ---   Nigeria's President Babangida said it would be prematurefor a five-nation, 4,000-member West African peacekeepingforce to pull out of Liberia after the reported slayingSunday of President Doe. The Nigerian leader also appealed toDoe loyalists and insurgents to cease fighting.   ---   An improperly installed seal was cited by NASA as thecause of hydrogen leaks that halted last week's launch of thespace shuttle Columbia, and the damaged seal has beenreplaced, officials said. The space agency announced it wouldmake a fourth attempt to launch the craft next Tuesday.   ---   Scientists identified an enzyme linked to the most seriousform of diabetes, a discovery that may help in finding peoplewho are at risk for the disease and developing therapies thatwill prevent it. The study dealt with insulin-dependentdiabetes, which affects about one million Americans.   ---   The Philippines halted military actions against Communistrebels in Manila and three provinces but demanded a show ofsincerity from insurgents before the cease-fire is expanded.There was no immediate reply from the guerrillas to theorder, seen as a way for officials to focus on thereconstruction of towns devastated by a July quake.   ---   An experimental plan was approved to permit televisioncameras to record and broadcast civil trials in severalfederal courtrooms. The three-year plan was cleared by thepolicy-making arm of the federal courts.   ---   Government investigators accused the Education Departmentof significant shortcomings in its management of theguaranteed student-loan program, which is plagued by defaultsof more than $2 billion annually.   ---   An eight-member crew was chosen to spend two years insidea 2 1/4-acre sealed dome in Arizona that is intended to be amicrocosm of Earth. Known as Biosphere II, the privatelyfunded, $30 million research project is envisioned as alaboratory for studying environmental problems.</TEXT></DOC>