<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910114-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>910114-0122.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Win the War, but Win the Peace Too   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>01/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   As the Middle East teeters on the edge of another war, mythoughts go back to another time of tension in that troubledand troublesome part of the world.   I was in Israel on a journalistic mission in early June,1967, just before the outbreak of what would be known as theSix-Day War. Although war clouds were gathering -- as theyare now -- there was no certainty war would come. That theoutcome would be a decisive Israeli victory in only six dayswas beyond belief.</LP><TEXT>   In those tense days, a group of western reporters wastaken by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) to a place nearIsrael's southern border to watch a military trainingexercise. It was a lackluster performance and I latersuspected that the Israelis put their rawest recruits ondisplay as part of efforts to persuade the world, and theArabs especially, that they were a weak country. Indeed, someinfluential military analysts were convinced of that and itmay well have contributed to Arab overconfidence.   During this low-key event, some of us chatted with a youngIDF lieutenant, who looked like what he was, a clean-cutcollege kid who had only recently climbed into his reservistuniform. He was not enthusiastic about fighting. &quot;Wars neversettle anything,&quot; he said with some vehemence.   War came anyway. Gamal Abdul Nasser, the Arab world'sstrongman of that day, moved large numbers of tanks upthrough the Sinai desert and told the U.N. &quot;peacekeeping&quot;force near the Israeli border to get lost, which it quicklydid. He made a military alliance with Jordan's King Hussein.Syria, Iraq and Kuwait mobilized. Nasser blockaded the Straitof Tiran, denying Israel access to its southern port ofEilat, and called up 100,000 reserves.   Israel, of course, launched its famous early morningpre-emptive air strike on Egypt, destroying most of Nasser'sair force on the ground and gaining mastery of the air.Israeli tanks swept into the Sinai, and with the benefit ofclose air support, routed the Egyptian forces. Syria andJordan were dealt with next, giving Israel command of theGolan Heights, from which the Syrians had periodicallyshelled Israeli kibbutzim, and possession of the land west ofthe Jordan river that Jordan had previously occupied. Israelachieved all of its military objectives in six days. Fewvictories in history have been more complete.   Whether a war with Saddam Hussein will be a short or longone will be decided similarly. Allied planes and missileswill be employed, as the Israeli air force was in 1967, totry to knock out the enemy air force and antiaircraftbatteries. If this can be done, it will be decisive, and acostly full-scale ground war will be avoided. Saddam's tanksand their supply lines will have no defence againstsystematic destruction inflicted from the air.   This will be more difficult today than it was for theIsraelis in 1967. The Israeli attack caught the Egyptian airforce totally by surprise, something that cannot happen withIraq. The Iraqi tank deployments near the Saudi border arecovered by large numbers of surface-to-air missiles (SAMs),which will have to be destroyed along with the Iraqi airforce. Complicated games with electronics and electroniccountermeasures will come into play, testing whether U.S.technological superiority really exists to the extentassumed.   Aside from the military issues, there is another questionthat can be illuminated by the lessons of the Six-Day War. Ithas to do with whether the Middle East will become a more, orless, peaceful place after a military action on the scale nowthreatened. Recalling that young Israeli lieutenant, will awar settle anything?   The Six-Day War settled one thing with certainty. Itinsured Israel's continued existence. I still remember thesight of two young Israeli soldiers, one male and the otherfemale, roaring into Tel Aviv on a motor scooter from thedesert, joyously waving a captured Egyptian battle flag. Forthem, it was a great victory.   But only six years later, in the Yom Kippur War of 1973,the whole process was repeated. This time it was theEgyptians under Anwar Sadat who had the advantage ofsurprise, pushing across the Suez Canal in force on Oct. 6.By then the Egyptians had Russian SAMs to ward off Israeliplanes, and Egyptian generals handled their tank armies withproficiency. Had it not been for a daring tank maneuver ledby Israeli General Ariel Sharon, crossing the Suez Canal toget behind the Egyptian SAM batteries, the Egyptians mighthave won.   That second war settled something further. The Egyptians,having given a good account of themselves, were ready to talkpeace and the ultimate result was the Camp David peaceaccord. The U.S. sponsored the peace at some considerabletaxpayer expense in the form of financial aid to both sides.But Camp David, which President Carter counted as the majorachievement of his presidency, left other matters stillunsettled, as they remain to this day. The insistence bySaddam Hussein on a broad Middle East &quot;peace conference&quot;focuses on Israel's continued occupation of the West Bank.The Palestine Liberation Organization, claiming to representPalestinians displaced by Arab-Israeli wars since 1948, hasaligned itself with Saddam, helping him try to shift worldattention from his rape of Kuwait -- which also displaced alot of former Palestinians -- to the longstanding Arabobjective of mastering Israel.   So if yet another war comes to the Middle East, what is itlikely to settle? One kind of answer is provided by amemorable line of foreign affairs veteran George Kennan, whoonce commented that there are no &quot;final solutions&quot; indiplomacy. War, the ultimate coercive weapon of diplomacy,never quite settles all scores.   But it does settle some. Israel fought for its life in1967 and won. Egypt decided after a second try in 1973 thatit wanted peace. Japan and Germany turned to democracy afterutter defeat in World War II and have benefitted greatly fromthat change.   Yet some wars settle very little. Korea remains divided.Vietnam is a harsh and impoverished Communist police state.Lebanon, where Ariel Sharon's attempt at pacification andexpulsion of the PLO in 1982 was ultimately defeated by worldopinion, was until recently a charnel house.   The question that will face the U.S. and its allies ifthey go to war over Kuwait will be a question of objectives.Expulsion of Iraq from Kuwait is the objective set out inU.N. Resolution 678. But a lasting solution will requirepacification of Iraq. It will demand a permanent westernmilitary presence in the region to keep the peace.   Which brings me back to that young IDF lieutenant. He waskilled on the first day of the Six-Day War, hit by shrapnelwhile directing the fire of his rifle squad from an exposedposition in a half-track. Perhaps a premonition of his owndeath motivated his anti-war remarks. He was both right andwrong about wars settling things. A lot depends on the skilland determination of the peace makers.</TEXT></DOC>