<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910916-0119</DOCNO><DOCID>910916-0119.</DOCID><HL>   Save the CIA, Confirm Robert Gates   ----   By R. James Woolsey</HL><DATE>09/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>IRAN (IR)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The hearings that begin today on the nomination of RobertGates to serve as director of central intelligence coincidewith a period of flux in international affairs and hence inthe requirements for intelligence.   The Soviet Union is dissolving, to be replaced by anentity whose legal structure is uncertain but whose level ofarmaments is still staggering. The proliferation of chemical,bacteriological and nuclear weapons -- and ballistic missilesto carry them -- continues apace. A future almost certainlylooms containing modern-day Barbary Pirates armed withweapons of mass destruction. The economic challenges fromGermany, Japan and others create a need for usable economicintelligence among American companies.</LP><TEXT>   In this period of change for the intelligence communitythere seem to be two types of reaction to revolutionarydevelopments. Both of them are wrong. One (&quot;don't just dosomething, stand there&quot;) has its principal locus in theintelligence bureaucracy, as heads of offices and sponsors ofcurrent programs scurry to protect staffs and funding. Theother (&quot;don't just stand there, do something&quot;) finds its homeprincipally on Capitol Hill and among pundits, where there isno penalty for proposing arbitrary changes -- e.g., abolishthe Central Intelligence Agency, replace the director ofcentral intelligence with an intelligence czar in the WhiteHouse, cut the intelligence budget.   Radical reorganization and funding changes may be calledfor, but first there should be a reasoning process relatingneeds to resources and structure. Closing down the CIA andstarting over because the CIA was born during the Cold War isjust as reasonable as it would have been to close down theU.S. Navy at the end of the 18th century because it wasspawned by the American Revolution.   What is needed, first, is a careful assessment by theexecutive branch and Congress together of what the country'snew intelligence needs are, and how they can best be met.Everything should be on the table. Some high-technologycollection systems may now be wrongly focused; but many mayhave an important new role in the search for proliferatingweapons of mass destruction. Some redundant analytical staffsmay need paring, but other redundancies have real utility.   For example, by all accounts the officials who wereresponsible for warning of military movements in general lastsummer were far more acutely attuned to the threat from Iraqthan those who were responsible for the Mideast region:Having two views of the same problem from differentperspectives can be invaluable.   All such readjustments require careful judgment and asystematic matching of new needs to existing intelligenceassets before paring down can begin and before reorganizationcan make sense.   Reorienting intelligence assets to deal with these newneeds is a matter of some urgency. Those who are busilyproliferating weapons and the foreign competitors who areplaying hardball with American companies won't wait while theU.S. tangles itself up in lengthy disputes between Congressand the Executive about the nature and scope of intelligencereform. The intelligence community needs to be able tofunction while it reorients itself.   At a time when substantial changes will have to be made inthe intelligence community's mission and structure, in theface of tight budgets, the only kind of leadership that makessense is the tough and experienced variety -- a director ofcentral intelligence who both has enough backbone to makehard decisions about pruning and refocusing big staffs andexpensive programs and knows what needs to be done and how toget it done.   Robert Gates holds long suits in toughness, ability andexperience. He should of course be questioned closely andthoroughly in the hearings about his plans for theintelligence community and his background as an intelligenceofficial -- e.g., how he has dealt in the past with suchproblems as attempts to politicize intelligence. But Mr.Gates's professional experience -- years as an intelligenceanalyst and manager -- make him almost uniquely suited torestructure the community and its programs effectively. Histhree years as deputy national security adviser -- i.e., as amajor consumer of intelligence and policy maker -- give himan invaluable perspective on what users of intelligence need.   Mr. Gates will face the important threshold question ofwhether he misled Congress in 1986 about having no knowledgeof the diversion of Iranian arms sale funds to the Contras.Senators will and should question Mr. Gates and otherwitnesses closely on this point, but thereafter they shouldmove on to decide whether they believe Mr. Gates. Eitherthere will be evidence to contradict him or there won't be;if there is, each senator should be able to decide if thatevidence is more credible than Mr. Gates's word.   In the absence of contrary evidence, however, there is noreason to assume that even if William Casey and one or moresubordinate intelligence officials knew of the diversion atthe time, Mr. Gates, as Mr. Casey's deputy, therefore musthave known as well. Some reporters and commentators haveassumed this, doubtless captivated by their one &quot;visual&quot; onthis story: a CIA organization chart.   In the first place, the best witness on whether Mr. Caseyroutinely shared all matters with his deputy will be anotherwho served as Mr. Casey's deputy, retired Adm. Bobby Inman.Adm. Inman, it should be noted, is widely and accuratelyregarded as a man of integrity, and he is a supporter of Mr.Gates's nomination. Moreover, for a cabinet member or head ofa government office to have his deputy ignore some issues andconcentrate on others is not a Casey-esque idiosyncracy. Itis more the rule than the exception.   The degree of congruence between the responsibilities ofthe head of a major agency and his deputy is a question ofthe way busy people allocate their time, given theirbackgrounds and those of their subordinates. Some deputiesare full alter egos. Many others are not.   To take only one current example, James Baker and RichardCheney each has a very able deputy who works on a host ofimportant issues, but neither of the secretaries' deputies isnormally involved with arms control. In this area, Mr. Bakerdeals directly with Undersecretary Reginald Bartholomew (notthrough his deputy, Lawrence Eagleburger), and Mr. Cheneyworks directly with Senior Defense Department officials PaulWolfowitz and Steve Hadley (not through his deputy, DonaldAtwood). If an important irregularity related to arms controlarose today, would Mr. Eagleburger or Mr. Atwood know aboutit soon? Quite possibly not -- because they are dealing withprocurement, budget, personnel, the Mideast, the Balkans,etc., instead.   Once each senator hears the available evidence and makeshis decision about Mr. Gates's credibility on the diversionissue, then -- based on Mr. Gates's other testimony about hisbackground and plans -- the Senate should vote. Theintelligence community needs strong leadership soon. TheSenate owes the country a prompt decision on this importantmatter -- not rumination.   ---   Mr. Woolsey, former U.S. negotiator for the ConventionalArmed Forces in Europe Treaty (CFE), practices law inWashington.</TEXT></DOC>