<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900928-0096</DOCNO><DOCID>900928-0096.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   USX Fined $4.1 Million in Influence Case   ----   By Alecia Swasy and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   LABOR X TAXES USBK WNEWS</CO><IN>STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES (SCR)OIL, SECONDARY (OIS)PETROLEUM (PET)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)STEEL MANUFACTURERS (STL)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   A federal judge in Birmingham, Ala., fined USX Corp. $4.1million for conspiring to influence unfairly a concessionarylabor contract in 1983.   The fine was the maximum penalty USX could have receivedafter its conviction in July on 14 criminal counts inconnection with its talks with the United Steelworkers unionto reopen its idled Fairfield works near Birmingham.</LP><TEXT>   The government said USX influenced two union officials byarranging for their pensions to be enriched beyond what theywould have received as regular company employees.   The case stemmed from 1983 labor negotiations when USX,then U.S. Steel Corp., sought substantial concessions fromsteelworkers to reopen the idled Fairfield works. A number ofworkers allege that they lost income because of the pact.   The convictions have been seen as a strain on tensenegotiations between the union and USX, the nation's largeststeelmaker. They also could hurt the union's credibilityamong some rank and file members.   USX was also ordered to pay restitution of $289,995 to twopension funds that prosecutors claimed were depleted becauseof the pension increases.   The two union officials, E.B. Rich, 60, and ThermonPhillips, 62, who were also convicted in July, weresentenced, but remain free on bond pending their appeals. Mr.Rich received three years in jail plus three years probationand a $6,000 fine. Mr. Phillips received 30 months in jailplus two years probation and a $6,000 fine.   A USX spokesman said the company plans to appeal. USX hassaid there was &quot;clear error in the conduct of the trial whichwill lead to a reversal of the verdicts.&quot;   Steelworkers president Lynn R. Williams said &quot;we believethe conviction will be reversed.&quot; The union has said thepractice of providing such pensions for union representativesis widespread in U.S. industry. A Department of Labor surveyhas found that 62% of U.S. manufacturers provide suchbenefits to labor representatives even though they areemployed by unions.   The union said Mr. Phillips's post as director ofSteelworkers' District 36 will be temporarily filled byRichard H. Davis, an administrative assistant at theinternational union, pending Mr. Phillips's appeal. Mr. Rich,a subdistrict director in Alabama, is retiring from his post.No successor was named.   ---   JURORS CHOSEN in Mapplethorpe obscenity case.   Prosecutors and defense attorneys in the obscenity andchild nudity case against Cincinnati's Contemporary ArtsCenter and its director settled on a jury of four men andfour women, ending four days of jury selection.   The case is the first ever in the U.S. in which a museumhas been charged with obscenity. The charges center on sevenphotographs in an exhibit of 175 works by the late RobertMapplethorpe.   None of the eight jurors or the two alternate jurorsselected had heard of the artist before April or seen hisretrospective exhibit. Only two, a sales associate at asporting goods outlet and an export coordinator for Procter andamp;Gamble, live in the city. The rest, including a warehousemanager, a data processor, an electrical engineer, asecretary, hospital quality control specialist and a systemstechnician for Cincinnnati Bell Telephone Co. live in theconservative suburbs. At least four have been active churchmembers.   Hamilton County Municipal Judge David H. Albanese hasasked reporters covering the trial not to publish the namesof the jurors because of possible harassment. Defense lawyersdeclined to comment on the jury pool.   Jury selection is considered by many trial lawyers to bethe most important part of a trial, but the makeup of thejury will have added significance in this case. The lawregarding obscenity hinges on whether the material inquestion falls within average and acceptable communitystandards or whether it appeals purely to prurient interestand has no redeeming literary or artistic merit. Jurors inthis case will act as the conscience of their community andpass judgment on what their community's standards should be.   Throughout the jury selection, Hamilton County's chiefprosecutor, Frank Prouty, systematically weeded out potentialjurors who indicated an interest in art or in visiting artgalleries and museums.   None of the jurors has ever been to the Center forContemporary Arts, and one hasn't been to an art gallery ormuseum since grade school.   Opening arguments in the case are set to begin thismorning.   The photos in question -- five depicting homoerotic andsadomasochistic images and two in which children posed withtheir genitals exposed -- caused a furor here when the showopened in April. The center and its director, Dennis Barrie,are each charged with one misdemeanor count of pandering andone misdemeanor count of using a minor in material withnudity.   ---   FORMER Sandamp;L EXECUTIVE pleads guilty to federal bank fraudand tax evasion.   Donald Moskowitz, former president, chief executiveofficer and chairman of United Savings Bank in Paterson,N.J., admitted in federal court in Newark, N.J., that he usedbank funds to pay for personal expenses, took kickbacks fromloan customers and bank suppliers and evaded more than$40,000 in personal income taxes. Judge Alfred M. Wolinaccepted his plea.   Mr. Moskowitz, who faces a maximum of 30 years in prison,restitution and $1,350,000 in fines, misappropriated $325,000in bank funds for personal use. He also estimated that thefraud cost the bank between $2 million to $2.5 million.   According to Stuart Rabner, an assistant U.S. attorney,United Savings Bank is one of the nation's top 100fraud-ridden thrifts. The Resolution Trust Corporation tookover the bank in May.   &quot;Obviously, his misappropriation of bank funds . . .jeopardized the bank's funds,&quot; Mr. Rabner said. Mr.Moskowitz's attorney, Edward Fitzpatrick, could not bereached for comment.   ---   JUDGE REFUSES to limit SEC's questioning of German broker.   The broker, Hans-Jurgen Klisch, is a defendant in theSecurities and Exchange Commission's civil suit alleginginsider-trading in connection with GTE Corp.'s merger withContel Corp. The $6.2 billion merger was announced July 12.Mr. Klisch and others are charged with trading Contelsecurities based on inside information about the merger.   Mr. Klisch, a broker for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. inDusseldorf, West Germany, had asked federal Judge CharlesHaight in Manhattan to restrict the scope of the SEC'squestioning. Mr. Klisch said he feared the SEC would ask himabout his brokerage clients, which he said could lead toviolations of German law on disclosing information about bankcustomers.   Judge Haight, however, ruled that because Mr. Klisch wouldface civil, rather than criminal, penalties for suchdisclosures, the SEC couldn't be restricted.   The deposition of Mr. Klisch was scheduled for today inDusseldorf.   ---   PRO BONO: Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom appointed apartner to oversee public interest work. Edwin E. McAmis, alitigation partner with 31 years of trial experience, willsupervise the New York firm's pro bono civil litigation fulltime. Mr. McAmis, who has specialized in corporate andcommercial disputes, said yesterday that pro bono litigation&quot;helps the firm meet its responsibilities to the communityand helps younger lawyers improve their skills as advocates.&quot;   ---   Arthur S. Hayes and Wade Lambert contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>