<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900417-0072</DOCNO><DOCID>900417-0072.</DOCID><HL>   What an Oil Spill Is Worth   ----   By George J. Stigler</HL><DATE>04/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C12</SO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   If a supertanker moved as slowly as the litigation thatfollows after a large oil spill, very little oil would bespilled in the world. The Amoco Cadiz spill on the Brittanycoast occurred during a violent storm in mid-March of 1978.The trial on damages began in 1986, the first court decisioncame 10 years after the spill in 1988, and a modifieddecision is now on appeal. Of course if tankers moved thisslowly, the cost of oil would triple.   The first lesson of any catastrophe such as a major oilspill is that one is never fully prepared for it. Earlyattempts to cope with it will be characterized by confusion,conflicts over authority, and outright blunders. That wastrue of the Cadiz and the Exxon Valdez and will be at leastpartially true in the next great spill.</LP><TEXT>   I am reminded of an odd letter I once received from thelate Tjalling Koopmans, a great Yale economist, in which heasked me if I believed that we should use the price system toevacuate Manhattan if it were bombed. What he was asking waswhether the transport system afforded by the normal economy-- buses, taxis, and so on -- would be equipped to handlesuch catastrophe. I replied that any method of evacuationwould be hopelessly inefficient during the first bombing. Asa true Chicago economist, I added that the price system woulddo a fine job of evacuation if the bombings became routine.   The Cadiz had the largest vessel spill in history: 11million gallons of oil were released when the ship was blownup by the French navy on the rocks of Brittany. That is sixtimes the amount of oil spilled by the Valdez in PrinceWilliam Sound. The Cadiz spill, to which I will limit myself,teaches some important economic lessons. (I was an economicwitness for Amoco in the Cadiz trial in Chicago, and am aconsultant to Exxon on the Valdez spill.)   The variety and magnitude of the claims that arise from aspill are astounding -- it was almost an oversight, I felt,that the repainting of the Eiffel Tower was not included inthe French claims. But this cannot be news to the mostlitigious nation on earth.   To measure damages with tolerable accuracy we need muchinformation, and it is seldom available. To measure the lossof tourism in Brittany in 1978 the French experts used theamount of flour delivered to the affected areas -- exactlythe way population was estimated in England in 1780] Theearly English experts, each using a different commodity toestimate population, could not agree on whether thepopulation was rising or falling. Similarly, depending uponwhether one treated flour consumption in April and May of1978 as normal or abnormal, the decline in tourism was 2.4million -- or 12.5 million -- nights worth of tourist stayslost.   In fact, the amount of information needed in a major spillis truly stupendous. Judge Frank McGarr's decision hasthousands of sentences with about the amount of hardinformation present in this instance for a single commune:   &quot;Henvic's miscellaneous claim for the purchase of clothingand cleanup products is contradicted by the commune's earlierstatements that they did not incur such expenses. It seemslogical to the court, however, that the cleanup actuallywould have required some such expenditures.&quot;   The judge awarded 1,000 French francs for this purpose. Ofthe commune's total request for 475,161 francs, our Solomonawarded 12,188 francs or 2.5% of the overweight baby, toHenvic.   Even when the damages are more easily measured, they raisequestions. A hotel, for example, has measured decline inpatronage (putting aside possible effects of bad weather).One can calculate lost revenues, deduct any savings in costswith fewer tourists, and thus measure the loss to the hotel.But notice: Other tourist areas in France will gain much ofthe lost business. The offsetting gain is not recognized inthe courtroom.   In the Cadiz cleanup, the military was used extensively.The extra cost of moving troops to Brittany was clearly aproper charge against Amoco. Should we add their food and notjust the meager pay of French conscripts but also what theycould have earned as civilians? That was what the Frenchrequested. I argued that these costs should be excluded: Itis a customary duty of the armed services to assist innational catastrophes. Judge Frank McGarr disagreed andadmitted part of the French claim. I persist in my beliefthat military forces have important civilian duties.   Another interesting question arose out of the French claimfor the value of services of many French college students whovolunteered their time in the cleanup during an academicvacation. There was no intention of paying them -- theirnames were unknown -- but it was argued that theircontribution was to France, not to Amoco. Putting aside thedispute over whether the students were really helpful, Iargued that no payment was needed to make France whole. Thatseems to me a good legal argument. One could raise a questionas to whether compensation for the students would havesignificantly increased the deterrence to future accidents,but the costs of a spill to the shipper are alreadystupendous.   A more elusive claim can arise for the loss of pleasure totourists and residents from the closing and damaging of thebeaches. Economists call &quot;consumer surplus&quot; the amount youwould be willing to pay for something minus the amount youactually paid. If you would be willing to spend a total of$2,000 for a week at a resort and actually paid $1,200, youwould be obtaining $800 of consumer surplus.   The French made large claims on behalf of the communes forlost consumer surplus in 1978 for both residents and tourists(even those from Belgium and Germany). Judge McGarr ruledthat the communes' claims were not sustainable under Frenchlaw. Such claims by tourists and residents will most probablyplay a large role in spills under American law.   Lost consumer surplus is called a &quot;use&quot; value because itrefers to some desired services actually lost which wouldhave been received if there had been no accident. Use-valuecan be measured with some accuracy. The same cannot be saidof a new category of &quot;non-use&quot; values that has been emergingin the economic literature on national resources.   An example: I tell you that the Taj Mahal will sooncollapse unless $10 million is spent upon its repair -- andthis is verified by a bishop of your own choice. Thesequestions arise: How much would you contribute to its repairif you were certain you would never visit it? That is called&quot;existence value.&quot; How much would you contribute if you mightvisit it someday? That is called &quot;option value.&quot; Finally, howmuch would you contribute for it to be preserved for futuregenerations? That is called &quot;bequest value.&quot;   How can one possibly measure a thing so subjective as &quot;usevalue,&quot; let alone &quot;non-use value&quot;? There are in fact clever,persuasive ways of dealing with use value. Suppose I findthat 2% of the people in town A go annually to a resort,whereas 5% of those in town B (closer to the resort) visitthe resort because travel costs per family are lower by $200than costs from A. That gives me a measure of willingness topay, and hence a measure of use value.   For non-use value I must resort to hypothetical questionssuch as those in my Taj Mahal example. Because the possiblevisitor does not actually pay the value he sets on non-usevalue, it costs him nothing to set a high value on hisestimate. But his liberality is not so cheap for thedefendant.   Large sums will be paid to the lawyers in litigation overa large oil spill, and the economists' services will come forfree. One might liken these beneficiaries of oil spills tothe extra business that goes to the glaziers who get toreplace the many windows broken after a hailstorm. Weeconomists do not believe that either the glaziers or thelawyers and economists are really beneficiaries of suchsurges in demand for their services. The surges (and thesharp declines) in future demand are taken into account inour decisions on which occupations to enter.   In any event, lawyers and economists will be well worththeir pay if they help to reach the correct social policy inoil spills. That policy is to deter spills up to the pointwhere further deterrence would cost more than the furtherreduction in damage. The costs of prevention of spills andpayments for the damage they cause will be paid, not by oilcompanies -- they are merely collection agencies -- but bythe consumers of oil products. We cannot eliminate all spillswithout eliminating oil from our lives. I for one do not wishto walk to work.   ---   Mr. Stigler, director of the Center for the Study of theEconomy and the State at the University of Chicago, won theNobel Prize for Economics in 1982.</TEXT></DOC>