<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920210-0064</DOCNO><DOCID>920210-0064.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Lawyers Say Securities Fraud Case   Connected to Wedtech Is Settled   ----   By Jonathan M. Moses and Junda Woo   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/10/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   BSC LTR MO RN LABOR</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>ACCOUNTING (ACC)AEROSPACE (ARO)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BROADCASTING (BRD)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)</IN><NS>ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING NEWS andamp; ISSUES (ACC)BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)MINNESOTA (MN)</RE><LP>   A $77.5 million settlement has been reached in asecurities fraud case stemming from the Wedtech scandal,lawyers involved in the case said last week.   The settlement with 29 defendants, which must be approvedby a federal judge, is believed to be one of the largest everin a civil securities fraud case. The bulk of the settlementis expected to be paid by the accounting firms KPMG PeatMarwick, as a successor to Main Hurd, and Deloitte andamp; Touche,as a successor to Touche Ross, as well as the investment bankBear, Stearns andamp; Co., a unit of Bear Stearns Cos.</LP><TEXT>   The settlement was reached just before the scheduled trialin federal court in Manhattan of the class action suitbrought by Wedtech Corp. shareholders and bond holders. Theplaintiffs contend that the defendants knew or should haveknown of the fraud and criminal activity that in 1986 broughtdown Wedtech, a Bronx-based defense contractor.   &quot;This is a global settlement,&quot; said Samuel Sporn, aplaintiffs attorney at the New York law firm Shoengold andamp;Sporn. Mr. Sporn said the settlement represents almost halfof the more than $160 million in stocks and bonds thatWedtech sold to the public between 1983 and 1986.   Wedtech, which received preferential government treatmentbecause of its status as a minority-owned firm, had links toprominent local and national public officials, includingformer U.S. Attorney General Edwin Meese. Former New YorkCongressmen Mario Biaggi and Robert Garcia were convicted ofextortion as a result of their dealings with the concern.   Bear Stearns, which underwrote three of Wedtech's fourpublic offerings, will contribute $10 million to thesettlement, people familiar with Bear Stearns said. Most ofBear Stearns's share will be covered by insurance, they said.Bear Stearns had sued its law firm, Shearman andamp; Sterling, inconnection with its advice about the public offerings. Thatdispute also has been resolved and the New York law firm willcontribute to the securities fraud settlement, lawyersfamiliar with the agreement said.   Shearman andamp; Sterling's lawyer, Edward Brodsky, confirmedthat his client's litigation with Bear Stearns had beensettled but wouldn't comment on whether the agreementinvolved money.   A Peat Marwick spokeswoman wouldn't comment on the amountthe firm will pay. A Deloitte andamp; Touche spokesman didn'treturn a phone call seeking comment.   Moseley Securities Corp., the defunct investment bank thatunderwrote some of Wedtech's offerings, will kick in $2.25million, according to lawyers familiar with the settlement.   Individual defendants, who included E. Robert Wallach, aSan Francisco lawyer and informal adviser to Mr. Meese, aresaid not to be contributing substantially to the settlement.Mr. Wallach, whose criminal conviction on Wedtech-relatedcharges has been overturned, said he isn't paying anything.   A separate case brought by the trust liquidating Wedtechagainst the two accounting firms is expected to go to trialtoday in federal court in Manhattan. Brian M. Cogan, thelawyer representing the trust, said that so far, Wedtech debtholders and trade creditors have received one cent for everythree dollars owed.   ---   TOBACCO PLAINTIFF wins right to see industry documents.   Tobacco companies and industry groups were ordered to turnover 11 documents that a federal judge called evidence thatthe industry chose &quot;sales over safety, money over morality&quot;in marketing cigarettes. The judge also will considerallowing the plaintiff in the Newark, N.J., case to seeanother 1,489 memos and transcripts that allegedly showtobacco companies knew smoking was dangerous but kept theinformation from the public.   &quot;These are basically smoking guns,&quot; said Richard A.Daynard, chairman of a tobacco product-liability project atBoston's Northeastern University School of Law. &quot;It willaffect all future cases and help make future cases mucheasier.&quot;   In a scathingly worded opinion, U.S. District Judge J. LeeSarokin overturned a magistrate's decision that almost allthe documents should remain confidential. In finding themagistrate's decision &quot;clearly erroneous,&quot; the judge citedseveral of the papers, including a 1978 memo written at thetobacco industry-funded Center for Tobacco Research that saidthe research group &quot;was set up as an industry `shield' in1954.&quot;   According to the judge's ruling, the documents indicatethat studies showing tobacco to be harmful were swept into aspecial division of the research center where they could beconcealed from plaintiffs because of attorneys' rights tokeep their work-product confidential. The judge will appointa special master to re-examine whether the other documentsshould also be made available to the plaintiff.   Judge Sarokin issued the ruling in a suit filed by thefamily of Peter F. Rossi, who died of lung cancer in 1982. Hesmoked brands made by Liggett Group Inc., a unit of LeBowWeksel and Co.; Philip Morris Cos.; Lorillard Inc., a unit ofLoews Corp.; and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., now part of RJRNabisco Inc. The companies, and the Tobacco Institute, aWashington, D.C., trade association, are defendants in thesuit.   Kansas City attorney William L. Allinder, who representsPhilip Morris and Lorillard, said the companies are &quot;stronglyconsidering&quot; an appeal. &quot;We don't agree with the inferenceshe has drawn, and we don't believe they're substantiated,&quot;Mr. Allinder said.   R.J. Reynolds, in a statement, said it will appeal andthat all the tobacco research group's studies have been madepublic. &quot;We would expect that Judge Sarokin's decision onthis matter would be overturned, as have many of his previousrulings in the long history of these cases,&quot; the statementsaid. A spokesman for Liggett said the company hadn't yetdecided whether to appeal.   Judge Sarokin last sparred with tobacco companies in thecase of Rose Cipollone, a Little Ferry, N.J., woman who diedof lung cancer in 1984. The judge awarded Ms. Cipollone'shusband $400,000, a decision reversed by an appeals court.The case is now before the U.S. Supreme Court, which willdecide whether cigarette-package warning labels protecttobacco companies from liability.   Susan Haines vs. Liggett Group Inc. et al., U.S. DistrictCourt, Newark, N.J., 84678.   ---   FIRST PROSECUTION under California's corporate crime lawresults in plea.   A unit of Cargill Inc. entered the no-contest plea to amisdemeanor charge that it violated the California CorporateCriminal Liability Act. The statute, which critics havedubbed the &quot;be a manager, go to jail&quot; act, imposes severepenalties on companies and managers that don't reportworkplace hazards or dangers in products.   Under the law, the strictest of its kind in the country,executives can be prosecuted as felons and imprisoned for upto three years. Corporations can be fined for as much as $1million for their failure to notify authorities and employeesin writing when they become aware of serious on-site dangers.Previously, California didn't specifically make suchnondisclosure a criminal offense.   The Cargill prosecution was prompted by the death lastyear of a laborer at the giant Minneapolis company's CargillSalt Co. subsidiary in Newark, Calif., then known as LeslieSalt Co. According to Blair Thomas, the Alameda County,Calif., deputy district attorney who brought the case, theworker caught his hand on a machine that prepares huge bagsof salt for stacking and was pulled between two conveyorbelts.   A Cargill Salt spokeswoman said: &quot;We feel very stronglythat we are innocent of the charge.&quot; She said the companydecided against &quot;the emotional strain that a long andprotracted court battle would have placed on our employees.&quot;   Critics of the law's strictest provisions said they fearthe statute will be used indiscriminately, even againstmanagers who made a good-faith decision not to disclosecertain conditions. &quot;Some disclosures could be as misleadingas a nondisclosure, and people could be warned off a productor a procedure that's not really dangerous,&quot; said Gerald W.Palmer, a partner at the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp;Pogue, who has studied the law. But Mr. Thomas said that thelaw punishes managers and companies in only a &quot;particularizedset of circumstances,&quot; requiring a showing that managers knewthere was a serious danger that wouldn't be readily apparentto a potential victim.   Last week, the Los Angeles District Attorney's officeopened an investigation of Dow Corning Inc. and its managersto determine whether the silicone-gel breast implant makerviolated the California Corporate Criminal Liability Act. TheMidland, Mich., company is under scrutiny by the U.S. Foodand Drug Administration for possibly withholding safetyinformation.   ---   MEDIA BLAMED for impression court system is falling apart,survey shows.   The survey, a poll of lawyers, judges, courtadministrators, insurance executives and state legislators,canvassed attitudes about the civil litigation process instate courts. Some of the results from the 803 respondentswere surprising: Only 22% viewed the civil litigation systemnegatively. The majority, 59%, however, gave it lukewarmpraise, saying the system works &quot;somewhat well.&quot;   Why do civil courts seem overwhelmed and on the verge ofbreaking down? The media took the hit from 77% of respondentsfor sensationalizing settlements and jury awards. Therespondents also said the process is too slow (72%); courtsare underfunded (69%) and litigation is becoming too complex(61%).   Sponsored by the Defense Research Institute, the insuranceindustry defense attorney's group in Chicago, the survey wasdescribed as a &quot;representative cross section,&quot; though defenselawyers in the pool outnumbered plaintiffs lawyers bytwo-to-one. Nevertheless, the survey found defense lawyersand plaintiffs lawyers almost equally culpable for increasedlitigation costs.   Respondents blamed both sides equally for abusing thepretrial fact-finding process known as discovery. And astrong majority of those polled favored more activeinvolvement by judges, including more use of disciplinarypenalties against lawyers (62%).   Most surprising was the reaction to the Bushadministration's proposals to overhaul the civil courts. Morethan 80% of the respondents weren't familiar with thedetails.   ---   NOTED: The Bush administration and the Senate JudiciaryCommittee announced an agreement that will restore tocommittee members and certain committee aides limited accessto Federal Bureau of Investigation reports on judicialnominees. The White House had sharply curtailed access to theFBI material in the wake of an alleged leak to journalists ofconfidential information about sexual harassment chargesagainst Clarence Thomas. The harassment charges became publicduring Justice Thomas's stormy confirmation hearings lastfall. A special congressional investigator is examiningallegations of impropriety related to the purported news leakfrom the panel.</TEXT></DOC>