<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900813-0028</DOCNO><DOCID>900813-0028.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Nationwide Plan Set for Asbestos Cases   ----   By Wade Lambert and Paul M. Barrett   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B3</SO><CO>   MVL EPI WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   After 20 years of relentless litigation, federal judgesfrom across the U.S. approved an unusual joint arrangement toresolve the 90,000 asbestos personal-injury cases nowclogging the courts.   Faced with thousands of new cases filed each month --often by victims who will die before their claims are paid --the judges approved an order Friday addressing the urgency ofthe problem and setting up three forums for resolving thecases. The actions announced in the order are intended topressure the defendants either to agree to a nationalsettlement or go to trial in a class-action lawsuit.</LP><TEXT>   For now, however, the judges' action is likely to bringcurrent settlement efforts to a halt as defendants size uptheir new alternatives. Supporters of the judges' plan,though, say that a consolidated, nationwide effort to resolvethe cases will benefit asbestos victims in the long run byensuring that funds are distributed more equitably and byguaranteeing that money is left to pay future claims.   Asbestos, once widely used as insulation, causes cancerand respiratory ailments. Most of the claimants are formershipyard and construction workers who became ill years laterfrom the asbestos dust they inhaled on the job. Thedefendants are former asbestos makers and distributors whoare accused of failing to warn workers of the serious healthrisks.   &quot;The need for a multicourt cooperative effort to disposeof these cases is compelling,&quot; the judges said in the order.&quot;The various case management techniques utilized by thefederal courts over the last 10 years have proved to beineffective. . . . The asbestos litigation has become theclassic example of civil cases that cost too much and taketoo long.&quot;   The order was issued by Judge Thomas Lambros, chief judgeof the Northern federal district of Ohio, and by Judge RobertParker, chief judge of the Eastern federal district of Texas.U.S. Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn, whose criticism ofthe Manville asbestos trust a few weeks ago was the catalystfor the national effort, agreed to the order. Seven otherfederal judges approved the order at a meeting in Washingtonon Friday.   The order includes plans for two possible class-actions,one of which is likely to be kicked off today in JudgeWeinstein's courtroom in Brooklyn. That class action is meantto include the less financially secure former asbestos makersand is expected to eventually involve the Manville trust. Thetrust's resources would be combined with those of otherdefendants.   The Manville trust, instrumental to Manville Corp.'sbankruptcy-court reorganization plan in 1986, was set up topay asbestos personal-injury claims against the company. Theasbestos litigation controversy came to a head after thetrust said it couldn't pay new claimants for more than 20years because it was running out of cash.   The class-action motion before Judge Weinstein was filedby Eagle-Picher Industries Inc., which claims that it andother defendants don't have enough money to continue fightingthe cases. In court filings, the company said it spent $119.7million on the litigation last year and is named in 2,000 newsuits a month.   Under Friday's order, as many as five other defendants canjoin Eagle-Picher in the class action. For the case toproceed, the court will have to determine that the defendantsdon't have enough money to pay current and future claims.   Meanwhile, a national settlement effort for all cases willbe set up by Judge Lambros in Cleveland. The joint orderenvisions a massive settlement. Several judges are expectedto participate by encouraging plaintiffs and defendants tosettle.   In order to give the settlement process clout withdefendants, a wider class action will be heard by JudgeParker in Beaumont, Texas. He will oversee cases againstdefendants who are unwilling to settle.   The judges will hear objections to the proposals at ahearing on Sept. 14 in federal court in Cleveland. In recentweeks, the judges' efforts to come up with a nationalsolution has drawn mixed reviews from plaintiffs anddefendants, and aspects of Friday's order are likely to beappealed. But some attorneys indicated that the judges mayhave found an acceptable middle ground.   Louis S. Robles, an attorney for asbestos victims inMiami, said he still opposes a class action. But consideringthe judges' determination to come up with a nationalapproach, the latest order &quot;was a prudent way to go&quot; becauseit doesn't immediately force the parties into a class actionand it allows current cases to continue, he said.   Attorneys for Eagle-Picher praised the judges' decision.&quot;It is consistent with our goals,&quot; said Arvin Maskin, anattorney for the company. &quot;The corporate defendants remainviable, transaction costs {of resolving the cases} arereduced, and it alleviates a tremendous burden on thecourts.&quot;   ---   FORMER THORNBURGH AIDE indicted on cocaine-relatedcharges.   A former Justice Department official was accused of usingcocaine in the latest of a string of highly visible problemsfor Attorney General Dick Thornburgh.   In a four-count indictment, a grand jury in Harrisburg,Pa., accused Henry Barr of using cocaine over a four-yearperiod, including the time he served in the JusticeDepartment. In a highly unusual charge, Mr. Barr was alsoaccused of lying to cover up his drug use on an applicationfor a security clearance.   Mr. Barr, a former federal prosecutor who served on Mr.Thornburgh's staff when he was governor of Pennsylvania, quithis Justice Department post in May 1989, citing personalreasons. He had coordinated major criminal investigations forthe attorney general, including those involving drugs. Hislawyer, Charles Scarlata of Pittsburgh, said Mr. Barr wouldplead not guilty.   Mr. Thornburgh, trying to stay clear of the situation, hasrecused himself from the Barr case on the grounds that heknows the defendant personally. &quot;I have no knowledge of theparticular circumstances of this case,&quot; the attorney generalsaid in a prepared statement on Friday.   Mr. Thornburgh has suffered several political defeats,including seeing top appointments rejected by the Senate andpersonal aides implicated as not being fully truthful onlie-detector tests administered during investigations ofJustice Department leaks.   Both Mr. Barr's defense lawyer and Sen. Arlen Specter (R.,Pa.) have called for appointment of a special independentprosecutor in the Barr case to avoid conflicts of interest.Mr. Thornburgh hasn't officially responded but isn't expectedto comply with the requests.   Lawyers familiar with the case said they believe Mr. Barris the highest-ranking U.S. law enforcement official evercharged with a drug offense.   ---   LIABILITY CRISIS seen by lawyers at small firms, surveyfinds.   The majority of lawyers surveyed by Lawyers Alert, aBoston trade publication, feel that the legal system is toocomplex and generates excessive litigation. But they don'tsupport any current reform proposals, the survey found.   Five hundred plaintiff and defense lawyers practicing inlaw firms of nine or fewer attorneys participated in thestudy.   According to the survey, 61% of the lawyers oppose federallegislation to create a uniform national system for productliability cases, 60% oppose limiting personal injury damages,and 69% oppose statutes limiting the liability of doctors,which have been enacted in many states.   The lawyers were split on only one issue: 47% of thelawyers said they favor no changes in medical malpracticelaws, while 41% said damages should be made easier to recoverfrom doctors.   ---   LEGAL SERVICES Corp. chooses former ethics chief as newpresident.   David Martin, director of the Office of Government Ethicsduring the Reagan administration, was chosen to lead thecontroversial poverty-law organization, which is funded bythe federal government.   Chairman George Wittgraf said Mr. Martin &quot;has strongcredentials both as a lawyer and as an administrator&quot; withextensive experience in government.   But Caroline Stewart, spokeswoman for the National LegalAid and Defender Association, an advocacy organization forlegal aid, said: &quot;We really don't know that much about him.He has no discernible legal experience in legal services.&quot;   Mr. Martin assumes the presidency of LSC at a time when itis the focus of considerable controversy. Among the issuescurrently being debated in Congress are whether theorganization should continue to participate in redistrictingsuits and whether a current prohibition against litigatingabortion suits should remain in place.   After leaving the Reagan administration, Mr. Martin wasaffiliated with the Washington office of Porter, Wright,Morris andamp; Arthur, a Columbus, Ohio, law firm. Since last yearhe has had a solo law practice in Washington. He is expectedto assume office in September.   ---   GOING GREEN: Hannoch Weisman, a 150-lawyer firm inRoseland, N.J., is abandoning traditional yellow legal pads.From now on the firm will use white pads. Sanders M.Chattman, chairman of Hannoch's 20-lawyer environmentaldepartment, said that when the law firm started participatingin a recycling program, they learned that the yellow dye inthe pads made the cost of recycling prohibitive. One addedbenefit is that white legal pads cost less.   ---   Amy Dockser Marcus and Timothy Noah contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>