<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910118-0028</DOCNO><DOCID>910118-0028.</DOCID><HL>   Once Combat Ends, Mideast   Faces a New Power Struggle   ----   By Tony Horwitz and Geraldine Brooks   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   AMMAN, Jordan -- When war first began to look inevitable,a group of diplomats based here got together to kick aroundideas about the shape of a post-crisis Middle East. &quot;We tookout the wax crayons and CIA maps and began drawing lineseverywhere,&quot; says one. They dickered over which state mightgrab what morsel of territory, but could only agree on onething: Both Iraq and the region will be radically changed,and not necessarily for the better.   Now, looking beyond the ups and downs of the first twodays of fighting, this prospect becomes more worrisome.America and its allies may ultimately win this war, but canthey win the peace? Even a silencing of Saddam Hussein couldhave its price, leaving some dangerous vacuums in the newMiddle East that followed.</LP><TEXT>   The ideology that has animated the region for decades,pan-Arabism, is shattered, but the frustrations on which ithas fed may burn stronger than ever. Palestinians, the mostvolatile element in the Middle East, seem likely to emergewith an impotent leader, Yasser Arafat, and perhaps the lossof their main Arab patrons, Saddam Hussein and the rich Gulfstates. Yet none of the Palestinians' grievances will havebeen answered. And the destruction of Iraq, should it come tothat, would leave the eastern flank of the Arab world up forgrabs, both territorially and politically.   Such an empty vessel could invite a potent brew made up ofIsraeli anger over Iraqi attacks, Islamic fundamentalism, andthe ambitions of several of Iraq's enemies, such as Syria,Iran and the Kurds. A relatively quick defeat of Iraq wouldinitially bolster the moderate Arab leaders who have sidedwith America. But the Arab masses would be likely to lurch inan even more extremist direction. The Iraqi missile attackson Israel last night hardly seem likely to help calm thesewaters.   If Washington seeks only to restore the status quo beforeAug. 2, it may not recognize &quot;the seething nationalist andreligious passions bubbling below,&quot; says James Bill, anexpert on the Persian Gulf. &quot;These could boil up in America'sface and scar it for a hundred years.&quot;   Indeed, there is little sign that the U.S. is eager tohave a role in shaping a reconstructed Iraq. &quot;The assumptionis that they {the Iraqis} will have a government of theirown,&quot; a State Department spokesman says. He adds that theU.S. is giving no thought to a Marshall Plan-stylereconstruction, because whatever Iraqi government emerges islikely to want to keep its distance from the U.S.   A drawn-out war with civilian carnage would cut thedeepest wounds in Iraq and in the rest of the Arab world. Buta swift victory would have perils of its own. Many Arabs hadgiddily anticipated that Iraq would bruise the U.S. andIsrael and shame America's Arab allies. Instead, they may befacing yet another in a long line of humiliating defeats.   The debris of crushed dreams was obvious after the firstonslaught, as Jordanians huddled around short-wave radios,desperately latching on to wild reports from Baghdad radiothat 14 allied planes had been downed, Saudi Arabia badlydamaged and tank battles begun.   &quot;We want all the American soldiers swimming in theirblood,&quot; declared a fiery-eyed student, gathered with otheryoung men at the Iraqi Embassy to volunteer for combat. Downthe street, a 37-year-old unemployed Jordanian was startingto realize how much Arabs stood to lose with the possibledefeat of Iraq. &quot;If it happens, God forbid, that Saddam loseseverything, nobody will hear or listen to what we say fromnow on,&quot; he lamented. &quot;This is our last chance, at least forour generation.&quot;   This reflex spasm of despair and anger at what SaddamHussein terms &quot;the devil Bush aided by criminal Zionism&quot; maytake months to play out. But later will come thesoul-searching such as followed the Six-Day War in 1967. Asthen, the consequences could be grim. At that time, shame andrage drove Arabs to spurn peace negotiations with Israel, andleft the Jewish state to consolidate its hold on the lands ithad occupied. Defeated militarily, frustrated Arabs unleashedscores of bloody terrorist attacks. And Arab governmentsfell, eventually bringing to power radical strongmen such asSaddam Hussein, Syria's Hafez Assad and Libya's MoammarGadhafi.   Now it is Islamic fundamentalism that stands ready toexploit both the bitterness of ordinary Arabs and thepotential discrediting of their leaders. &quot;The holy war hasbegun&quot; was the message that drifted across Amman yesterdaywith the dawn call to prayer from the minarets of the city'smosques. The government, jittery at the prospect offundamentalist-inspired trouble, quickly pulled the plug onminaret loudspeakers and circled mosques with police.   Surging fundamentalism also is the likeliest source ofunrest in other Arab states, particularly Egypt. And it isHamas, the Islamic extremist movement within theIsraeli-occupied territories, that would be likeliest to fillany vacuum left by Saddam Hussein and Mr. Arafat's embrace ofhim.   Inside Iraq, militant Shiites are among the downtroddenminorities that could take advantage of postwar instability.Iraq's population also includes a fractious mix of non-ArabKurds, Turkomans and Christians. The ruling Sunni minorityhas little ideology save the pervasive personality cult ofSaddam Hussein. If his regime crumbles, the nation is atperil of a possible Lebanon-style unraveling.   Romania may be another model. Just as revolution inBucharest unleashed an ugly struggle for survival by theremnants of the Ceausescu regime, so could Saddam Hussein'scadres fight a rear-guard battle against a population theyhave brutalized. At the same time, as in Romania, few outsidethe ruling clique have been allowed to develop the sort ofskills that would be needed to govern and rebuild thecountry. Baghdad's government, like Bucharest's, might haveto be substantially preserved to keep the country running atall.   With no democratic tradition, says Amatzia Baram, an Iraqexpert at Haifa University, &quot;Iraq will either have areplacement regime that is almost as nasty as Saddam's orthey'll have a new coalition that will be problematic andweak. It's very depressing: There is simply no power centerin Iraq except Saddam.&quot;   Postwar instability also could lead to trouble at Iraq'sborders. The Kurds, about 20% of Iraq's population of 17million, are the only group inside Iraq with bothorganization and a history of effective resistance. But ifthey used chaos in Baghdad to further their dream of anautonomous region in Iraq's oil-rich north, neighboringstates might be tempted to intervene.   Turkey, Iran and Syria all fear that a Kurdish uprising inIraq could spill over to their own Kurdish minorities.Concern over the Kurdish situation also could conceivably bea pretext for land grabs in northern Iraq. Turkey hashistorical claims in the region, but is likely to beconstrained by its quest for integration into the EuropeanCommunity. Iran, with strong ties to Shiites in southernIraq, is another candidate for territorial expansion. Butmost of its border claims with Iraq have recently beensettled in its favor.   When the diplomats in Amman sat down to play theirmap-making games, it was Syria that they saw as likeliest togain. The cash-strapped state may covet the oil fields overthe border in Iraq, and could use the postwar chaos as coverfor extending its hegemony there, as it did in Lebanon latelast year. More likely, Syrian President Assad may make aplay for the mantle of radical Arab leadership.   His two main rivals, Saddam Hussein and Yasser Arafat,seem likely to emerge from the Gulf war as shrunken figures,assuming both survive. Mr. Assad then would be the only majorArab leader left standing who has militant anti-Israel andanti-Western credentials. At the same time, his hand would bestrengthened by money from the Gulf states, a warming of tieswith Egypt and cautious good will from the West.   Although Iraq's attack on Israel raises big uncertainties,in the event of a clear Iraqi defeat Israel would be abeneficiary. If Saddam Hussein should be neutralized, therewould be no real Arab answer to Israel's vast arsenal ofsophisticated weapons. Syria has never achieved its goal ofmilitary parity with Israel, and without Soviet backing it isan even easier threat for Israel to contain.   The bombing of Iraq adds to what has been a disastrousweek for the Palestine Liberation Organization, which saw twoof its leading officials and a bodyguard gunned down inTunisia on Tuesday. Even before this week, the PLO -- if notthe Palestinian cause -- had lost much of its moral backingin the West and its financial support from Gulf oilproducers.   As if to pile on the humiliations of the day, the closureof Amman's airport meant that the bodies of the murdered PLOleaders could not be brought here for burial Thursday, astheir families had requested. But that word didn't getthrough to the Palestinians who gathered in small, sombergroups at the Martyrs' Cemetery in Amman. Omar Rashid, a23-year-old English teacher, had hoped the funeral wouldprovide an outlet for his grief, and his rage. Unlike otheryoung men who simply shook their heads and turned away inpain when asked about the war, Mr. Rashid hadn't come togrips with Iraq's predicament. &quot;We want this war, it is veryexciting,&quot; he says. &quot;Saddam will win for sure.&quot;   The future of a postwar Middle East, and of America'sinterests there, isn't entirely bleak. Egypt's PresidentHosni Mubarak, the closest U.S. ally in the region, hasbought time for his feeble economy, the gratitude of the Gulfstates and opportunities for thousands of Egyptian workers toreplace Palestinians, Yemenis and Sudanese in lucrative jobsin the Gulf. If a bloody ground war is avoided, Mr. Mubarak,like Mr. Assad and Saudi King Fahd, also will have dodged apolitical bullet. High Egyptian casualties, the slaughter ofthousands of Arab civilians in Iraq, and the involvement ofIsrael would have dealt a damaging domestic blow.   Jordan's King Hussein also may manage to snatch a victoryfrom what looked like a possible disaster. With the PLO andSaddam Hussein weakened, and King Hussein's Palestiniansupport stronger than it has ever been, the West may finditself dusting off the king and looking to him once again asa broker in the Arab-Israeli conflict.   Iraq could re-emerge as a regional power, though it islikely to be years before it recovers from war. It is theonly Arab country with vast supplies of both oil and water.Its population, equal to that of the other Gulf statescombined, is well-educated, and there are several millionIraqis living in exile who could return to revitalize theircountry.   America, if it chose, could play an active role by aidingdissident groups centered in London and Damascus that aretalking about a democratic, post-Saddam Iraq. But U.S.officials appear to be ignoring this option. When JalalTalabani, a prominent Kurdish leader, visited Washington inAugust, administration officials declined to meet with him.Separately, the U.S. could salve the wounds opened by war, inIraq and across the Arab world, by picking up the issue ofresolving Palestinian problems with increased vigor.   But postwar progress is probably unthinkable if SaddamHussein survives in power. His 12-year tenure as presidenthas been one of almost continuous warfare -- with Iran, withKurds and now with the U.S.-led alliance. There is nothing tosuggest that President Hussein, even if stripped of his armyand weapons, is capable of ruling his people in peace. Evenas hundreds of warplanes rained down their explosives, Iraqiradio read a message from him to &quot;Bush, enemy of God andcolleague of the devil. . . . Accursed be you and hopelessare your objectives.&quot;   His supporters may also need to let go of a proud beliefin their own might. Last Sunday, as masking tape went up onthe windows of Mohammed Hamzah's newspaper office in Baghdad,the editor lamented Iraq's long history of domination bycolonial powers. &quot;We are tired of foreign interference in ourcountry,&quot; he said. &quot;We have water, we have oil, we haveeverything. Why do we have to be defeated all the time?&quot;   When the smoke and dust finally clear, many Iraqis will beleft with the sole hope that what Saddam Hussein called the&quot;mother of battles&quot; will be his last.</TEXT></DOC>