<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910306-0108</DOCNO><DOCID>910306-0108.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Kelley Drye Lawyer Is Appointed   As Examiner in Interco Bankruptcy   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/06/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   ISS MDEST WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SECURITIES (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BANKS (BNK)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)</IN><GV>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   A New York lawyer was appointed as an examiner in theInterco Inc. bankruptcy case to determine whether the companyhas grounds to sue any of the firms that advised it in itsdefensive restructuring in 1988.   Sandra E. Mayerson, a bankruptcy and creditors-rightsexpert at the New York law firm of Kelley Drye andamp; Warren, willconsider whether Interco's advisers should have known thatthe company wouldn't be able to pay off its debt after ajunk-bond recapitalization aimed at warding off a hostiletakeover by the Rales brothers of Washington, D.C.</LP><TEXT>   Interco, a St. Louis-based furniture and shoe company,sought bankruptcy-court protection in January of this yearafter assets it had sold to pay off the debt failed togenerate as much cash as specified in the recapitalization.   While appointment of an examiner is required in bankruptcycases of this magnitude when requested by any party, theInterco appointment is noteworthy because a team from Ms.Mayerson's law firm also recently served as examiner in asimilar matter involving Revco D.S.   In that case, court-appointed examiner Barry L. Zaretsky,another Kelley Drye lawyer, found in December 1990 that Revcohad legal grounds to sue its advisers and others forparticipating in a leveraged buyout that left the companyinsolvent. Ms. Mayerson, 39 years old, served on the legalteam working with Mr. Zaretsky.   &quot;I indicated to the trustee that we would use the sameteam of lawyers that worked on the Revco case and that wecould tackle these issues quickly,&quot; Ms. Mayerson said. Herreport is due in May.   On the day of its bankruptcy filing, Interco sued itsformer investment banker, Wasserstein Perella andamp; Co., allegingfraudulent misrepresentations in relation to therecapitalization. Wasserstein Perella handled therecapitalization, which required Interco to assume nearly $2billion in additional debt. In the past, Wasserstein Perellahas called the lawsuit &quot;groundless,&quot; but a spokesman saidyesterday that the firm couldn't comment on the appointmentof the examiner because it hadn't seen any court filingannouncing it.   Ms. Mayerson said she would be considering the role of allthe advisers in the deal, including lawyers and accountants.   Like the Revco case, the Interco matter involves the issueof so-called fraudulent conveyance of assets. Under a legaldoctrine that's hundreds of years old, a transaction can beconsidered fraudulent if the effect of the deal was to leavethe company insolvent, unable to pay its debt or withinsufficient capital to conduct its business. Under thedoctrine, anyone benefiting from such a transaction can beheld liable for losses.   Ms. Mayerson's findings are expected to shape any futurelitigation. Under bankruptcy law, Interco may pursue itslawsuit without court permission, but the judge hasdiscretion to block suits by other parties, such ascreditors' or bondholders' committees. The judge is expectedto rely heavily on Ms. Mayerson's report in determiningwhether such suits should be allowed to proceed.   In addition, if the examiner finds there are grounds forlawsuits, Interco and others may be able to use her report asevidence in their cases. Ms. Mayerson said, however, that thelaw on the admissibility of such a report is unclear.   Last spring, Interco and Wasserstein Perella settledvarious class-action suits brought by Interco securitiesholders, agreeing to pay $18.6 million. In joining thesettlement, Wasserstein Perella didn't admit any wrongdoing.The settlement limited shareholders' rights to bring anyfurther litigation. However, it didn't bar the company frombringing actions of its own, according to Ms. Mayerson.   ---   CHESTMAN'S SEC SETTLEMENT stands, despite reversal ofcriminal conviction.   Broker Robert Chestman can't block payments from aSecurities and Exchange Commission settlement fund that wasfinanced with alleged insider-trading profits, a federaljudge ruled. The SEC's civil suit stemmed from the sameallegations in the criminal case.   Mr. Chestman was convicted in March 1989 of insidertrading in Waldbaum Inc. stock just before the company'stakeover in 1986 by Great Atlantic andamp; Pacific Tea Co. Thetrading was based on information that Mr. Chestman receivedfourth-hand, from an in-law of Waldbaum's then-president.While his appeal was pending, Mr. Chestman began serving hisprison sentence and agreed to settle the SEC suit for$235,125, without denying or admitting the allegations.   A three-judge panel of the U.S. Second Circuit Court ofAppeals overturned the conviction last May, finding that a&quot;remote tippee&quot; such as Mr. Chestman couldn't be convicted ofinsider trading. In a rare move, however, the full appealscourt agreed to review the panel's decision, afterlaw-enforcement officials warned that it could jeopardizefuture insider-trading prosecutions.   Mr. Chestman asked U.S. District Judge Robert Ward to barthe SEC from distributing his share of the settlement funduntil after the full appeals court rules. Mr. Chestman'spayment to the SEC accounts for about a third of the totalfund of $743,113, which includes settlement payments from sixother defendants. The fund will be distributed to investorswho were hurt by the trading.   In documents filed with the court, Mr. Chestman said hemay try to rescind the SEC settlement if the full appealscourt rules in his favor in the criminal case. Mr. Chestmanclaims that the reversal of the criminal conviction castsdoubt on the legal basis of the SEC civil case.   But Judge Ward ruled that the SEC settlement clearlystates that it won't be affected by the appeal of thecriminal case. Mr. Chestman claimed that it would be unfairfor him to pay restitution for conduct that later was foundto have been lawful. But Judge Ward said Mr. Chestman&quot;decided to risk such an outcome when he entered into thesettlement agreement.&quot;   ---   CLAIMS AGAINST IRAQ must be filed with the Treasury byMarch 15.   The Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Controlis collecting records of claims by corporations andindividuals, which will be used by the government forplanning purposes. Ultimately, some sort of claims proceduremay be developed to enable claimants whose interests weredamaged by Iraq to be compensated for all or part of theirlosses.   However, R. Richard Newcomb, director of OFAC, said in aletter to interested parties, &quot;We do not know at this timewhether a formal claims program will be established or how itmight be funded or administered.&quot;   Daniel Yorks, a blocked-assets compliance specialist withOFAC, said the filing deadline, originally March 1, wasextended because &quot;we had so many people calling seekingtwo-week extensions.&quot; Additional extensions will beconsidered on a case-by-case basis. Mr. Yorks said OFAChadn't tallied the claims received so far.   But calculating claims may not be easy. Javarde Chaudhri,a partner in the Washington law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp;Pogue, says that for many companies, it is &quot;very hard to comeup with a number at this point with so little informationabout what may have happened to assets on the ground inKuwait. The numbers will keep changing as time goes on.&quot;   ---   FDIC'S PARTIAL REIMBURSEMENT of depositors at failed bankis challenged.   New York state Attorney General Robert Abrams asked afederal appeals court to review the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorp.'s decision not to fully reimburse depositors of thefailed Freedom National Bank.   Mr. Abrams wants the FDIC's insurance to cover anestimated $2.7 million in uninsured deposits held by at least31 nonprofit groups. The groups held accounts that exceededthe FDIC's $100,000-per-depositor insurance limit.   The groups, including churches and charities in Harlem andBrooklyn, the United Negro College Fund and the NationalUrban League, incurred losses when the FDIC liquidatedFreedom National Bank last November.   The Attorney General said the FDIC is incorrectly treatingdeposits of each nonprofit group as those of a singledepositor. Instead, the state wants these accounts to qualifyas charitable trusts that are eligible for full coveragebecause their assets are held in trust for manybeneficiaries.   The FDIC agreed in November to reimburse 50% of the amountof uninsured Freedom deposits that exceeded the $100,000coverage limit. In January, in response to questions raisedby the attorney general, the agency said it would study thelosses of the 31 charities on a case-by-case basis.   A spokesman for the attorney general said to date noadditional reimbursements to nonprofits has been made by theFDIC.   Alan Whitney, a spokesman for the FDIC, said the FDIC hasmade some additional insurance payments, but would notidentify the nonprofit groups that had received the payments.   The collapse of Harlem-based Freedom National, thenation's fourth-largest black-owned bank, has emerged as asymbol of regulatory inequity because it highlights the factthat depositors in small banks often get less protection thanthose in big banks.   ---   SILVERADO BANKING investigation is shifted from Denver toDallas.   The U.S. Justice Department shifted the investigation toDallas prosecutors after U.S. Attorney Michael J. Norton ofDenver was identified as a possible witness in an unspecifiedmatter related to alleged wrongdoing at the defunct SilveradoBanking, Savings andamp; Loan Association of Denver.   The investigation is being watched closely becausePresident Bush's son Neil was on the thrift's board before itfailed.   Mr. Norton, who declined to comment on the case, haspreviously been quoted as saying the matter in which he is apossible witness &quot;relates to political contributions.&quot;   Before his appointment as U.S. Attorney, Mr. Norton ranunsuccessfully for Congress. Several Colorado officials havesought to remove him from the Silverado investigation becauseof questions about contributions to his campaign, accordingto a spokesman for U.S. Rep. Patricia Schroeder, one of thoseofficials.   The investigation of Silverado will be overseen by U.S.Attorney Marvin Collins of Dallas, whose office has beeninvolved in major thrift-fraud investigations since 1984.   &quot;I assume I was chosen for it because of our track recordhere in Dallas,&quot; Mr. Collins said. &quot;I can assure you, Ididn't volunteer for it.&quot;   ---   NOTED: Oliver B. Revell, associate deputy director of theFederal Bureau of Investigation in Washington, will becomespecial agent in charge of the Dallas FBI office in May. Mr.Revell, 52 years old, replaces Bobby R. Gillham, who helpedform the U.S. Justice Department's Dallas Bank Fraud TaskForce. Mr. Gillham, 53, will become special agent in chargeof the FBI office in Baltimore.</TEXT></DOC>