<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910719-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>910719-0107.</DOCID><HL>   The Debt Non-Problem   ----   By John D. Paulus</HL><DATE>07/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FORECASTS andamp; ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GERMANY (GE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   Although the past six U.S. recessions have been followedby a rapid 6% average pace of growth during the first year ofrecovery, an agonizingly slow bounce back from the 1990-91downturn is expected by most economic forecasters. Accordingto the proponents of the slow-recovery thesis, the principalimpediment to a vigorous rebound is the excessive debt burdenthat households and corporations accumulated in the 1980s.Because, they continue, much of this indebtedness was notused to finance hard assets that generate income to coverdebt service, businesses and households have little choicenow but to devote an inordinate share of their resources torepaying these liabilities. Such payments must divert fundsfrom expenditures on business plants and equipment as well asresidential dwellings and other household durable goods.   This reasoning ignores a startling fact: Americans' assetssubstantially outweigh their debts. U.S. nonfinancialcorporations own $3.27 of assets for every dollar of creditmarket debt outstanding. Households own $5.35 of assets foreach dollar of debt indebtedness. Against this background,the preoccupation with debt -- truly one of the smallercomponents of corporate and household balance sheets -- ispuzzling, to say the least, and misleading as well. Indeed,when the balance sheets are examined, the inescapableconclusion is that neither the corporate nor the householdsector is burdened by excessive leverage and that both arepoised to contribute to a fairly vigorous economic recovery.</LP><TEXT>   Corporations generally borrow to acquire tangible orfinancial assets, and the earnings from these investments areused to service the expanded stock of debt. No problem. Butin the 1980s another type of borrowing emerged on a largescale, namely, the financing of corporate takeovers andrestructurings, which sometimes generated little if anyinvestment income to cover expanded debt service. Forexample, in takeovers, where premium prices were usually paidto acquire targets, a portion of the borrowings, in effect,financed an intangible asset -- the &quot;goodwill&quot; of the targetcompany. And in restructurings, debt was typically used topay back equity.   Nevertheless, despite the debt incurred to financetakeovers and restructurings, for every dollar of increasedindebtedness in the 1980s, nonfinancial corporations acquired80 cents of financial assets plus $1.52 of tangible assets.Thus, while debt expanded swiftly, nonfinancial corporationsadded a total of $2.32 in income-earning tangible andfinancial assets for every dollar of increased credit marketdebt in the 1980s. This hardly seems to indicate thatcorporations are drowning in a sea of red ink, or that theylack sufficient resources to service their debt.   When the debt of U.S. corporations is compared with thatof Japanese and German companies, the worrying over corporateleverage in America becomes all the more baffling. As thenearby chart shows, the ratio of the debt of nonfinancialcorporations to GNP is almost twice as high in Germany as inthe U.S. (See accompanying illustration -- WSJ July 19, 1991)Japan's corporate debt ratio increased four times faster thanthat of the U.S. in the 1980s, and currently is more thanthree times higher than America's. German and Japanesecompanies have, of course, maintained these elevated leverageratios for decades without any apparent harm to economicgrowth.   To be sure, many American companies did increase theirleverage in the 1980s, and some have taken on too much debt.But the dire predictions made a year or two ago of massivebankruptcies accompanying the next U.S. recession have beenwrong, and this, too, supports the view that U.S. corporatedebt is not excessive.   Households, of course, borrow for a variety of reasons,ranging from the acquisition of financial and tangible assetsto the financing of vacations and other nondurable goods andservices. In the 1980s, the credit market debt of Americanhouseholds increased by $2.47 trillion. Meanwhile, householdownership of tangible assets -- mainly houses, property,automobiles and furniture -- rose by $3.21 trillion, whileholdings of financial assets -- primarily deposits, creditmarket instruments, and equities -- increased another $7.54trillion. Thus, tangible and financial assets of Americanhouseholds grew $10.75 trillion in the 1980s, or by $4.35 forevery $1 increase in debt.   Nevertheless, some critics of leverage argue that if thevery rich own most of the assets and if the poor owe most ofthe debt, rising household leverage still could hurt totalspending. This would occur if the poor reduced theirexpenditures in order to service higher debt burdens whilethe rich failed to boost spending because they already heldmany assets. The trouble with this argument is that commonsense suggests that most of the debt will be owed by theaffluent, not by the poor -- nobody lends to those withoutassets.   Moreover, reinforcing the view that the well-to-do owemost of the debt is the high correlation during the past 40years between household asset growth in one year and debtexpansion in the next. That implies that holders of wealthtend to react to an increase in the value of their assets byborrowing more. One possible reason for this is that debthelps to liquefy increases in tangible wealth without forcingthe sale of assets. Also, increases in the value of financialassets might initiate additional borrowing simply becausepeople feel more affluent. In any event, much of householddebt appears to be owed by asset holders, and if spending isinfluenced at all by balance sheet considerations, it,therefore, will be affected far less by changes inindebtedness than by variations in net worth.   Thus, it should come as no surprise that neither changesin household leverage nor its absolute level has influencedaggregate U.S. consumer spending at any time in thepost-World War II era. In 23 of the past 39 years, the ratioof household debt to disposable personal income in the U.S.has climbed to record highs. If elevated levels of debt arelikely to constrain household spending, as many contend, onewould expect to find that during these 23 years of heightenedindebtedness (including 1984 to 1990) consumptionexpenditures would lag behind income growth, as compared tothe 16 years when the debt ratio was not at a record high.   However, the relationship between household spending andincome was identical during both periods. During the 23 yearsof record household leverage, personal income expanded at anaverage annual rate of 3.4%, and spending grew onetenth of apercentage point faster, or 3.5%. In the other 16 years,income rose at a 3.1% annual rate, with householdexpenditures advancing, once again, one-tenth of a percentagepoint faster, at a 3.2% pace. Spending, therefore, hasclosely tracked income growth regardless of whether debtlevels were high or low relative to past trends.Consequently, the strength of income growth in the comingrecovery will, almost exclusively, determine the rate atwhich consumption spending advances and contributes toeconomic expansion.   There has been an almost mindless condemnation of theprivate sector's use of debt in the 1980s. The 1990s istherefore supposed to be a decade of deleveraging, of equityissuance and of undoing the evils of the past.   This is an unfortunate misreading of history. Leverageserved a constructive purpose, on balance, in the 1980s.Debt, in comparison to equity financing, supplied a cheapsource of capital to American companies struggling to survivethe competitive challenge from abroad that was unleashedmainly by the overvalued dollar.   When this competitive onslaught intensified in the middle1980s, both bank and securities market debt played a crucialrole in financing the market for corporate control, whichinitiated corporate ownership changes and restructuring on anunprecedented scale. According to several studies, theseactivities generally raised worker productivity, and probablycontributed to the hefty output per manhour gains of 3% to 4%per year that U.S. factories achieved after 1982.   The debt market also allowed households to liquefy aportion of their vast asset holdings, holdings that in 1990exceeded $21 trillion -- $7 trillion in tangible items, and$14 trillion in financial assets. Against these sums,households have borrowed a mere $4 trillion, mostly inmortgages.   The major challenge to economic growth in the 1990scertainly is not excessive private sector debt. The mostformidable challenges facing the U.S. economy now includefinding ways to increase worker productivity in the servicesector (that is, to duplicate in services in the 1990s whatwas achieved in manufacturing in the 1980s); reducing thefederal budget deficit so that the U.S. national saving ratecan be restored to respectability; and restraining inflation,thereby avoiding stop-go monetary policies that destabilizeeconomic growth and employment. Persistent handwringing overa nonproblem -- private sector debt -- only diverts attentionfrom the real challenge to economic growth in the U.S. in the1990s.   ---   Mr. Paulus is the chief economist for Morgan Stanley andamp; Co.in New York.</TEXT></DOC>