<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900615-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>900615-0085.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Safeway's CEO Disputes Portrayal</HL><DATE>06/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   LABOR SWY</CO><IN>FOOD RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS, CONVENIENCE STORES (FDR)</IN><LP>   I don't recall ever having seen a more one-sided story inthe Journal than the Safeway article on page one May 16. Yourthesis in the article that the Safeway LBO is responsible foror the primary cause of a whole host of &quot;human costs&quot; thatotherwise would not have occurred is both distorted andunsound. Safeway is a smaller but better company than it wasin 1986. Its employees have more security as part of agrowing and profitable company. This could not be without theactions that have taken place over the past three years.   A brief look at a summary of supposed consequences of theLBO reveals it to be a ludicrous insult to common sense. Youimply or directly state that the Safeway LBO is responsiblefor the following:</LP><TEXT>   Killing people, heart attacks, suicides and attemptedsuicides, a broken marriage engagement, a college dropout anda nationwide shortage of engineers, car repossessions, agediscrimination, quotas, homelessness, sweatshop conditions, aseven-day-week wage discrimination, cuts in charitablecontributions and mortgage foreclosures.   That's some powerful, heartless financing technique.   The indictment is wrong. Safeway employs more than 100,000men and women. When you employ that many people, there arenaturally going to be events in their lives that are unhappyand tragic, no matter what happens at the company. But toassert or imply that an economic transaction is the primarycause or factor in a tragic event like a heart attack orsuicide is to betray a bias that is so sharp and so deep thatit defies reasonable discussion, not to mention demonstratinga total misunderstanding of the human heart. We discussed allthese matters with you over a period of three months.   Most important, you never confronted the real question:the costs of change vs. the costs of no change. Never oncedid you mention the primary reason for most of the changesthat took place at Safeway: labor costs that were out ofline, the consequences, long and short term, of those costs,and the absolute business necessity in a low-margin, highlycompetitive industry for parity of labor costs. Safeway hadto confront its major business problem -- labor costs thatwere so out of line with its nonunion competition that theycaused a situation where 66% of the company was either makingno money or losing money.   It was this that caused the pressures for and the need forchange at Safeway. And it was this business problem, LBO ornot, that had to be solved. The bleeding had to stop. Themost important effect of the LBO was to highlight this needand provide the urgency and incentive to act quickly.   The consequences of choosing to act are sometimes hard,and sometimes they do not fall equally across the board. Butyour portrait is a reflection of this in a funhouse mirror.In the case of the Safeway corporate staff, that staff had tobe cut to match the smaller size of the company. There was noalternative. Staff cuts have taken place at other majorcompanies, all over America, to reflect their businessrealities. If you write about the consequences of such cuts,why confine yourself to LBOs? Or perhaps only LBO staff cutscause &quot;a heavy human toll.&quot;   Unions faced a hard choice: Either they and their membersaccepted the fact that they would have to adjust their wagedemands to make them more competitive with the labor forcesSafeway and they were competing with, or the management ofSafeway would either quickly sell or close the stores.Regardless of the LBO, that problem had to be faced. It is tothe great credit of the union officials with whom webargained that after the sale of our Dallas division theyrecognized the dilemma forced on us by the Hafts and werewilling to work with us to minimize the impact.   Many companies faced the same problems that Safeway did.It is the history of the grocery business in the '80s thatwage parity was being requested everywhere. Yet Safeway dealtwith its problems not perfectly, but in as humane a manner asit could, and it came through. We believe that if you were toask international union officials, they would confirm thatSafeway worked very hard and in good faith to ensure thatpeople buying our divisions would also hire our employees.The consequences to all of the company's constituents wouldhave been far worse if we had ignored those problems. Thefacts are that the overwhelming majority of our employees areworking at higher wage rates and with more benefits than wasthe case at the time of the buy-out. By focusing solely onselected, individual, anecdotal portraits of the purportedindividual costs of change, you ignored the larger businessand human reality.   The financial success of the company is &quot;kissed off&quot; inone or two paragraphs stating that the company has &quot;raisedproductivity and operating profits.&quot; Among the things thatdid not appear in your lengthy article:   -- Operating profit in 1989 was higher ($462 million) on$14 billion of sales than it used to be in 1986 on $20billion of sales. That is no small achievement.   -- Our 1989 operating profit margin of 3.2% ranked Safewaythird of the top 10 food chains.   -- Our operating cash flow of 5.2% of sales in 1989 rankedus first of the five leading food chains.   -- Our debt has been reduced from $5.7 billion to $3.1billion.   To not include these key aspects of our financialperformance is misleading to say the least -- especially whenyou do include, &quot;The company's net income was only $2.5million last year, down from $31 million the year before.&quot;   The good news for Safeway's customers wasn't mentioned atall. Safeway's prices are more competitive than any time inthe past 10 years. We have more service in our stores (39%more employee hours per store than in 1985). Our service isnot only better, it is friendlier. We remodeled 200 stores inthe past few years to add all the specialty departments ourcustomers want.   A balanced portrait of what happened at Safeway would haveexplained what happened and why.   Finally, I believe your article seeks to establish a newmeasure by which corporate behavior should be evaluated --providing guaranteed lifetime employment. It judges thesuccess of corporate behavior primarily on that criterionregardless of other business or financial consequences. Assuch, I feel it is the most anti-investorbiased articleimaginable. It implicitly tells corporate management andinvestors: Don't do the right thing by taking the painfulmeasures you know are necessary to ensure the health of thebusiness in the future, and forget about shareholder value ifit requires tough action. Don't do it because The Wall StreetJournal will be there to impose its own &quot;reckoning.&quot;   Readers may well ask themselves: Who pays the ultimateprice to be extracted for investing according to the newstandard you are imposing?   Peter A. Magowan   Chief Executive Officer   Safeway Stores Inc.   Oakland, Calif.   ---   Your article contains false assertions and misquotes thatI consider to be most serious.   The writer indicates that my son Peter, chairman ofSafeway, was &quot;pressed&quot; by me in 1986: &quot;Will anyone get hurt?Will anyone lose his job?&quot; in the process of Safeway's LBO.The story stated that I expressed concern that the company'slongstanding reputation as a benevolent employer not bedamaged by the LBO. Both of these statements are untrue.Peter and I had no such conversation, and I highly resenthaving been quoted in this fashion.   In the changing economic climate of the past decade,hostile takeovers have been commonplace. When the Haft familyannounced its intention to buy up Safeway, many very seriousand long-reaching decisions had to be made by management in ashort period of time.   In any takeover situation, it is a given that jobs will belost. Every effort was made to minimize this effect.   In addition, I extremely resent the intrusion of yourreporter into my home. She telephoned me requesting aninterview &quot;about the good old days at Safeway,&quot; and was tolda day or two later by my assistant that as policy I do notmeet with the press. Disregarding this, she showed up at myhome uninvited. As I had no intention of speaking with her,it was necessary to ask her to leave my home. I very muchresent her disrespect for my wishes and privacy, as well asher inaccurate portrayal of a conversation between my son andme.   Peter is a man of high moral character, integrity,sincerity and honesty. He and the management team haveconsistently attempted to preserve as much of the &quot;old&quot;Safeway as possible under very trying and alteredcircumstances.   Doris Merrill Magowan   San Francisco</TEXT></DOC>