<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910423-0162</DOCNO><DOCID>910423-0162.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Limits on Judicial Campaigns Challenged   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Allanna Sullivan   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   CPQ DELL EUROP XON</CO><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><LP>   A judicial candidate in Pennsylvania is challenging astate law that makes trial judgeships elective offices butbars candidates from telling the electorate virtuallyanything about their legal or political views.   The candidate's lawsuit, claiming the prohibitions areunconstitutional, could have widespread ramifications becausemany states have set similar rules for their own judicialelections. Twenty-nine states elect their trial judges, and alarge majority of those ban most forms of issue-orientedpoliticking.</LP><TEXT>   The Pennsylvania case, filed by Chester County judicialcandidate Samuel C. Stretton, challenges the state's code ofjudicial conduct barring him from discussing his views,personally soliciting campaign funds or emphasizing his partyaffiliation. The penalty for violating the rule isdisbarment.   According to the suit, filed by the Philadelphia law firmof Kohn, Savett, Klein andamp; Graf, the restrictions prevent Mr.Stretton from telling voters what he thinks about majorissues relevant to a judge's duties, including his views oncriminal sentencing, the need for judges to continue theirlegal education and the dearth of minorities on juries.   Pennsylvania's law is patterned after a model code ofjudicial conduct drafted by the American Bar Association in1972 and adopted to varying degrees by the states that electtrial judges. The intent is to protect the independence ofthe judicial system by barring judges from making promises tovoters. In addition, the provision reflects the view thatjudges should decide cases neutrally, without using anyparticular ideological criteria. As a result, judicialcampaigns are effectively limited to the candidates' family,education, and legal backgrounds, and in some states theirparty affiliations.   &quot;Judges shouldn't commit themselves ahead of time todecide cases a certain way,&quot; says Cindy Gray, director of theAmerican Judicature Society's Center for Judicial ConductOrganizations, a legal research center in Chicago.   Mr. Stretton's suit contends that the practical result ofsuch an approach is that &quot;voters are exposed to a candidate'sresume, not to his or her background. They are forced tovote, if at all, in the basis of platitudes and blind partyloyalty.&quot;   Courts in only a handful of other states have everconsidered the issue. In August, a federal judge inTallahassee, Fla., temporarily barred enforcement ofFlorida's law, virtually identical to Pennsylvania's, on theground that its prohibitions were too broad. In that case, alawyer running against an incumbent judge wanted to criticizethe incumbent's treatment of lawyers and his &quot;petty andvindictive&quot; sentencing practices. There has been no finalruling on the constitutionality of the Florida rule.   Last month, the Kentucky Supreme Court rejected arecommendation that one of its own newly elected members besuspended without pay for three months because of hiscampaign tactics. Justice Dan Jack Combs had criticized astate gun law, attacked his opponent's ruling in a personalinjury case and challenged the state's prohibition barringhim from raising those issues.   After he won, his fellow justices sided with him, rulingthat the state's code of judicial conduct was too broad andthat the electorate has a right to know about judicialcandidates' knowledge of the law and their personal views andbeliefs.   The American Bar Association also has narrowed itsproposed state prohibitions. Its new model code now allowscandidates to discuss their views in broad terms. It barsthem only from making specific pledges or unfairly attackingtheir opponents. So far, only one state -- Wyoming -- hasadopted the new code.   ---   EXXON AGREES to $15 million settle ment in New York Harboroil spill.   To resolve criminal action, Exxon Corp. agreed to pleadguilty to a violation of the Clean Water Act and to pay out$5 million in connection with those charges. The company paidthe full amount into a type of escrow account, an Exxonspokesman said. Of the total, $200,000 was declared acriminal fine. The remaining $4.8 million will be used tocover restitution to the governments of New York state, NewJersey, New York City and the City of Elizabeth, N.J.   Exxon also resolved pending civil charges by agreeing toprovide $10 million over five years to finance environmentalinitiatives. The first payment of $1.5 million will go totrustees of the four state and local governments involved.The money will be used to purchase additional wetlands in theNew York Harbor area and to set up research projects focusedon the Arthur Kill Waterway, site of the oil spill.   The spill occurred early Jan. 1, 1990, when a rupturedunderwater pipeline connecting Exxon's Bayway Refinery to anearby terminal ruptured and spilled 567,000 gallons ofrefined oil into Arthur Kill. The spill stopped harbortraffic, polluted miles of shoreline and killed hundreds ofbirds in the area.   Settlement of the Bayway spill comes only one week afterExxon agreed to a $1.1 billion settlement arising from thehuge Alaskan spill in 1989. That agreement also puts to restpending civil and criminal actions.   Still outstanding, however, are more than 150 suitsregarding the Alaskan spill by third-party plaintiffs. Anattorney involved in those suits says that there aren't anynegotiations under way between Exxon and any of theseplaintiffs to settle their differences.   ---   DELL MUST REVISE U.K. ads comparing its computers toCompaq's. Dell Computer Corp., an aggressive direct seller ofpersonal computers, has run print advertisements in the U.S.and U.K. for several months comparing the price andperformance of its computers with those of Compaq ComputerCorp.   Compaq, based in Houston, sued Dell for false advertisingin late January in London, figuring the legal process wouldgo faster in the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division,than in a U.S. court.   On Tuesday, a U.K. judge issued a temporary restrainingorder against Dell, forcing it to revise its ads until a fulltrial can be held. The judge found Dell's ads often comparedlesser Dell machines to Compaq's more capable models butfailed to note the difference. The difference between thecomputers explains the price difference cited in the ads, thejudge said, concluding that the price comparisons weremisleading.   In its revised ads, Dell, based in Austin, Texas, cancompare its computers to Compaq's but must be sure to comparelike models and similar pricing structures. The order won'taffect Dell's U.S. ads, which Dell doesn't plan to change.Compaq hasn't filed a similar suit in the U.S.   Compaq declined to comment on the ruling. Dell couldn't bereached for comment.   ---   CROSSES IN MUNICIPAL SEALS found to violate church-stateseparation.   The U.S. appeals court in Chicago ruled that the municipalseals of two Chicago suburbs, Zion and Rolling Meadows, couldnot include Christian crosses.   &quot;In both cases, we find that sectarian religious imagerysimply has no place on municipal seals,&quot; the court wrote.   The appellate court relied on the U.S. Supreme Court testfor government use of religious symbols, finding that thesuburban seals effectively endorsed a religion. In the Zioncase, the city protested that its seal commemorated thecity's history; Zion was founded in the 19th century as autopian religious community.   The suits were brought by the Society of Separationists, anational atheist group. Attorneys for the suburbs said theyhadn't decided whether they will appeal.</TEXT></DOC>