<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911122-0021</DOCNO><DOCID>911122-0021.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>11/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   BUSH SIGNED a job rights bill as his aides disavowed adirective on hiring bias.   The president's signing of the civil-rights legislationwas marred by a furor over the proposed directive limitingaffirmative-action programs. Bush aides yesterday werescrambling to withdraw the order, drafted by the White Housecounsel. The directive would have dismantled the guidelinesthat affect hiring practices of businesses with more than 15employees. It also called for elimination of hiring practicesthat involve the use of quotas.</LP><TEXT>   While the directive was dropped from the president'sbill-signing statement, the incident left Bush'saffirmative-action policy under a cloud.   ---   G-7 NATIONS UNVEILED a plan to help Soviet republics staveoff financial default.   The Group of Seven industrialized nations reached anaccord with Moscow and eight Soviet republics on the aidpackage. The G-7 said it would defer for up to a yearprincipal payments on the Soviet foreign debt. In addition,the G-7 will provide an emergency fund of $1 billion in agold swap and pledged to ask export-credit agencies to extendshort-term credits. Moscow and the republics agreed toundertake IMF-supervised reforms.   Yeltsin asserted Russia's sovereignty as he began a visitto Germany and received pledges of cooperation andhumanitarian aid from Chancellor Kohl.   ---   CALIFORNIA PREPARED to issue strict new low-pollutiongasoline standards.   The standards, to be issued as early as today, areexpected to sharply boost future pump prices and set apattern for cleaner, more expensive fuels in many otherstates. Scheduled to take effect in 1996, the standards willdictate a &quot;recipe&quot; for gasoline that is substantially morestringent than federal requirements due to take effect in1995 in nine heavily polluted metropolitan areas in the U.S.   It is estimated that California refineries will need tospend anywhere from $2 billion to $10 billion onmodifications to meet the new standards.   ---   The U.N. Security Council chose Boutros Ghali of Egypt tosucceed Perez de Cuellar as U.N. secretary-general. Afterapproval by the General Assembly, Ghali on Jan. 1 wouldbecome the first African to lead the U.N. Ghali, 69, anEgyptian deputy prime minister, is expected to emphasizereform of the U.N.'s bureaucratic structure.   ---   Sixteen Haitians drowned and 119 others were missing aftera boat carrying 200 refugees capsized off the eastern tip ofCuba, Cuban news agencies said. Cuba reportedly mounted arescue operation after the boat capsized Tuesday. Hundreds ofHaitian boat people have tried to flee to the U.S. after theSept. 30 overthrow of President Aristide.   ---   The Senate broke a stalemate blocking action on acomprehensive anti-crime bill that would extend the deathpenalty to more than 50 crimes and require a waiting periodfor buying a handgun. After 3 1/2 weeks of inaction,Republicans lifted procedural roadblocks to the proposed guncontrols.   ---   Secretary of Defense Cheney said in Seoul that the U.S.will delay further troop pullouts from South Korea. Theannouncement, while signaling to Pyongyang thatWashington-Seoul ties are strong, probably won't persuadeNorth Korea to allow inspection of nuclear sites.   ---   Rival factions in Somalia fired artillery and rocketlaunchers for a fifth day in Mogadishu. Relief workers termedthe situation &quot;appalling,&quot; saying hundreds of people havedied. The conflict stems from a struggle between PresidentAli Mahdi -- who claims he retains power -- and Gen. Aidid,who said Monday he had ousted the president.   ---   The next Mideast talks are likely to be held in Washingtonin early December, a senior U.S. official hinted. His commentcame after a meeting between Secretary of State Baker andIsraeli Prime Minister Shamir.   ---   Federal investigators are pursuing any leads that mightprove Syrian or Iranian involvement in the 1988 bombing ofPan Am Flight 103 over Scotland, Bush administration aidestold relatives of the victims. The White House said it stillhasn't made a formal request for Libya to extradite the twointelligence officials indicted in the case.   ---   U.S. and Vietnamese diplomats met in New York to begindiscussions aimed at normalizing relations after nearly 40years of hostility. Although the two nations have haddealings on specific issues such as refugees and missingAmericans, the meeting marked the first effort toward fulldiplomatic ties between Washington and Hanoi.   ---   Cambodian leader Sihanouk initialed an accord withThailand and the U.N. on the repatriation of 350,000 refugeesfrom camps on the Thai-Cambodian border. A U.N. official saidthe agreement, signed in Phnom Penh, includes clauses toensure refugees aren't coerced into returning to zonescontrolled by rival guerrilla factions.   ---   Romania's Parliament adopted a constitution calling for apopularly elected president and containing guarantees ofpluralism and human rights. Romania is the second EastEuropean country, after Bulgaria, to pass an entirely newpost-Communist constitution. The document still must beapproved in a national referendum.   ---   A pro-Havel rally attracted tens of thousands ofCzechoslovaks in Prague. The nation's president, who isseeking to resolve a rift between Slovakia and the largerCzech republic, said Parliament would meet next month todiscuss a proposed referendum on Slovak separatism. Havelsupports a federation system to keep the country together.</TEXT></DOC>