<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910315-0098</DOCNO><DOCID>910315-0098.</DOCID><HL>   The Rule of Violence Continues   ----   By Yuri Afanasyev</HL><DATE>03/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   MOSCOW -- As Sunday's national referendum on continuedunion of the Soviet republics nears, the Communist Party andthe entire state apparatus are mobilizing all their resourcesto achieve a single goal -- that at least half the voters,plus one person, answer &quot;yes.&quot;   Communists have conducted all the requisite plenums in theCentral Committee and regional committees. They have hadregional meetings and other organizational events at everylevel. An enormous amount of propaganda material has beenprepared. Methodical instructions as to how to work withthankless workers (divided up into categories, by age andsocial status) have been issued down to the primary partycells. Professional artists have been commissioned to producework for leaflets to be thrown on the street -- this despitethe paper shortage. Printing presses for the leaflets werealso found.</LP><TEXT>   Daily and hourly, the central mass media, the media ofdisinformation, have been pouring out a stupefying stream oflies and intimidation. The whole of the Soviet propagandamachine is suggesting that a &quot;yes&quot; vote for the union in thereferendum will guarantee prosperity, well-being andhappiness for one and all; a &quot;no&quot; vote will bring failure tothe economy and bloody, internecine conflict.   I shall not repeat the specialists' judgment as to theinternational juridical illiteracy of the referendum wordingoffered to the Soviet population. But a totally shamelesscampaign of slander is being waged against those urging a&quot;no&quot; vote. The wizards at the national TV news show &quot;Vremya&quot;already are saying that the so-called democrats are &quot;stilltimidly&quot; calling for the hanging and shooting of &quot;ourpeople.&quot; This, although the basic weapon of the democraticopposition to the Communist Party has always been and remainsnonviolence and renunciation of the use of weapons.   So why do the ruling party and the president need thereferendum? In a time when the political and economic crisisin the country is deepening, when the volume of production inall state-owned industries is being cut back, when thevariety, quantity and quality of state commerce reminds oneof wartime -- why has the communist press simply forgottenabout curing the economy? Why is the referendum anall-encompassing theme?   It is my conviction that the Gorbachev team is incitinghysteria in connection with the referendum to give it theappearance of a kind of magic, a direct expression of the voxpopuli to sanctify the use of violence by the Kremlin and theCentral Committee of the Communist Party against today'sunion republics.   The very decision to conduct an all-union referendum afterdeclarations of sovereignty on the part of the republicssignifies a de facto nonrecognition of these declarations. Itsignifies the rule of violence over the will of thepopulations of the republics, saying that democrats candiscuss their independence as much as they like, but they arethen obliged to follow the directives of comrade presidentand his pocket-parliament, the Supreme Soviet of the SovietUnion.   Without violence, it will be impossible to continue aninternal political course guaranteeing the existence of thisleadership as a viable political institution. In the pendinglegislation for a new Union Treaty, the &quot;center,&quot; as before,gives itself enormous powers, but not in terms of centralcoordinating structures voluntarily transferred by therepublics. The &quot;sovereign&quot; states can be left only with those&quot;powers&quot; that the center itself finds onerous. But forcingthe people to accept the scheme of a &quot;revivified&quot; unionwithout the use of violence will prove impossible.   The leadership hopes the referendum will sanction thecruelest violence already demonstrated by the Gorbachev team,including actions by the Soviet military against civilians inTbilisi, Baku and Vilnius. It also hopes to sanction theviolence now being prepared. This is the reason for theartificial exaggeration of the significance of the referendumand the frenzied TV and newspaper war with opponents of thereferendum.   These are the plans of the communist leaders. What,though, will be the results of the campaign?   The results are basically already available, and do notdepend on tallying up the votes. One result is a suddenincrease in the political antipathy of various social strataand national groups, an antipathy provoked by the partyapparatus. Another is society's rapidly increasingpolarization (on one side, the proponent of &quot;the socialistchoice&quot;; on the other, the proponent of normal life.) Theparty, grown decrepit in the past 20 years, is revivingeverything it needs for its continued existence. It isreviving the atmosphere necessary for an implacable civilconflict. Before our very eyes, the organizational andpolitical ground is being set for splitting society into twoirreconciliable, warring factions.   Through their legally elected authorities, six unionrepublics already have announced their refusal to participatein the union referendum. Russia and Ukraine have decided toconduct their own referendums coincident with the nationalreferendum -- again dissension and disorder, thejuxtaposition of &quot;ours&quot; and &quot;not ours.&quot;   But the central powers are determined to conduct thereferendum even where the republic authorities have refusedto go along. Electoral commissions will be created along thelines of the infamous Committees for National Salvation,&quot;based not on legal, constitutional structures, but rather oncertain social organizations (party organizations, etc.).   Moreover, yet another split is occurring within theindividual republics. In Russia, certain oblasts have refusedto follow the will of the Russian Supreme Soviet and havedecided to conduct only the union referendum on Sunday. Atthe regional level, the party propagandists are busy drivinga new wedge between various social groups.   With temperatures rising, something not directly relatedto the referendum results could occur -- the people couldgive a supposed &quot;go ahead&quot; to the local and regionalbloodshed planned by the party apparatus.   There is a peculiarity to major social events in Soviethistory: The external form of these events often has littlein common with their internal content. Communist propagandais attempting to give the referendum the appearance offinally and decisively answering the question of whether theSovet Union is to continue to exist, about whether today'sunion center will continue to exist. It is the social groupstanding behind these structures (the party apparatchiks, the&quot;nomenklatura&quot;) that so needs the structures. &quot;Renewal&quot; ofthe Soviet Union is only an excuse to save the center, thegigantic feeding trough for the communist-parasite class. Forthe members of this class, the survival of the empire meansthey can resuscitate a confiscatory, totalitarian economy atthe expense of those who actually produce goods and services.   Speaking in even more concrete terms, this is first andforemost a question of the political survival of MikhailGorbachev and his Presidential Council. Political survival isthe source of the mad frenzy, of the energy and force withwhich the battle for the referendum is being led.   With but minor correction, the Shatalin-Yavlinsky Plan forthe economy could have become the basis for overcomingtoday's system. And this is why Mr. Gorbachev did not expendeven one hundredth of the energy of current efforts to defendthat plan. Quite the opposite, he buried the plan in just afew days.   The referendum cannot be a realistic means of creating acommonwealth of republics on the territory of the U.S.S.R. Toconstruct a new community, many more concrete steps must betaken to establish bilateral and multilateral ties betweenthe republics. Liberty, independence and sovereignty must bethe defining categories of these new relations.   This is the road taken by Russia. It started down thisroad in a shy and unsure fashion, because the means ofsolving the problems before us are still incomplete. Here inour Eurasian crossroads, where the millennia of peoples'migrations come together, the knot of differing national,social and religious world views is tied as no where else inthe world. Yet even the timid steps taken by Russia werequickly met by powerful opposition from the Gorbachev&quot;center.&quot; Among other goals, the union referendum mustdeliver a blow to Russian sovereignty and thus to thesovereignty of the national republics.   I cannot say that I tremble with impatience as I await theresults of the referendum. Given the chaos in connection withthe creation of the electoral commissions, and in most casesthe nonparticipation in these commissions of legally electedrepresentatives, it follows that the communists can &quot;pulltogether&quot; a majority in their favor -- even if this majoritydoes not really exist.   The usual false Soviet electoral statistics on the outcomeof the referendum will nonetheless not reflect the mainresult of this event, an event thought up and executed by theGorbachev team. With real disintegration of the Union ofSoviet Socialist Republics continuing, the social andnational relations between the peoples who make up oursociety are fast worsening.   ---   Mr. Afanasyev, rector of the Moscow Historical ArchivesInstitute, is a people's deputy and co-president of theRussian Democratic Movement.</TEXT></DOC>