<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910308-0105</DOCNO><DOCID>910308-0105.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   U.S. Judge Blocks Exxon Oil-Spill Accord   ----   By Richard B. Schmitt and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   XON GRA WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ACCOUNTING (ACC)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)BANKS (BNK)INSURANCE (INS)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   A U.S. district court judge temporarily blocked governmentefforts to settle the Exxon Valdez oil-spill litigation,because of concerns that negotiators may have wronglyexcluded native Alaskans from the bargaining.   Federal Judge Stanley Sporkin put the talks on holdyesterday in Washington, D.C. His ruling bars U.S. and Alaskaofficials from completing a settlement with Exxon Corp. overthe March 1989 spill before a scheduled Monday hearing on alawsuit brought by native Alaskans villagers. Judge Sporkinleft the door open to lifting the ban if Justice Departmentofficials promise not to settle the case before Monday. JudgeSporkin's directive caught Justice Department officials bysurprise. The department didn't respond formally, butofficials said they wouldn't complete any settlement beforethe hearing scheduled for Monday.</LP><TEXT>   The decision came as state and federal officials appearedclose to settling the case, which arose two years ago thismonth after a grounded Exxon tanker dumped 11 million gallonsof crude oil into Prince William Sound, the worst such spillever in North America. Last week, Charles Cole, Alaska'sattorney general, said a settlement &quot;framework&quot; had beenreached in which Exxon would pay &quot;in the ballpark&quot; of $1.2billion. The actual value of the settlement is consideredmuch less, however, because Exxon would pay the money overseveral years. Exxon's federal criminal liability may also beresolved as part of any such pact.   &quot;We have moved along since last week,&quot; Mr. Cole said in aninterview from Washington yesterday where he has been intalks.   Judge Sporkin's ruling followed suits filed on Tuesday andWednesday by Alaska native villages and native corporationsclaiming they had been wrongfully excluded from thesettlement talks. The groups contend that federal statutesgive them unique interests in natural resources involvingtheir land, and that the government hasn't any right tosettle resource damage claims without their participation.The groups have also expressed concern that the settlementwould wipe out their chances of recovering damages in theirown previously filed civil suits.   Judge Sporkin didn't rule on the actual merits of thoseclaims, but attorneys for the Alaskans said they wereencouraged by the judge's initial reaction. &quot;He was making adetermination that the native village claims fornatural-resource damage might be irreparably harmed if thesettlement went forward,&quot; said Lloyd Miller, an Anchoragelawyer for the native groups. &quot;He was skeptical of thegovernment's argument that the villagers' interests would beprotected through a commitment to having a public commentperiod once a settlement was reached.&quot;   A spokesman for Alaska Gov. Walter Hickel, who has beenpressing for a settlement of the case, said: &quot;The governmentis trying to get a settlement in the best interests of allthe people of Alaska. We are not trying to exclude anybody.&quot;He added: &quot;From all indications, I would say a settlement isgetting close. We think it will be in the short term, and wedo not think this {ruling} will be a long-term impediment toa settlement.&quot;   ---   ASBESTOS INSURANCE COVERAGE available to Grace, courtfinds.   A federal magistrate in New York ruled that W.R. Grace andamp;Co.'s insurance carriers may have to reimburse the companyfor legal costs, settlements and verdicts in asbestos-relatedpersonal injury and property damage cases filed against it.   But U.S. Magistrate Judge Leonard Bernikow limited thescope of the ruling in the dispute between Grace and five ofits carriers. For property damage cases, he found that onlythose policies in effect when the asbestos was discoveredwould apply. Grace, based in New York, had hoped to receivecoverage from the time the asbestos was actually installed.   And for personal injury cases, the magistrate ruled thatonly those policies in effect when the person's injuryoccurred would apply; Grace had sought coverage from the timeof the person's initial exposure to asbestos. The magistrateruled that several other issues required further examinationat a trial.   Disputes over coverage are emerging as a significant issuein a growing number of asbestos cases around the country.While courts are split on whether insurers are liable, mosthave agreed with the New York court on when policies aretriggered.   The ruling arises out of a dispute between Grace and itscarriers over the company's right to be defended andreimbursed by insurers in asbestos-related litigation.   Over 6,400 asbestos-related suits have been filed againstGrace seeking damages for injuries stemming from exposure toasbestos or asbestos-containing products manufactured byGrace or its predecessor companies.   Grace also faces more than 100 suits by building ownerswho say that over the years asbestos fibers were releasedinto the atmosphere, allegedly contaminating the buildingsand creating a health hazard.   &quot;We have always maintained that the amounts paid indisposing of these cases would be recoverable from ourinsurance carriers. This action significantly reduces thepotential financial liability that this issue once appearedto pose,&quot; J.P. Bolduc, president of Grace, said in astatement.   A lawyer for Maryland Casualty andamp; Co., Baltimore, one ofthe carriers, said that the ruling drastically limits Grace'scoverage. &quot;This cuts off a great deal of potential exposurefor the insurers of Grace,&quot; said Thomas Brunner, a lawyerwith the Washington law firm Wiley, Rein andamp; Field ing.   ---   ARBITRATION IN FDIC CASE against accountants yields smallrecovery.   The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., under pressure toreduce its massive legal fees, agreed to what may have beenthe first arbitration of a professional liability casearising from a failed bank.   The move may have saved legal fees but the FDIC came awaywith only a fraction of the $46 million damages it wasseeking. Last week, the arbitrator awarded the agency $2.5million, which will be paid by the liability insurer for theaccounting firm of Cherry, Baekert andamp; Holland.   The accountants' lawyer, Jack Gerstein of the Washington,D.C., firm of Ross, Dixon andamp; Masback, says the award mayreflect the difficulties facing the FDIC as it steps up itsefforts to recoup losses from the professional advisers tofailed banks and thrifts.   &quot;I think they were testing the waters for suits againstaccountants and lawyers and found the waters to be verycold,&quot; he says.   The case involved Cherry Baekert's 1983 audit of Park Bankof St. Petersburg, Fla. Park Bank failed in February 1986,and the FDIC filed suit against the Charlotte, N.C.,accountants in 1988, alleging that they failed to advise thebank to establish sufficient reserves to cover souring loans.The FDIC was seeking $46 million in damages from the firm tocover its losses on the loans.   Lawyers for the accountants and the FDIC attempted tosettle the case before it was scheduled for trial in January,but those efforts failed. The trial was expected to last fiveweeks, but the two sides agreed to arbitration on the damagesquestion two days before it was set to begin.   ---   JOURNALISTS OPPOSING the Pentagon's wartime pressrestrictions told a federal court they should be able topursue their suit even though the Persian Gulf war is over.The government asked U.S. District Judge Leonard B. Sand inManhattan to dismiss the suit. The journalists who filed thesuit, however, want the Pentagon to be barred fromimplementing the restrictions in any future wars. They claimthat the rules are an unconstitutional prior restraint onjournalists' access to the battlefield. Judge Sand didn'trule on whether the case is moot and urged both sides tosettle the matter.   ---   NOTED: Pepper, Hamilton andamp; Scheetz, a Philadelphia-basedlaw firm, has beefed up its tax practice with the acquisitionof two partners and one associate from Piper andamp; Marbury, aBaltimore law firm. A. Carl Kaseman III and LaBrenda GarrettStodghill joined Pepper Hamilton's 50-lawyer Washingtonoffice as partners. Before joining Piper andamp; Marbury, Mr.Kaseman was a partner at Pepper Hamilton.</TEXT></DOC>