<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910521-0114</DOCNO><DOCID>910521-0114.</DOCID><HL>   Selling Moderation:   Alcohol Industry Is   At Forefront of Efforts   To Curb Drunkenness   ---   But Critics See It as Cynicism,   A Way to Control Debate   While Moving the Booze   ---   The Century Council Kickoff   ----   By Jill Abramson   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   ACCOB BUD MO T.VO VO</CO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)BEVERAGES (BVG)DISTILLERS AND BREWERS, MAKERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (DST)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)CANADA (CN)COLORADO (CO)ILLINOIS (IL)MISSOURI (MO)NEW YORK (NY)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- These are sobering times for the alcoholindustry.   When 600 beer distributors recently gathered here fortheir national convention, the big attraction wasn't the hugeice sculpture of the Miller logo or the free-flowing brew(and shrimp) from Anheuser-Busch Cos. It was Cindi Lamb.</LP><TEXT>   A co-founder of Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) whoseseven-year-old daughter died because of a drunk driver, Ms.Lamb recently signed on as a consultant to the National BeerWholesalers Association. She opened the convention with arousing talk on a new industry campaign to promote&quot;responsible drinking.&quot;   Then, wearing lapel pins boasting &quot;We're part of thesolution,&quot; the beer people marched off to Capitol Hill tobrief their representatives and senators. To help the messagego down, they carried along $172,000 in campaigncontributions.   The lobbying is part of a billion-dollar counterattack bythe liquor industry against the greatest peril to itsbusiness since Prohibition: a binge of anti-drinkingcriticism by health advocates, parents groups and others thatthreatens to do to booze what others have done to cigarettes.&quot;Either you take the high ground, or you're going to go downTobacco Road,&quot; says Douglas Metz of the Wine and SpiritsWholesalers Association.   The industry worries that policy makers and the public arebeing swayed by what it considers exaggerated warnings on thedangers of drinking. The past five years have seen two risesin federal excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, a boost inthe legal drinking age to 21 in all 50 states and, now,proposed curbs on advertising. (Hard-liquor companiesvoluntarily don't advertise on TV and radio.) Industryofficials fear their products may even be swept into thenation's war on drugs. &quot;We have very sophisticated criticswho have tried to confuse and mix our product with illicitdrugs,&quot; says James Sanders, president of the Beer Institute.   Fears are so great that traditionally antagonisticindustry factions -- beer, wine and hard liquor -- arejoining forces against the onslaught. In a call to arms,Marvin Shanken, publisher of the beverage journal MarketWatch, warns that &quot;New Temperance fanatics&quot; will destroy theindustry unless it unites to &quot;reach into every Americancommunity with the message that moderate consumption of thebeverage of their choice is OK.&quot;   The industry has money on its side. It is pouring millionsinto an array of anti-alcohol-abuse groups, minorityorganizations and don't-drink-and-drive advertising messagessuch as Miller Brewing Co.'s &quot;Know Your Limits.&quot; One of thefirst places the National Organization for Fetal AlcoholSyndrome, a new group whose board includes movie star KevinCostner, sought financing was the Licensed BeverageInformation Council. Anheuser-Busch last year donated $2.5million to the National Collegiate Athletic Association toendow an alcohol-awareness program for college athletes.   The big push already shows signs of paying off. Lastmonth, while Health and Human Services Secretary LouisSullivan was denouncing tobacco-industry sponsorship ofsporting events, Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner putin a special appearance at the annual meeting of the BeerInstitute, the industry's lobbying arm, to praise the beerindustry for helping promote the use of seat belts.   &quot;Talk about mixed messages,&quot; fumes Patricia Taylor of theCenter for Science in the Public Interest, a group raisinghealth and safety issues about drinking. &quot;Buckle up in a beerad?&quot;   Such critics say industry efforts to combat drunk drivingand other health and social ills of drinking are cosmetic andself-serving. They note that the alcohol lobby fought againstraising the drinking age to 21 in Ohio and against tougherblood-alcohol standards for defining drunk driving inIllinois and Utah. &quot;Would you want the Mafia underwritinganti-crime programs?&quot; asks Andrew McGuire, director of theTrauma Foundation in San Francisco and one of the originaldirectors of MADD.   Tomorrow the industry will kick off its most ambitiouseffort yet, with a new organization called the CenturyCouncil. Led by Seagram Co., other big distillers and wineinterests, the Century Council will promote a broad campaignagainst drunk driving. The group's spokesman is John Gavin,the former actor and ambassador to Mexico, who is being paida salary well into six figures to do for booze what CharltonHeston has done for guns.   Black and Hispanic organizations long have receivedparticularly lavish attention from the alcohol industry.Direct contributions to such groups keep them &quot;gagged anddependent,&quot; charges Omowale Amuleru-Marshall, a public healthpsychologist. He complains that most of the major black andHispanic groups have remained silent (or have stood withindustry) on the promotion to blacks and Hispanics of maltliquor and fortified wine, products particularly high inalcohol. Alcoholic beverage advertising has long been amainstay of publications aimed at a black readership.   Peter Bell, founder of the Institute on Black ChemicalAbuse, says the profusion of billboards advertising theseproducts in inner-city neighborhoods is disturbing becauseblacks suffer disproportionately from alcohol-relatedillnesses.   Industry leaders say their support for minorityorganizations is a model of good corporate citizenship. Mr.Sanders, of the Beer Institute, points proudly to hisassociation's new $500,000 community assistance fund, whichhelps pay for inner-city programs such as midnightbasketball. Miller Brewing, a unit of Philip Morris Cos., in1987 established the Thurgood Marshall Scholarship Fund inconjunction with the Office for the Advancement of PublicBlack Colleges. The fund gives scholarships at 36predominantly black schools.   No brewer has been more aggressive about building bridgesto the black and Hispanic communities than the politicallyconservative Adolph Coors Co., which also has tied its givingdirectly to marketing. Under covenants signed in 1984 with adozen major minority organizations, and renewed this year,Coors pledged to increase its hiring of minorities and todonate $1 million annually to various groups. John Meadows,Coors's community relations director, says the company hasinvested $615 million in the black and Hispanic communitiessince the understandings took effect, and that it has posted&quot;dramatic&quot; minority sales increases.   Other beneficiaries include Operation Push, which derivesabout 12% of its budget from the liquor industry; theNational Urban League, which took in $200,000 in all lastyear from Philip Morris, Anheuser-Busch and the Joseph E.Seagram andamp; Sons Inc. unit of Seagram; and the CongressionalBlack Caucus Foundation, which gets 11.5% of its budget fromthe alcohol industry -- $118,250 in 1989. The NationalCouncil of La Raza, an influential Hispanic organization, got$86,000 from the industry in 1990.   John Jacob, president of the National Urban League,echoing officials of other groups, says the donations have noeffect on Urban League policies. But in 1988, its Detroitchapter withdrew its sponsorship of a conference on billboardadvertising when questions were raised by a member of itsboard who was also an executive of the Stroh Brewery Co. &quot;Wehad no pressure or threats,&quot; says N. Charles Anderson,president of the Detroit Urban League.   Under pressure from within, some groups, including theCongressional Black Caucus, are re-examining their policieson accepting industry money. &quot;With all the costs, the victimsand the deaths, more and more people are realizing it's apretty poor bargain we're getting into,&quot; says Rep. JohnConyers. The Detroit Democrat is one of the few black membersof Congress to have spoken out against the alcohol industry'smoney ties to minority organizations. He is also behindrecently introduced legislation to require health warnings inalcohol advertising.   Some organizations fear that if they turn away industrymoney, they won't be able to make it up elsewhere. But someare trying. In New Mexico, the Gathering of Nations, one ofthe largest native-American powwows, rejected Coors as itschief sponsor in 1989 after a mother protested having herdaughter dance with the Coors beer logo on her back. Theevent was able to find other sponsors, including Borden Inc.,to replace $50,000 from Coors.   The alcohol-industry largess goes far beyond minoritygroups. Bacchus, which runs programs on 400 college campusespromoting &quot;responsible habits and attitudes&quot; toward &quot;beveragealcohol use or nonuse,&quot; received $203,500 of its $220,460cash contributions in 1990 from the liquor industry. TheAlcoholic Beverage Medical Research Foundation in Baltimoregets 95% of its funding (amounting to more than $7 millionover the past five years) from the beer industry. Studiesfinanced by the foundation have found medical benefits inmoderate drinking, as has some independent medical research.   Drew Hunter, Bacchus's executive director, says thealcohol industry is a legitimate source of income and that heis careful to avoid donations with strings attached. MackMitchell, president of the research foundation, says, &quot;thebrewing industry has nothing to do with who gets funded&quot; andnotes that his organization has also backed studies intopotential links between drinking and cancer. At the new fetalalcohol group, its director, Patti Hunter, says of industrycontributions: &quot;I may be able to take their guilt money andturn it into effective prevention.&quot;   But others say that maintaining independence isn't alwaysso easy. &quot;There's a long history of industry giving groupsmoney to buy their silence,&quot; says Christine Lubinski, chieflobbyist for the National Council on Alcoholism, whovolunteers her own group as a prime example. Before theNational Council cut off its funding from the alcoholindustry in 1982, Ms. Lubinski says it felt obliged to remainsilent on issues such as alcohol advertising. Now, the groupis a proponent of legislation to require warning labels onalcohol ads.   Alcohol critics are turning up the heat on groups thataccept industry backing. MADD, for example, stopped takingindustry money in the early 1980s. Students Against DrivingDrunk (SADD), which drew almost half its funding fromAnheuser-Busch, was recently pressured by the U.S. EducationDepartment to cut its financial ties to the beer industry.   The alcohol industry contends it is being unfairlyattacked by neo-prohibitionists. &quot;It's insanity that anorganization like Anheuser-Busch can't support SADD becausewe're in the beer industry,&quot; complains Stephen Lambright, anAnheuser-Busch vice president who, until last year, sat onSADD's board and helped contribute $850,000 to the group.   The hiring of the former MADD organizer is cited byindustry insiders and critics alike as a shrewd way todeflect criticism. Ms. Lamb says that her new job will giveher a platform from which to stress moderate drinking habits.The beer industry gave Ms. Lamb a royal welcome, and ringsideseats for her and her mother at a championship boxing matchin Atlantic City.   The alcohol industry still has plenty of friends inWashington, where there has been no reluctance on the part oflawmakers to rake in booze bucks. Since 1985, 26political-action committees connected to the industry havecontributed $4.7 million to congressional candidates. Membersof famous industry families (including Gallo, Mondavi,Bronfman, Coors and Busch) have kicked in an additional $1million.   At the state level, the industry keeps a fleet oflobbyists on retainer. In California, the alcohol industry,in one of the most expensive lobbying campaigns ever in thestate, spent more than $20 million to crush a ballot measurelast November to raise alcohol excise taxes. &quot;They haveenough influence that they can kill anything they want tokill,&quot; says Assemblyman Lloyd Connelly, a Sacramentolegislator who sponsored the proposition.   But as more politicians respond to public concerns aboutdrinking, not all of the industry's forays onto the politicalbattlefield are ending happily for the liquor interests. TheAssociated Beer Distributors of Illinois organized a &quot;lastcall&quot; voter registration drive during last fall'sgubernatorial campaign against Republican Jim Edgar, who asIllinois's secretary of state had championed stifferpenalties for motorists convicted of drunk driving.   Although the registration drive yielded 20,000 new voters,Mr. Edgar won the election. He promptly instituted ano-alcohol policy in the governor's mansion and may introduceeven tougher anti-drunk-driving legislation.   ---   Mark Anderson contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>