<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911218-0160</DOCNO><DOCID>911218-0160.</DOCID><HL>   `Los Yuppies':   A 1980s-Style Boom   Is Just Now Reaching   An Awakening Mexico   ---   Its New Free-Trade Approach   Is Luring Lots of Capital;   The Wealthy Class Grows   ---   Leading Indicator: Sushi Bars   ----   By Matt Moffett   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FORGN</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>MEXICO (MX)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MEXICO CITY -- Scenes from a south-of-the-border economicboom:   An exultant Angelica Reyes skips out of a bank hoisting ahome loan contract above her head. &quot;I'd been trying to getthis for 15 years,&quot; says Ms. Reyes, a nurse. There's nocredit crunch in Mexico: The banking system's mortgage loanportfolio has doubled in just two years.</LP><TEXT>   Another scene: The clerk at Sharper Image apologizes forthe fancy gadget store's picked-over appearance. Theautomatic massage chair is almost out of stock. Ditto theelectronic pet-food dish. The San Francisco-based companyopened its first Mexican outlet a year ago and quickly addedtwo more stores and a catalog service. &quot;We can't import goodsfast enough,&quot; says manager Ramon Alvarez.   And one more scene: Mexico's deftest television satirists,Victor Trujillo and Ausencio Cruz, worry that thegovernment's competence in managing the economy will put themout of business. &quot;Even I like this president,&quot; Mr. Trujilloconfesses. The comics have recovered by taking aim at theexcesses of the newfound prosperity. Mr. Cruz's new characteris a 30-year-old stock trader wearing a three-piece suit anda sense of self-importance. His name: &quot;el yuppie.&quot;   Mexicans, after looking on wanly while their northernneighbors enjoyed an economic bonanza during the last decade,are starting out the 1990s with a spree of their own. Many ofthe images are familiar ones: Sushi bars are springing up andbillboards are touting the Soloflex fitness station. Lastmonth, Ronald Reagan gave a speech to a deferential,clipboard-wielding group of students and executives. Therewasn't a single demonstrator.   &quot;We missed the '80s but we are doing our best to make upfor that now,&quot; says Jorge Aizpuru, a merchant in the trendyZona Rosa shopping district. For him and other Mexicans, thelast 10 years were a time of brutal depression brought on bythe country's huge foreign debt -- &quot;the lost decade&quot; it'scalled here. At Mr. Aizpuru's jewelry store, sales plummeted90% during that period. &quot;I couldn't afford a hamburger --forget about sushi,&quot; he says.   Mexico emerged from its crisis when it began viewing itsproximity to the U.S. as a business opportunity, not a threatto its sovereignty. &quot;When we said we wanted a free-tradeagreement with the United States, the whole world came hereto invest,&quot; says Mr. Aizpuru, exaggerating, but onlyslightly. People also began buying his jewelry. He decided toexpand. The jeweler bought property in the financial districtand last month opened a flashy restaurant called &quot;WallStreet.&quot;   The restaurant's slogan, &quot;the taste of success,&quot; is apt.The Mexican stock market is up more than 100% this year. Thecountry's annual economic growth rate of about 4% is expectedto surpass that of any of the Group of Seven industrialnations. Mexico has attracted more than $12 billion inforeign investment in just two years, more than the SovietUnion and the six former East Bloc countries combinedattracted in the same period.   Mexico's renaissance is visible from many vantage points.Retail sales are growing faster than the population for thefirst time in nearly a decade, according to A.C. Nielsen, themarket researcher. This year, the country's auto dealers solda record number of cars. The largest shopping mall in thecountry -- 400 stores -- recently opened for business. AndGrupo Sidek, Mexico's leading tourism developer, has shiftedthe bulk of its promotional budget to woo Mexicans, ratherthan recession-racked Americans. &quot;The Mexicans are retakingCancun,&quot; jokes Jose Julian Franco, Sidek's chief of finance.   Construction is also booming. Dallas developer TrammellCrow is helping put up a 36-story office tower in Monterreythat will be that industrial city's tallest building. OtherTexas and Mexican developers are building a three-story mall,a luxury hotel and an office building near Mexico City'sBellas Artes, a historic theater featuring a Diego Riveramural extolling Marxism.   The new moneyed class emerging from all this is making itspresence felt in many ways. A rowdy jai alai club near thestock exchange has become the place to be after hours. Itsdenizens are people &quot;who have learned how to earn wealth, butnot how to be wealthy,&quot; says columnist Mario de la Reguera.One example: Players at the club complained that the nouveauxriches' incessantly beeping cellular phones were distractingthem from the game. Now an attendant checks phones at thedoor.   Having had little experience with prosperity, &quot;Mexicansdon't know how to behave, they tend to go to extremes andbecome over-optimistic,&quot; contends Enrique Krauze, one ofMexico's most eminent historians. There are also troublingsigns that some Mexicans may follow the path of some of theirneighbors to the north, and turn prosperity into excess.Investors trying to convert a hotel into a World Trade Centerin Mexico City ran out of cash, leaving a half-completedconcrete skeleton. And the U.S. Securities and ExchangeCommission recently charged five Mexicans with making morethan $1 million in illicit profits from insider informationduring the 1989 takeover of a U.S. glass maker by Mexico'sGrupo Vitro.   What's more, the country's economy still has manyproblems. Mexico, a place of widespread poverty, mustmaintain a steady stream of foreign investment to cover ahuge trade deficit and service its $78 billion foreign debt,which isn't much less than it was in 1982. Furthermore, manypeople here fear that the recession in the U.S. could spark abacklash among Americans against the free-trade agreement,which hasn't yet been finalized. If that happens, foreigncapital might flee Mexico.   The fact that the country's huge debt still exists, eventhough the debt crisis is supposedly waning, has tingedMexico's cheer with a vague foreboding. &quot;Is the crisis over?&quot;asks a headline in El Financiero, Mexico's leading businesspaper. In other countries, historical epochs are being markedwith grand finales: the Berlin Wall tumbles, Russians manbarricades to thwart a coup. But Mexico's worst modern crisislacks such a clear-cut resolution.   Rogelio Ramirez de la O, an economist, says he thinkshistory will date the end of the depression to the first halfof 1990, when President Carlos Salinas de Gortari won overinvestors by announcing the free-trade proposal and theprivatization of state-owned banks.   But the recovery didn't become a palpable thing for Mr.Ramirez until a memorable taxi ride several weeks ago. Thewoman driving the cab was having trouble keeping it in gear.The economist craned over the front seat and discovered theproblem: The driver was trying to operate the clutch whilewearing three-inch heels. Looking again, Mr. Ramirez saw thatshe was decked out in a new dress, a permanent and artfullyapplied makeup. &quot;I began looking around,&quot; he says. &quot;Peoplewere dressing up again like you hadn't seen in 10 years. Thecrisis was over.&quot;   In a poll taken this summer, 44% of Mexicans said theywere better off than last year, compared with 28% who saidthey were worse off. The improvement partly reflects a muchbrighter inflation picture: The rate has dropped to 19% thisyear from 170% in 1987. There are also signs that employmentis picking up. El Universal, the newspaper with Mexico'slargest help-wanted section, has seen job listings for postssuch as secretaries and clerks rise 40% in three years. Theprotagonist of a Mexican rock song is a teen-ager whosemother is running him ragged with chores because she can'tfind a servant.   That's not to say working people have more money.High-paying manufacturing jobs are actually scarcer thisyear, as plants automate in preparation for free trade. Andthough many companies must now offer more than the minimumwage to retain laborers, that's only enough to keep mostworkers even with inflation. &quot;Things have stopped gettingworse, but workers haven't yet regained much of what theylost during the 1980s,&quot; says Roberto Servitje, chief of GrupoBimbo, Mexico's largest bread maker.   What workers have gained are greatly expanded socialservices. The government has pushed outlays on education,health and housing to their highest levels in 20 years. Thus,notes psychiatrist and writer Federico San Roman, the Mexicanresurgence has had its most visible effects at the twoopposite poles of society. In the office, the doctor'swealthy patients are calmer, no longer fretting aboutshipping their savings to Switzerland. At home, Dr. SanRoman's maid is elated that the government recently broughtrunning water to her barrio.   It's the middle class that's found the expansion to be amixed bag. Roughly 25% of the population, the middle class isnotable more for its education and aspirations than for itsincome. It includes people like Federico Rodriguez, formerlysales director for a Mexican pen company.   Now he drives a taxi. &quot;The Taiwanese make an excellentpen, and now you can import it,&quot; he explains. In the cabthere are only two signs of Mr. Rodriguez's former station.One is a bottle of perfume with the nozzle aimed at thepassenger seat. &quot;The odors that come in here]&quot; he exclaims.The other is the box of Taiwanese pens he hawks topassengers. &quot;I can vouch that it's a good product,&quot; he says.   In contrast, Mexico's boom has provided 26-year-old SoniaMillan Calderon with opportunities she never would haveenjoyed in a closed economy. She was hired three years ago asa secretary by a German auto-parts company. Not long ago, theGermans promoted her over more well-born colleagues, the kindthat always seem to get ahead in the clubby world of Mexicanbusiness. &quot;I never could have been this happy workinganywhere else,&quot; says Ms. Millan, whose new job is chief ofcustomer service. She says when she recently had a bout ofunhappiness she was carrying enough spare cash to obtain herfavorite remedy: two new dresses and a pair of shoes.   After a decade of deprivation, Mexicans like Ms. Millanhave a pent-up demand for nearly everything. The number offranchises operating here has quadrupled in two years. EvenTaco Bell is looking at Mexico. Conference halls are bookedsolid with business seminars. Foreign pop stars, like Stingand Billy Joel, have lately put Mexico on their itineraries.   Robert Jones, president of a Texas-based ecologicalengineering firm, has also come to Mexico. He had to decidebetween expanding to Mexico or the Soviet Union, both ofwhich are trying to clean up local industry. He traveled tothe Ukraine and says he was appalled by the slack work ethic.On the other hand, he found Mexicans, from shoe-shine boys tothe engineers who became his partners, to be industrious. &quot;MySpanish isn't that good but we all speak capitalism,&quot; hesays.   The free-enterprise tradition here explains why Mexico iswinning the battle for foreign capital. &quot;Mexico is ashort-term opportunity: zero to five years,&quot; says DeanMefford, president of international operations for St.Louis-based Ralston Purina Co. &quot;In the Soviet Union and agood bit of Eastern Europe you have to be looking at thelong-term, five to 10 years.&quot;   But the emerging prosperity in Mexico has also put intorelief the clash between past and future that has roiled thecountry ever since the Aztecs first saw the Spanishconquistadors almost 500 years ago. Speaking for progress isMexico's Commerce Minister Jaime Serra: &quot;Mexico is going tobe part of the first world. And if it doesn't want to, itwill be anyway,&quot; he says. Perhaps. But in the meantime, twovery different worlds are colliding on virtually every citystreet.   Last month, for example, the employees of a new McDonald'sin Mexico City erected a traditional Day of the Dead altar ofskull candies right alongside the employee of the monthplaque. And not far away, Super 7, a chain of 24-hourconvenience stores featuring microwave ovens and frozencroissant pizzas, attracted local competition immediatelyafter it opened. A shrewd peasant installed himself in frontof the store and began selling tamales, cooked right thereover a low flame.</TEXT></DOC>