<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911023-0133</DOCNO><DOCID>911023-0133.</DOCID><HL>   Sverdlovsk -- What Really Happened?   ---   The Cover-up:   Anthrax: The Survivors Speak   ----   By Peter Gumbel</HL><DATE>10/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   SVERDLOVSK -- Military Compound 19 is the most heavilyguarded installation in Sverdlovsk. Situated in the city'ssouthern Chkalovsky district, its wrought-iron gates and10-foot perimeter fence, constantly patrolled by soldierswith machine guns and topped with spikes and barbed wire, aredesigned to ward off intruders. And with reason: The Sovietauthorities recently acknowledged that the compound houses asecret military microbiological research institute.   It was here, the U.S. alleges, that Soviet scientists wereengaged in germ-warfare activities that contravened a 1972convention on biological weapons. And it was this laboratorythat was the source of a deadly epidemic that struckSverdlovsk in 1979, Washington says, when anthrax spores wereaccidentally released into the air.</LP><TEXT>   In February 1990, in an attempt to calm local concernsabout the facility's activities, a small group of Sverdlovskcivilians was allowed into the compound to see forthemselves. The laboratory's head, Col. Anatoly Kharechko,denied the U.S. allegations of a leak of anthrax -- and shedsome light on what the laboratory does. &quot;Until 1986,&quot; hesaid, &quot;our institute worked on . . . vaccines for the defenseof troops and the population of the country against a numberof dangerous infections.&quot;   That account is hard to square either with U.S.intelligence reports, or with a statement made by the man whowas Sverdlovsk's Communist Party leader in 1979, Boris N.Yeltsin, now the president of Russia. Last November, Mr.Yeltsin told a meeting of Sverdlovsk residents that he&quot;didn't have any information about what {the facility}actually did, although I can guess.&quot; As soon as the epidemicbroke out, however, he personally asked the Defense Ministryto remove the institute because &quot;it endangers the lives ofhundreds of thousands&quot; of city residents.   According to an account of his remarks published in thenewspaper Kuranty, Mr. Yeltsin also described how, &quot;a biggroup of military specialists and KGB officials&quot; came toSverdlovsk during the anthrax outbreak. &quot;They told me nothingof the results of their work, although after some time acertain part of the laboratory was removed from the militarycompound.&quot;   Mr. Yeltsin's comments directly contradict the officialSoviet version, which maintains that no military personnelwere involved in any way with the outbreak. Thiscontradiction fits a pattern: For the 12 years since theoutbreak, the KGB and military have been engaged in acover-up of the facts of the case.   It starts with the documents. All the medical records ofthe victims were immediately taken away, as were lab samplesand other tangible proof. One pathologist who conductedpost-mortems on the victims remembers how military officerseven refused to allow copies to be made of official protocolsdetailing the deaths. Morgue and cemetery records wereremoved, as were documents belonging to the Red Cross, whichhelped to console the relatives of victims and sometimeshanded out 50 rubles in &quot;compensation.&quot;   It was the same story at Chkalovsky district court.Gennady Kuznetsov, who worked as a judge in 1979 and nowserves as the court's president, recalls how the district'sprosecutor opened a criminal investigation into the anthraxaffair. Dozens of people, after all, died under mysteriouscircumstances. But the prosecutor &quot;was told to stop, and allthe documents were taken away by the KGB or militaryintelligence, I don't know which,&quot; Mr. Kuznetsov remembers.Under Soviet law, he says, the military prosecutor could onlytake the case &quot;if a crime affects the military.&quot;   The cover-up doesn't stop there. The Health Ministry inMoscow mysteriously &quot;can't find&quot; any official reports thatwere made at the time. A comprehensive study promised by aSoviet delegation that visited the U.S. in 1988 hasn'tmaterialized. U.S. scientists, including Harvard's Matthew S.Meselson, haven't been allowed to visit Sverdlovsk to verifythe Soviet account.   Natalia Zenova, a correspondent for the weeklyLiteraturnaya Gazeta who was the first Soviet reporter toexamine the incident in detail, recounts how one of her keywitnesses, a microbiologist who was a member of a specialanti-epidemic committee, received anonymous threats afterspeaking to her, and at the last minute asked that his namenot be used in her article. Several people I talked to in thecourse of my investigation, including Judge Kuznetsov,received visits from the KGB. I was constantly and blatantlyfollowed, and my driver was harassed.   Why all the fuss if, as the Soviets say, the epidemic wascaused by poisoned meat? One reason is that militarypersonnel, contrary to the official Soviet version, wereindeed among the victims. The city's registry records showthat at least four of the dead lived at a military barrackswhich is literally across the street from Compound 19. Almostall the anthrax victims were buried in a special area of thetown's Eastern cemetery. Next to tombstones of the civilianswho died are dozens of graves unmarked except for small metalspikes topped by a red star. Talk in the town, which couldn'tbe verified, is that military recruits killed in the epidemicwere buried here.   Moreover, there is clear circumstantial evidence toassociate the Compound 19 with the outbreak. With oneexception, every civilian victim I could trace -- more thanhalf the 64 people the Soviets say died -- either lived orworked in a tiny area in Chkalovsky district within a fewhundred yards downwind from the military facility. Two dozenof the victims worked at a ceramics factory, most of them inone part of the plant that looks on to Compound 19. Thefactory, which produces ceramic toilets, mugs and some drainpipes, is rundown and there are gaping holes in the walls andbroken windows -- as there were back in 1979.   Vladlen Krayev, the chief engineer, recalls how hereceived precise instructions during the epidemic todisinfect the entire territory of the factory, including allthe equipment, the inside and outside of all the buildingsand the roof. Chkalovsky residents say the clean-up alsoinvolved disinfecting the roofs of private houses, andcovering dirt roads in the district with a layer of asphalt.   Soviet officials have said that an extensive cleanup wasordered, largely because stray dogs were dragging aroundanthrax-tainted meat that had been thrown out by frightenedresidents. But Mr. Krayev, like others, laughs at the ideathat dogs could climb onto the roofs of houses and factories.   Health inspectors did come to check the ceramic factory'scanteen. It regularly bought meat from a nearby state farm,and samples of this were taken away for examination as soonas the outbreak started. But Galina Khusnutdinova, a Tatar inher early 50s who has headed the factory's canteen since1975, says the meat was found to be free of anycontamination. &quot;They said the meat is O.K., so we ate it,&quot;she recalls. &quot;If the meat was tainted, I wouldn't be sittinghere. I would be in jail.&quot;   Indeed, the almost complete absence of any punishment isastonishing, given the severity of the outbreak, and theSoviet accusations that it was caused by tainted meatillegally sold by private vendors. Chkalovsky court recordsshow that two people were punished in July 1979 forincorrectly disposing of anthrax-infected animals. An articlein the Soviet journal Man and the Law, published in September1980, mentions both cases and pins the blame for the entireoutbreak on the two, Viktor Stafayev and Marina Gorina:   &quot;The judicial process gave an exhaustive reply to thequestion concerning the causes of the outbreak of anthrax.The cases of the disease were connected with theirresponsibility of individuals who criminally violated thesanitary regulations established in our country.&quot;   But court records show that both cases occurred after thefirst people had died of anthrax. Nobody died as a result oftheir negligence in disposing of sick animals, although Mrs.Gorina's son-in-law did contract a mild case of skin anthraxthat was easily cured. Both Mr. Stafayev and Mrs. Gorina weregiven extremely light punishments: He was fined 100 rubles,and she was given a one-year suspended sentence.   Judge Kuznetsov of Chkalovsky court says such punishmentis &quot;purely token.&quot; And he contends that the officialexplanation of anthrax-infected meat, &quot;is ridiculous. It's afiction.&quot;   This wealth of evidence suggests that the official Sovietversion of the anthrax outbreak is false, and that thethree-man delegation that visited the U.S. in 1988 engaged incomprehensive disinformation. But there remain some factsthat can't be easily explained by either the U.S. or theSoviet version of events.   It is odd that no children were affected, except for onesix-year-old who recovered. It is also strange that theepidemic continued for several weeks, although most of thepeople I traced died within the first eight days. Onepossible explanation for this could be that some of thevictims were killed by an initial airborne release of anthraxspores that may have then worked their way into the foodchain. If that were so, the later victims could have died ofintestinal anthrax, while the earlier ones were struck downby inhalatory anthrax.   Probably only the government or military leadership of theSoviet Union will be able to shed light on to what reallyhappened in Sverdlovsk 12 years ago. Following the failedAugust coup, a full disclosure of the truth would go a longway towards convincing the West that the old, monolithiccommunist-run Soviet Union that had no qualms about breakingits word has really gone for ever. Full disclosure of thetruth would help to alleviate Western concerns about Sovietcompliance with arms control agreements. It would also be anact imbued with strong symbolism.   Sverdlovsk has already taken steps toward burying its uglysocialist past. The site where the Romanov royal family wasexecuted in 1918 has been turned into an impromptu shrine,and the city's pre-revolutionary name of Yekaterinburg wasrestored shortly after the failed August coup. By comingclean about the anthrax outbreak, Soviet authorities couldnow remove the dark cloud that hangs over the city'sinternational reputation.   ---   Mr. Gumbel is the Journal's Moscow bureau chief. This isthe last of three articles.</TEXT></DOC>