<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910912-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>910912-0005.</DOCID><HL>   Yankee Row:   Aging Nuclear Plants   Become a Hot Issue   As Relicensings Near   ---   A Reactor in Rowe, Mass.,   30 Years Old, Still Runs   Even With Brittle Steel   ---   Crucial Issue for the Industry   ----   By John R. Wilke   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   BSE</CO><MS>UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)</NS><RE>MASSACHUSETTS (MA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   ROWE, Mass. -- Yankee Rowe nuclear power station, hiddendeep in the Berkshires in the northwest corner ofMassachusetts, stands as a testament to the reliability ofnuclear power. For 30 years, it has produced electricitysafely and efficiently -- good reason, supporters argue, thatit should be allowed to run another 20 years.   But to its critics, Yankee Rowe is a disaster waiting tohappen.</LP><TEXT>   Year after year, uranium fuel has showered its steelreactor vessel with intense radiation. Now, critics say, theaging vessel has become so brittle it could crack in anaccident and help turn that accident into a meltdown, sendinga plume of radioactive steam into the air and rendering partsof Massachusetts and Vermont unlivable. Pryor N. Randall, whowas the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's senior metallurgistuntil he retired last fall, says Yankee Rowe should be shutimmediately. To him, extending its license for another 20years, as proposed, &quot;would be madness.&quot;   Despite its exemplary performance history, Yankee Rowe,the nation's oldest operating commercial reactor, has becomea lightning rod in a controversy over the aging ofnuclear-power plants. At stake, besides the public safety,are vast investments by utilities across the country andperhaps the very future of the nuclear power industry, whichsupplies about 20% of the nation's electricity.   No new nuclear plant has been ordered since 1974. Buildingone now could cost $5 billion or more -- if public oppositioncould be overcome. So squeezing longer life from the 110existing U.S. nuclear facilities has become critical to theindustry, and a priority of the Bush administration's energypolicy. But as many plants approach the end of their 40-yearlicense period, a growing number of age-related mishaps andsigns of deterioration have aroused industry critics andsparked an unusual internal debate at the NRC.   Although the industry says refurbishing and maintenancemake the old plants as good as ever, critics and some on theNRC maintain that the reactors and their parts are worn andwheezy, and were never designed to last forever. If all theplants coming up for reauthorization are allowed extendedlives without big overhauls, they argue, it's only a matterof time before trouble strikes.   &quot;It's a kind of national insanity,&quot; says Robert Pollard, aformer NRC safety official and a leading critic of YankeeRowe. &quot;The country seems to have decided it's all right toplay Russian roulette, as long as there are enough chambersin the gun.&quot;   Mr. Pollard says that safety standards have grown muchtougher since many of the older plants were built, so that&quot;if you built the identical plant next door, you couldn't getit licensed today.&quot; He notes that the NRC, which is stilldeveloping rules for relicensing, isn't currently proposingto force older plants to meet the new standards when itrelicenses them.   Old pipes have already proven deadly: A steam line burstin 1986 at Virginia's Surry reactor, killing four workers. Atleast a dozen other plants have shown signs of deterioration,ranging from brittle steel to aging pumps, wiring, valves andvents.   Just last July, the NRC found extensive age-relatedcracking in pipes at the Trojan nuclear plant in Prescott,Ore. NRC standards for fracture strength are already exceededby the reactor vessels at Yankee Rowe and at least threeother plants: Wisconsin's Point Beach; Ginna, near Rochester,N.Y.; and Turkey Point, south of Miami. Fifteen more plantswill exceed the standard by the end of their license period.   Corrosion of a critical pressure-release structure hasbeen found by the NRC in more than a dozen other old plants.The structure is a solid steel torus, or doughnut-shaped ringwith a 20-foot-wide hole. It sits at the base of the reactorvessels. &quot;It's rusting at a rate higher than expected,&quot;especially at Oyster Creek in New Jersey and Nine Mile Pointin upstate New York, says Diane Screnzi, an NRC spokeswoman.&quot;The torus is huge and very difficult and expensive toreplace. But we may require&quot; replacement, she says.   Yankee Rowe is owned by Yankee Atomic Electric Co., aconsortium of 10 northeastern utilities, including NewEngland Power Co., Connecticut Light andamp; Power Co. and BostonEdison Co. It's a relatively small plant, producing less than1% of New England's electricity, and could probably bereplaced by existing plants if closed. But the plant is keyto both sides of the controversy in setting a precedent forfuture relicensing requests.   Although its original permit doesn't expire until the year2000, Yankee Rowe plans to be among the first to apply for anew 20-year license from the NRC. Because of its lead role,President Bush last year called Yankee Rowe &quot;the model forthe future of nuclear power.&quot;   But that future could be an embattled one. If Yankee Roweis any indication, every time the industry asks to renew aplant's license it can expect a fight that may even threatenthe facility's immediate operation. In June, the Union ofConcerned Scientists and a Vermont anti-nuclear grouppetitioned the NRC to shut the plant, citing the agency's owndata showing that it no longer meets NRC standards. Thepetition has already prompted Yankee Rowe to delay itsrelicensing effort and forced it to defend its currentlicense.   The reactor vessel at the center of the controversy is awater-filled steel silo 33 feet high and nine feet wide. Theatomic reaction takes place inside, producing steam thatdrives the turbine to produce electricity. In the event of apipe break or other mishap that would keep water fromcirculating within the vessel, a separate emergency watersupply, much colder than the original, would flood thecontainer to cool off the nuclear fuel and prevent ameltdown. The issue at Yankee Rowe and other plants iswhether the vessel steel has become so brittle it would cracklike glass from the shock of a sudden change in temperatureor pressure.   Regulators know there's a problem. &quot;The vessel isbrittle,&quot; says the new NRC chairman, Ivan Selin. &quot;Howbrittle? We don't know yet.&quot; In 1988, NRC commissionerKenneth Rogers described aging reactor components as &quot;aloaded gun.&quot;   The nuclear industry counters that aging isn't a problembecause atomic plants are closely regulated and carefullymaintained. The Council on Energy Awareness, the industry'slobbyist, says plants are being continuously &quot;renewed fromthe inside out&quot; with new components. And they charge thatopposition to Yankee Rowe is the opening shot in a largercampaign to prevent older nuclear plants from winning newlicenses as their current 40-year permits expire.   Yankee Atomic, Yankee Rowe's owner, concedes the vesselhas become brittle but says the problem isn't as bad asportrayed by the Union of Concerned Scientists. The companyis studying the problem and has done several things it hopeswill mitigate it, including heating the emergency coolingwater to 130 degrees to lessen the shock when it floods the500-degree reactor core. &quot;The plant is safe, or we wouldn'tbe letting it operate,&quot; says Andrew C. Kadak, Yankee Atomic'spresident.   The shutdown petition led to an unusual decision. TheNRC's technical staff found that although the vessel doesn'tmeet standards for strength against fracturing, the plant'sowners could wait until its scheduled refueling shutdown nextApril before conducting the strength tests required byregulations. The results will be used to decide whether theplant should be allowed to restart -- and ultimately whetherit will be granted a 20-year license renewal. &quot;Yankee Rowe isin technical compliance with our rules,&quot; the agency'sdirector of reactor regulation said at its hearing in July,citing a provision allowing case-by-case exemptions.   The staff reached its position despite its own estimate ofa high probability of failure -- of between 1% and 10% -- inthe event of an accident, such as a small pipe break, thatwould cause a loss of reactor water and perhaps trigger ameltdown. In a meltdown, the uranium fuel overheats to 5,000degrees -- twice the temperature of molten lava -- and burnsthrough the reactor until it meets groundwater, where itcould potentially set off a huge burst of radioactive steam.   The NRC voted July 31 to reject the Union's petition. Inits decision, it cited what it called the &quot;low&quot; probability-- about 1 in 1,000 each year -- of the type of pipe break orother coolant-loss accident that could suddenly stress thevessel. But the day after the vote, Mr. Selin apparently hadmisgivings, telling Congress the decision to let the plantrun was conditioned on its owners' taking steps to reduce thechance of a failure. He said &quot;an unacceptable level ofuncertainty&quot; remained at Yankee Rowe.   The improbable has happened before at the plant. Tenminutes before midnight June 15, a powerful lightning boltstruck electric lines serving Yankee Rowe. In an instant, theviolent charge coursed through the cables to a transformernext to the reactor, shattering two four-foot-high lightningarresters in a flash of acrid smoke. Lightning strikes are ahazard at any nuclear plant, and most are designed to handlethem without forcing a shutdown. But the lightning strikethat night was more powerful than anticipated, cuttingoutside power and forcing a shutdown.   The industry's supporters reject the critics' concerns.Richard Wilson, a Harvard physics professor and member of thepro-nuclear Scientists and Engineers for Secure Energy, callsindustry critics &quot;irresponsible and inflammatory&quot; becausethey consider only the worst-case scenario at every turn.&quot;The best estimate is that while brittleness is a littleworse than we thought it was, it's really not a seriousproblem,&quot; he says.   The dispute has divided residents of towns near the plant.Many of them say Yankee Rowe has always been a good neighbor,providing jobs for some 200 people and paying for roads andschools.   But others aren't sure anymore. Sharon Gensler, a memberof the board of health in the nearby town of Wendell, saysthat while she's never really thought much about the plantbefore, the five-member board recently voted in favor of ashutdown so the plant's vessel could be tested. &quot;We don'tunderstand why the NRC seems to be ignoring its establishedsafety standards,&quot; she says.   Mr. Randall, the retired NRC metallurgist, says he is astrong supporter of nuclear power but is among thosecriticizing the agency's actions in the Yankee Rowe case. Theplant's reactor vessel &quot;is brittle as hell. You can't justsay it's probably going to be okay&quot; if you don't know how badit is, he says. &quot;If we let Yankee Rowe keep running, we'resimply gambling that a significant accident that stresses thevessel won't happen. It's not worth putting the wholerelicensing effort at risk, and perhaps the future of nuclearpower as well, just to allow this small plant another year ortwo of operation.&quot; He adds that thermal shocks sufficient tocrack the Yankee Rowe vessel have already occurred at otherplants.   Ironically, the event most feared at Yankee Rowe is atriggering of the safety system designed to cool down thereactor in case of an accident. While the NRC says that is anextremely remote possibility, it happened in the tenseminutes following the lightning strike in June. The emergencycooling system inadvertently started as plant control systemswere switched to emergency generators, according to NRCdocuments. But no cooling water flooded the reactor, becausea pressure valve prevented it. &quot;Everything worked the way itwas supposed to,&quot; says Gregory Maret, the plant's technicaldirector.</TEXT></DOC>