<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910129-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>910129-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Just War and This War   ----   By Richard John Neuhaus</HL><DATE>01/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   President Bush, in a vigorous defense of the Persian Gulfconflict, said yesterday that it is &quot;a just war.&quot;   Probably no commander has fought a war without declaringhis cause to be just. But how is the course of justice to bedetermined? For five remarkable months, that was the questiondebated wherever Americans met. Is it just, is it right, isit wise to use military force against Iraq? The overwhelmingmajority of Americans now say yes, or at least they give thebenefit of the doubt to those who have said yes. In the greatand confusedly democratic deliberation that led up to thismoment, however, significant sectors of the country'sreligious leadership contributed little.</LP><TEXT>   That is both odd and disappointing, for Western thoughtabout the ethics of war and peace is determinately shaped byChristian teaching. In that teaching, there is a respectedplace for pacifism, the absolute rejection of force in allcircumstances. The dominant Christian tradition, however, isthat of the just war or, more precisely, the justified war.What the American people and their Congress were debatingbefore Jan. 16 was, whether they realized it or not, just-wartheory.   Just-war theory was formulated by Augustine, refined byThomas Aquinas and Francisco de Vitoria, and developed inmore or less its present form by Hugo Grotius (1583-1645),who is often called the father of international law. Skepticsclaim that just-war theory is useless because it has notstopped wars. But that is like saying the Ten Commandmentsshould be discarded because they have not eliminated theft,lying and adultery. The presumption of just-war theory isagainst the use of military force. The theory erects anobstacle course of moral testings aimed at preventing theunjust resort to war.   In the great moral debate leading up to our action in theGulf, these testings were very much in play. Democraticleaders in Congress, for example, argued the criterion of&quot;last resort&quot; in their contention that sanctions had not beengiven enough time to work. In addition to last resort, thereare six other criteria that must be met if war is to bemorally justified:   -- The cause itself must be just, aimed at deterring orrepelling aggression, or righting a grievous wrong.   -- The war must be undertaken by legitimate authority.   -- There must be a right intention, such as defendingagainst great injury.   -- There must be probability of success in achieving thepurpose.   -- There must be proportionality of both goals and means:Goals must be commensurate with the probable costs of war,and the means employed must be commensurate with the goals.   -- Discrimination must be exercised so that, as much aspossible, the immunity of noncombatants is respected.   A careful reading of President Bush's address to thenation of Jan. 16 reveals that he explicitly addressed allseven criteria of a justified war. There was some ambiguityonly on the question of discrimination. On the other hand,Defense Secretary Richard Cheney has stated that we would nottarget civilian populations and yesterday, in a speech toreligious broadcasters, the president addressed the questionof the morality of the war and said the coalition was making&quot;every effort possible&quot; to spare civilian casualties.   Note that some of the criteria (e.g. last resort,probability of success, proportionate means) depend uponprudential judgments. That is, people may agree on theprinciples while disagreeing on the circumstances andcontingencies. With respect to just war, it is not a matterof theory vs. practice. The very theory itself requires thatpeople accept moral responsibility for what are ordinarilydescribed as &quot;judgment calls.&quot; While all citizens share inthat responsibility, the &quot;legitimate authority&quot; in thisrepresentative democracy is exercised by elected officials.   In a democracy everybody has the right to try to influencethe decisions of legitimate authority. Whether to go to waris inescapably a moral question. Very nearly all Americansclaim to believe that morality is inseparable from religion.One might therefore have expected that, in the great debateof recent months, religious leaders would have played acritical role. To a surprising extent that seems not to havehappened, and it is worth asking why.   Some religious leaders were indeed vocal. In speaking out,however, they did not so much inform and elevate moraldiscourse as promote their own policy prescriptions. Theypitted their prudential judgments against those of others.That is their right as citizens, but we may wonder whether itought to be their role as leaders who supposedly speak forthe churches.   It has been widely reported that all the major religiousgroups in the country oppose U.S. policy in the Gulf. Thereality is much more mixed.   In its November meeting, the National Conference ofCatholic Bishops endorsed two statements on what ought to bedone in the Gulf. &quot;We specifically seek to draw attention tothe ethical dimensions of these choices,&quot; the bishops said,&quot;so that they are not ignored or neglected in a focus onsimply military and geopolitical considerations.&quot; Theirconclusion was clear: &quot;We urge our government and our alliesto continue to pursue the course of peaceful pressure and notresort to war.&quot;   The bishops' statements are problematic on at least threescores. The statements are, no doubt inadvertently,patronizing. They invite the inference that religious leadershave a corner on moral concern and wisdom, while politiciansand generals are interested in &quot;simply military andgeopolitical considerations.&quot;   A second problem is that there seems to be some dissonancebetween at least the tone of the bishops' statements andother statements of the church. For instance this from&quot;Gaudium et Spes,&quot; a key document of Vatican Council II:&quot;Secular duties and activities belong properly although notexclusively to laymen. Therefore acting as citizens . . .they will observe the laws proper to each discipline, andlabor to equip themselves with a genuine expertise in theirvarious fields.&quot; The council goes on to say that people ofgood will may legitimately differ on what is the right thingto do in specific situations, and then adds that &quot;no one isallowed in the aforementioned situations to appropriate theChurch's authority for his opinion.&quot;   A third difficulty is that the opinion advanced by thebishops is explicitly based on their reading of the &quot;militaryand geopolitical considerations.&quot; Catholics and others might,without disrespect, wonder how the bishops equippedthemselves with &quot;a genuine expertise&quot; in these fields. Onewonders whether the bishops really want the faithful to haveto choose between their comprehension of the military andgeopolitical realities and that of, say, George Bush, LesAspin and Colin Powell.   But that was back in November. It may well be that most ofthe bishops would today agree that the war against Iraq ismorally justified. Cardinal John O'Connor of New York took upthe question in a carefully crafted homily on Sunday, Jan.13, on the eve of the counterattack. While leaning stronglyagainst military action, he did indicate the need to respectdifferences in prudential judgments and he invoked a 1948statement by Pius XII that other nations have an obligation&quot;not to abandon a nation that is attacked.&quot;   Other bishops, however, have continued to declare publiclythat the allied effort is an unjust war. For Catholics in thearmed forces who want to take their bishops seriously, thisraises excruciatingly cruel questions of conscience,including the question of whether they must refuse to obeyorders. Of course, some of these other bishops are professedpacifists. An oddity in the Catholic situation is thatbishops who insist that all military action is morallyimpermissible in principle are influentially involved indeliberations about whether a specific military action ismorally permissible.   A very different situation prevails in another orbit ofreligious leadership that has received significant mediaattention. The leaderships of the 32 denominations connectedwith the National Council of Churches have enthusiasticallyidentified themselves with what they hope will be the 1960speace movement redivivus.   The council includes the declining churches that used tobe the religious mainline -- United Methodist, Episcopal,United Church of Christ, Presbyterian Church (USA),Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, and so forth. Thecost of military action, declared all 32 denominationalheads, &quot;is out of proportion to any conceivable gain.&quot; Thatis a rather sweeping judgment based on the proportionalitycriterion of just-war theory. It fits, however, the council'sreading of the military and geopolitical realities.   In the days prior to Christmas, the council sponsored a&quot;peace pilgrimage&quot; in which church leaders talked to thepeaceloving people of the Middle East, including officials inBaghdad. They &quot;discovered&quot; that nobody wanted the war thatwas being precipitated by misguided U.S. foreign policy. Sucha war, they said, would be &quot;politically and morallyindefensible.&quot; It would &quot;unleash weapons of mass destruction&quot;and result in &quot;tens and hundreds of thousands&quot; of casualties.It would perpetuate conflict for generations and would, inparticular, deny the Palestinians their right toself-determination.   In reciting the horrors, the peace pilgrims asserted, &quot;Itis entirely possible that war in the Middle East will destroyeverything.&quot; That apocalyptic prospect might surely give onepause.   The council's condemnation of allied action in the Gulfwas entirely predictable. The council and the bureaucraciesof its chief member churches were thoroughly &quot;radicalized,&quot;as it used to be said, in the Vietnam era. Over the pastquarter century the council has condemned almost every U.S.military measure of peacekeeping or deterrence, includingcountering the Soviet nuclear threat in Europe.   It should not be thought, however, that the churches ofthe council are pacifist. Most are not. Most subscribe tosome version of just-war theory. It is simply that, in theirview, justice is typically on the side of whatever force ishostile to the U.S.whether in Latin America, Africa, Asia orthe Middle East. During the decades of the cold war, theNational Council of Churches and its cognate body, the WorldCouncil of Churches, were many times more adamant andpersistent in condemning anti-communism than in criticizingcommunism.   Last year the governing board of the National Council ofChurches adopted a resolution condemning the celebration ofthe 500th anniversary of the arrival of Columbus. Thestatement declared, &quot;What some historians have termed a`discovery' in reality was an invasion and colonization withlegalized occupation, genocide, economic exploitation, and adeep level of institutional racism and moral decadence.&quot; Itis necessary to understand this view of the &quot;criminalhistory&quot; of America and its role in the world to understandwhy the oldline leaderships oppose U.S. policy in the Gulfprecisely because that policy is thought to be in America'sinterest.   The geopolitical opining of the Catholic bishops and thehysteria of the National Council of Churches notwithstanding,the American people conducted a great moral debate about warand peace in the Gulf. Religion was critically important tothat debate. Most Jewish leaders, many millions ofevangelical Protestants, and thousands of oldline localchurches that have long since stopped listening to theirnational bureaucracies all helped the nation to think andpray through the question of the right thing to do.   The military response may yet turn out to be a tragicmistake. God only knows. Certainly mistakes will be made.But, on the basis of just-war principles and with reasonabletrust in the prudential judgment of our leaders, we mayconfidently proceed in the belief that our course is just.   ---   Mr. Neuhaus is editor in chief of First Things: A MonthlyJournal of Religion and Public Life.</TEXT></DOC>