<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920319-0090</DOCNO><DOCID>920319-0090.</DOCID><HL>   Israel's Deadly Game of Hide-and-Seek   ----   By David Brooks</HL><DATE>03/19/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><RE>ARGENTINA (AG)IRAN (IR)ISRAEL (ISR)LEBANON (LBN)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)SYRIA (SY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   ISRAELI-LEBANESE BORDER -- The madness of southern Lebanonreached out across the globe Tuesday and touched down inArgentina. Islamic Jihad has claimed responsibility for thebombing of the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires, saying thatattack is in retaliation for Israel's assassination ofLebanese terrorist leader Abbas Musawi. Why an Argentinepriest -- one of those killed in the blast -- should die inconnection with the Musawi assassination can only beexplained by the twisted logic of Islamic Jihad.   Up here on the desolate security zone between Israel andLebanon, that twisted logic constitutes a fundamental law ofphysics. The Israeli soldiers who patrol this region havesomehow adapted to the insanity. They are an unusuallyanimated group, who seem to be selected for their ability tomake ironic remarks about fathomless situations. They play adeadly game of hide-and-seek with the Lebanese guerrillas.Driving around this region, one feels like Mel Gibson in &quot;MadMax.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   That these soldiers would have personality quirks becomesmore understandable as you learn about the moral complexitiesof their task of combatting the frequent border incursionsand rocket attacks mounted by Mr. Musawi's Hezbollah, theLebanon-based Islamic fundamentalist militia that applies ahigh degree of fanaticism to its mission of eradicatingIsrael. Over the past five years, according to senior Israeliofficers, Hezbollah has attempted about 300 borderincursions. Twenty Hezbollah bands made it through thesecurity zone, which is three miles wide at its narrowest, tothe Israeli fence. None reached their target. Of the membersof those 300 raiding parties, one was taken prisoner and therest were killed.   It is a bizarre and awful theater. The officers have nostrategy textbooks to guide them, and report that they aregiven broad latitude by their higher-ups to carry out theirmandate. The Israelis bombarded a southern Lebanese town oneweek, and then cut a deal with the town's leaders the next:Israel would rebuild the town if the townspeople would expelHezbollah's bases. This week Reuters reported that theIsraelis were using human shields, forcing Arab locals todrive in front of their patrols on a one-mile stretch of roadin southern Lebanon that has been subject to Hezbollah raids.   Most of the firefights occur at random, when opposingpatrols chance upon each other in open terrain. Israelis saythat Hezbollah bands, unlike the Palestinian guerrillagroups, rush to engage in battle and fight enthusiastically.   Asked about the Musawi killings three days before theBuenos Aires blast, senior Israeli officers said that in theshort term, the assassination is disrupting Hezbollahactivity. But they admitted that in the long term, theeffects would be counterproductive. But, they insisted, insouthern Lebanon there is no long term. The constant rush ofevents and shifting alliances drowns out long-termconsiderations.   The region's anarchy did not happen by accident; it wascreated. On Oct. 13, 1990, the world turned a blind eye asSyria moved 40,000 troops into Lebanon and imposed a rough&quot;peace.&quot; But Syria did not disarm Hezbollah. Syria'sleadership does not share the religious fervor of Hezbollah,but Syria believes that its goal of extracting concessionsfrom Israel and the U.S. is well served by having anon-Syrian army launch raids and rockets into Israel. LastApril, Syria, as part of an agreement with its ally Iran,gave Hezbollah free reign to conduct anti-Israeli operations.Iran gives financial and technical assistance to Hezbollahand its members look to Tehran for guidance. Their immediategoal is to make normal life in northern Israel impossible.   According to Israeli intelligence, the Hezbollah militaryis divided into three branches. The first does technicalwork, devising the booby traps that dot the roads patrolledby Israelis and Hezbollah's Lebanese rivals. Some are simpleland mines disguised as rocks, others are electronicallydetonated, using radio or telephone equipment. One type setsoff a small explosion and then pauses, allowing the victimstime to begin to flee their vehicle. A second explosionunleashes thousands of small pellets.   Most of the labor in this line consists of putting thebooby traps in place. Instead of using maps, Hezbollah useswritten narratives to guide their soldiers: Walk 50 paces toa bent tree, then 25 paces right to a large white rock, andso on. The painstaking work is in measuring out the distancesbetween the various components of the trap, and then incamouflaging it properly. The Israelis admit they areperpetually one step behind in countering innovativeHezbollah traps and placements.   The second branch conducts intelligence work. Themilitia's membership is drawn from the Shiite community ofsouthern Lebanon; intelligence agents tend to be native tothe Lebanese towns in which they operate. The politicalsplits within these towns are such that very often onebrother will go to work for Hezbollah, another will fight forthe Israeli-backed South Lebanese Army, and another willfight for one of the other private armies. Because of thisintegration, Hezbollah has been able to penetrate the otherlocal forces. Israel coordinates its activities with the SLA,but assumes that any information given to the SLA immediatelygoes to Hezbollah.   The final Hezbollah branch conducts operations. Severalyears ago, Hezbollah would stage raids with as many as 40 or50 soldiers, but discovered that they could not succeed inany conventional clash.   U.S. Justice Department officials have privately chargedthat Hezbollah is engaged in trafficking in illicit drugsfrom the Bekaa valley, but some Israelis are skeptical,saying that Hezbollah is the only local militia that is notinvolved in the drug trade. Senior Syrian officers profitfrom Lebanon's $4 billion-a-year drug business, and there areprivate drug armies such as one finds in Latin America. ButHezbollah objects to drugs on religious grounds.   In fact, if there is a movement for social reform insouthern Lebanon, it is Hezbollah. The leadership will notadmit anyone into the organization who takes drugs, whodrinks, who has debts, or who otherwise violates Islamic law.A few years ago, a leader of a rival secular militia tried todefect to Hezbollah, bringing with him a captured Israeliairman. Hezbollah reportedly took the airman, but chased thecaptor away, on the grounds that he did not lead a religiouslife.   The military wing is but one aspect of Hezbollah activity.Like other militias, Hezbollah sponsors schools and hospitalsfor its members, and has its own police force. Terrorists aresaid to comprise a secret organization within Hezbollah. Butthe car bombings and other suicide attacks Hezbollah sponsorsare believed to be conducted by emotionally unsteadyindividuals tangentionally connected to the organization.   The constant refrain in conversations with the Israelisoldiers on these fronts is that Westerners will neverunderstand the complexities and absurdities of Middle Easternwarfare and life. They use this to explain and justify whatwould be outrageous behavior in normal military situations.   On a cold night last week, while gale force winds werewhipping across the mountain, the Israeli patrols were usingsearchlights and night vision equipment to peer into thesecurity zone. They patrol in oversized jeeps, five men to apatrol -- a commander, a machine gunner, a radio man, aparamedic and a driver. They patrol for seven hours at astretch, peering out into the darkness, and are not permittedto eat during that time. Some commanders make their crewsperiodically do push-ups to keep them sharp.   Israeli soldiers volunteer for this sort of duty. Theselection process is extremely competitive, emphasizing notso much overt machismo as grace under pressure. Tumbling outof their vehicle to meet a visiting reporter, they look likecollege freshman on the first night of orientation week, somechubby, some scrawny, all eager to please.   Their commander, all of 21, explains that their orders areto shoot anything that moves in the security zone. They havea device that allows them to blow down the nearby fence ifthey need to pursue Hezbollah bands into the zone. They arebundled up in their flak jackets, the searchlights areblinding and there is no other life around.   But the final lasting impression of the visit is the drivedown the hill from the other-worldly atmosphere of thesecurity zone. You get in your car and by the time you settleon a radio station you're in Qiryat Shemona, driving paststrip malls, pizzerias and the Burger Ranch. The contrast isjarring. Whatever one makes of the &quot;peace&quot; process, or ofIsrael's tendency to fight fire with fire, the geography ismemorable. As Israelis see it, when it comes to security,that three-minute drive is their only margin of error.   ---   Mr. Brooks is deputy editorial page editor of The WallStreet Journal Europe.</TEXT></DOC>