<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910807-0134</DOCNO><DOCID>910807-0134.</DOCID><HL>   Law:   Lawyers Maneuver to Resolve   Shareholder Suits in Safra Case   ----   By Stephen J. Adler   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   AXP</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   An attempt by American Express Co. lawyer Arthur Liman todispose of shareholder legal complaints about the company'ssmear campaign against banker Edmond Safra is stirring debateamong attorneys pressing the lawsuits.   Seeking to convince the shareholder attorneys that theallegations related to Mr. Safra are weak and should bedropped, Mr. Liman has shown them a copy of a confidentialreport on the affair prepared for the board by outsidecounsel. Mr. Liman also has left most of the shareholderattorneys with the impression that if they drop the Saframatters, the company will be willing to consider afee-generating settlement of other, non-Safra allegations intheir lawsuits. An associate of Mr. Liman says thisimpression is incorrect.</LP><TEXT>   The attorneys suing the directors and some top executivesof American Express meet today in New York to consider theirnext step. Some of them are expected to argue against anysettlement at this stage -- and to advocate trying instead touncover and publicize potentially embarrassing details of thecompany's handling of the matter. The confidential report tothe board, for example, includes an internal memo that raisesquestions about how top executives dealt with the Safra smearcampaign.   The case involves efforts in 1988 and 1989 to spread falserumors linking Mr. Safra to drug trafficking, moneylaundering and the Iran-Contra affair. The campaign came tolight in July 1989, when American Express issued an apologyfor what it called an &quot;unauthorized and shameful effort&quot; andagreed to pay $8 million to Mr. Safra and to charities heselected. The settlement was reached after Mr. Safrapersonally confronted company Chairman James D. Robinson IIIin March 1989, and Mr. Safra's attorney, Stanley Arkin,subsequently threatened legal action.   Following the payment to Mr. Safra, several prominentplaintiffs' law firms filed federal shareholder suits, whichclaim that the $8 million payment was a waste of corporateassets and that the employees responsible for the campaignshould have made the payment personally. In addition, thesuits charge that Mr. Robinson and others didn't properlysupervise the lower-level employees involved in plantingfalse newspaper stories about Mr. Safra, a rivalinternational banker.   Top company officials, including Mr. Robinson, have deniedthe charges and said they had no prior knowledge of thecampaign against Mr. Safra. Separate state-court suitsagainst the same defendants are pending as well, and thecompany has moved to dismiss them. Larry Armour, an AmericanExpress senior vice president, says, &quot;As part of oursettlement with Mr. Safra, we agreed that there would be nofurther discussion of this matter by either side, and wedon't intend to violate the letter or spirit of thatagreement.&quot;   In addition to the Safra-related charges, the federalsuits, now consolidated in federal court in New York,included allegations that the company paid too much severanceto Peter Cohen, the former chairman of its Shearson LehmanBrothers unit, when it fired him in January 1990, and thatAmerican Express wrongfully recommended shareholder approvalof charter and bylaw amendments personally beneficial to itsdirectors and officers.   The dance between plaintiff and defense lawyers in thefederal case began when Mr. Liman, outside counsel toAmerican Express, urged the plaintiff attorneys to drop theSafra-related allegations, according to people familiar withthe case. In several conversations with plaintiff attorneyRichard Greenfield of Greenfield andamp; Chimicles, Mr. Limanargued that more negative publicity concerning the matterwould damage both American Express and its shareholders.   But Mr. Liman didn't suggest that the plaintiffs dropcharges related to the other two elements of the suit,according to people familiar with the conversations. Thatleft most of the plaintiff lawyers with the distinctimpression that the company would settle those claims -- andthus steer fees to the plaintiff lawyers -- if the moresensitive Safra matter were dropped.   Mr. Liman's law partner, Mark A. Belnick, says that Mr.Liman didn't mean to imply any such thing and that, if theSafra-related allegations were dropped, American Expresswould vigorously defend itself against the other charges. Mr.Liman didn't return calls seeking comment.   In any event, in making his pitch to the plaintiffattorneys, Mr. Liman argued that the shareholder caseregarding Mr. Safra was weak, even if it were provocativeenough to stir up publicity. Under the &quot;business-judgmentrule,&quot; such lawsuits as this -- which shareholders file onbehalf of the company against its officers and directors --frequently don't survive. To win dismissal, the company'sboard generally has to show only that its outside directorsinvestigated the charges carefully and found them meritless.   To bolster his case, Mr. Liman -- who served asIran-Contra committee counsel and as lead defense lawyer forMichael R. Milken --  took a risk. He agreed to show theshareholder attorneys the confidential report commissioned bythe board's audit committee, made up of outside directors.The attorneys were required to keep confidential the contentsof the report, which runs more than 100 pages.   The report, which concluded there were no grounds forlawsuits against officers or directors, was prepared for thecommittee by lawyers from Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp;Flom; Vinson and Elkins; and Schulte Roth andamp; Zabel. But whensome plaintiff attorneys read the report, they found thingsin it that they considered potentially damaging to AmericanExpress -- and potentially helpful to their lawsuit if theycould secure the document in pretrial fact-finding andrelease it.   But if they dropped the Safra-related allegations andsettled the other parts of the lawsuit, the contents of thereport might never be made public, and they would lose thechance to question Mr. Robinson and others about it in sworndepositions. Rather than deter the attorneys, as Mr. Limanhad hoped, the report seemed to embolden some of them.   The document offers some intriguing new details about theSafra matter. According to the report, Harry L. Freeman, thenan executive vice president at American Express, discussedthe Safra affair with Mr. Robinson after Mr. Safra firstconfronted Mr. Robinson in March 1989. In an April 12, 1989,memo to Robert F. Smith, then chairman of American ExpressBank Ltd., Mr. Freeman described his conversation. (SusanCantor, referred to in the memo, was active in the campaignagainst Mr. Safra, according to the shareholder complaint andan earlier article in this newspaper.)   &quot;I spoke rather directly and sharply with JDR3 {Mr.Robinson} re talking with Susan Cantor about certainactivities, tell him he was nuts to obtain any informationregardless of its inherent interesting nature and regardlessof whether the stuff they discussed were activities of acurrent nature or a year or two ago,&quot; Mr. Freeman wrote inthe memo. &quot;As a matter of fact the best {sic} said by anyonethe better. I am a little worried that SC may have apropensity to talk to gain recognition for her services.&quot;   Mr. Freeman, also a defendant in the holder suit, retiredfrom American Express after the company's apology, saying hehad done nothing wrong, but taking responsibility because thecampaign against Mr. Safra happened &quot;on my watch.&quot; JohnWalsh, Mr. Freeman's attorney, declines to comment on thememo, but says Mr. Freeman denies all the allegations in thelawsuits.   The report also contains records of payments from thecompany to Antonio Greco, a private detective who, theplaintiffs allege, played a central role in planting negativearticles about Mr. Safra in publications world-wide. A$25,000 payment to Mr. Greco by American Express was approvedon May 9, 1989, and another for about $21,000 on June 8,1989. Both payments came after Mr. Robinson was confronted byMr. Safra about the smear campaign but before the companyagreed to settle with Mr. Safra that July.   It isn't evident in the audit-committee report why anypayments were made after apparent wrongdoing came to theattention of high-level company officials, though it is clearthe payments were for services previously contracted for andcompleted. But it's also uncertain whether the paymentsrelated to the Safra matter; Mr. Greco was known to have donework for American Express in a variety of matters.   After reading the report last spring, lawyers from thefive plaintiffs' firms involved in the case came away withdiffering ideas about how to proceed. Some thought it mightbe wise to drop the Safra aspects of the case if the companywould be willing to make a significant payment to settle theother parts of the lawsuit. Because of the business-judgmentrule, they reasoned, American Express might succeed in usingthe audit-committee report to get the case dismissed anyway.   But at least some of the lawyers involved objected. Theysaw an opportunity to challenge the audit committee as to whyit didn't pursue open questions, such as what happened afterMr. Freeman's talk with Mr. Robinson, and why Mr. Greco waspaid when he was. An effort to discredit the report mighthelp the plaintiffs fight any motion by American Express todismiss the case, or at least might squeeze more money out ofthe company.   In an interview, Melvyn I. Weiss, senior partner ofMilberg Weiss Bershad Spechthrie andamp; Lerach and long a leadingplayer in the plaintiffs' bar, says, &quot;I am doing my ownindependent investigation, and I believe that informationthat I am obtaining will, if taken in conjunction with what'sin the report, evidence the need for this litigation to goforward.&quot; Mr. Weiss declines to comment on the contents ofthe audit-committee report, citing the confidentialityprovision.   Because of disagreement among plaintiffs' counsel, nodecision was made last spring on how to respond to Mr. Liman.But the plaintiff attorneys could reach agreement on whattheir next step will be when they meet today to discuss thecase.</TEXT></DOC>