<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911212-0130</DOCNO><DOCID>911212-0130.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   If Monetary Policy Is Not Enough   ----   By Martin Feldstein</HL><DATE>12/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)</IN><NS>CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE RATES (MOR)TAXES (TAX)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GERMANY (GE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   Strong action is needed to achieve a healthy economicrecovery in 1992. The primary requirement is a much moreaggressive monetary policy. Although the right kind of taxcut could be a useful supplement, most of the recentcongressional tax proposals would be either irrelevant orcounterproductive. Since the legislative outcome in anelection year may well be a stalemate or a veto, the FederalReserve should act now as if it alone is responsible forproviding the needed stimulus.   The fundamental fact about the current downturn is thatmonetary policy has been too tight. The M2, the broadmoney-supply measure that includes currency, checkingaccounts and some savings accounts, has increased only 2.5%since a year ago, only half of the Fed's own conservativetarget for money-supply growth during this period. Experienceimplies that such slow money growth cannot support enougheconomic activity to prevent a rising rate of unemployment.And the zero growth of M2 during the past six months pointsto a decline in output and employment in the months ahead.</LP><TEXT>   Although a falling demand for credit has caused interestrates to decline, real inflation-adjusted interest rates arestill too high. While a 4.5% Treasury bill rate may seem lowin comparison with the levels of a few years ago, the impliedreal rate is much higher than the zero or negative level thattypically prevailed at the beginning of past economicrecoveries.   The many private borrowers who must pay two percentagepoints or more over the prime rate are facing real rates ofnearly 8%. And with marginal tax rates much lower than in thepast, the increase in the real cost of funds is even greater.   A healthy recovery requires an easier monetary policy. TheFed's decision to inject enough reserves to cut the federalfunds rate twice in the past month is a step in the rightdirection. And the 5% rate of increase of M2 in the past sixweeks is encouraging. It may be too late for the Fed oranyone else to do much to boost the economy before earlyspring. But if the Fed causes M2 to rise at a 6% rate for atleast the next six months, the most likely result would bethe start of a healthy expansion with 3% real growth by thesecond quarter. This would be enough to cut the unemploymentrate without increasing inflation.   There are, of course, those who doubt that an easiermonetary policy can really revive the economy when consumerconfidence is so badly depressed and when firms have suchsubstantial excess capacity. One way it usually can isthrough increased home building. Recent increases in housingstarts are in line with past experience as lower interestrates reduce the cost of home ownership and permit morepeople to qualify for mortgages.   The decline in mortgage interest rates also giveshouseholds more money for discretionary spending as monthlypayments fall on adjustable-rate mortgages and afterconventional mortgages have been refinanced. That increase inspendable funds should boost consumer spending. Similarly,the fall in interest rates should lead to additional outlaysfor business investment. And perhaps most important, lowerinterest rates should lead to further declines in the dollar,making exports more competitive in world markets and importsmore expensive here.   Under normal conditions, the easing of monetary policywould be enough to spur a recovery. But there are enoughspecial features of the current situation to raise doubtsabout whether an expansionary monetary policy alone issufficient.   The unusually high level of household and business debtmay deter individuals and businesses from taking on more debtas interest rates fall. The oversupply of commercial realestate leaves little prospect for construction in response tolower interest rates. The declines in expected inflationrates and in personal income tax rates have reducedhouseholds' desire to invest in owner-occupied housing. Newcapital requirements are forcing some banks to cut theirlending to small and medium-size businesses that have noother access to capital. State and local governments arecutting spending and raising taxes. And even the federalstructural deficit is becoming contractionary.   While lower U.S. interest rates should cause the dollar tofall to a more competitive level, events elsewhere maydepress foreign currencies and keep the dollar relativelystrong. If political developments in Russia and Ukrainefrighten investors about political stability in Germany, thevalue of the mark and related currencies would decline. Adecision of Japan to deal with the cyclical rise in itsbudget deficit by tax increases would induce the Bank ofJapan to lower interest rates, thereby weakening the yen andmaking Japanese goods more competitive.   At a minimum, the Federal Reserve may have to be moreaggressive than usual to achieve even a modest pace ofexpansion. And since monetary policy alone may not besufficient, the Bush administration and Congress are correctto be considering tax cuts.   To stimulate recovery, any tax change must pass two tests.First, it must encourage private spending quickly. Second, itmust avoid inducing the interest-rate surge that would occurif financial markets believe the tax cut would violate theBudget Enforcement Act and start a new round of increases inthe budget deficit. Such a rise in interest rates could morethan offset the expansionary effect of the tax cut byreducing business investment and housing starts, by raisingmortgage payments and by making American products lesscompetitive in world markets.   And even those tax changes that can help in the short runare worth doing only if they do not hurt in the longer run.Too often in the past, countercyclical fiscal policies havegiven their biggest stimulus to spending long after therecovery had started, thereby either increasing inflation orrequiring a tight monetary policy that hurt long-term growthby damping desirable investment in plant and equipment. Thereis a danger also that tax cuts aimed at wooing middle-incomevoters will simply give a permanent boost to consumerspending when our long-term need is for reforms that reducetax biases against saving, risk-taking and individual effort.   Unfortunately, most of the tax proposals under discussionwould either do very little to stimulate the economy in thecoming year or would both hurt the recovery and have adverselong-term effects on economic growth as well.   Congressional Democrats have proposed giving middle-incometaxpayers a credit that would reduce taxes by a fixed amountper family or per child. But delays in enacting andimplementing changes in tax withholding could make theresulting rise in consumer spending too late to do much tohelp start a recovery. And proposals to balance such tax cutswith equal cuts in military spending would actually weakenthe recovery by reducing government spending by more than thetax cuts raise consumer outlays. The response of consumerswould be particularly small if the tax cut is regarded astemporary. And while making the tax cut permanent would raiseconsumer spending, it would also cause financial markets toraise interest rates out of a fear that the government hadabandoned the Budget Enforcement Act and was heading towardpermanently higher budget deficits.   The administration's proposals to reduce capital-gainstaxes and to stimulate saving by expanding individualretirement accounts are good long-term policy but are notlikely to help short term. If anything, the expanded IRAsmight damp the recovery by decreasing consumer spending.   What then would be a good tax change to stimulate therecovery? An investment tax credit for spending on equipment,retroactive to the first day of 1992, would trigger animmediate increase in investment spending. The 30-yearhistory of the investment tax credit as a cyclical stabilizerthat is repealed when the economy recovers would motivatebusinesses to act quickly and would reassure financialmarkets that this is not the beginning of a permanentlyhigher budget deficit. The cost of a 10% investment taxcredit could be kept under $15 billion a year by giving thetax credit only for the increase in investment over abaseline such as 80% of previous investment spending.   Alternatively, the investment tax credit could be providedas a low-interest loan rather than an outright tax reduction.A 10% &quot;investment credit grant&quot; that provides firms with anautomatic five-year government loan at half the prime ratewould add less than $5 billion a year to the budget (based onthe value of the interest subsidy). Even if that were offsetcompletely by reductions in other spending to satisfy theBudget Enforcement Act, the incentive to invest would providea net stimulus to the economy because it raises investmentspending by more than a dollar for every dollar of tax loss.Moreover, the investment tax credit's origins in the Kennedyadministration and its reputation as a way of stimulatingemployment should make it acceptable to Democrats as well asRepublicans.   But election-year politics may nevertheless block itsenactment. Democrats have a political incentive to pass abill that provides politically attractive cuts inmiddle-class tax liabilities but that increases the budgetdeficit by so much that it is sure to induce a presidentialveto.   The Fed should act as if there will be no tax change. Whenits Open Market Committee meets next week, it should cut thediscount rate and the federal funds rate to less than 4%. Ifa large tax cut is enacted in February or March, the Fed willhave ample time to reverse its monetary expansion.   A powerful monetary stimulus would also reduce the riskthat President Bush would feel compelled to accept an unwisetax cut as the only way to stimulate the economy. By makinggood monetary policy now, the Fed can reduce the risk of badfiscal policy next year.   ---   Mr. Feldstein, former chairman of the president's Councilof Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard.</TEXT></DOC>