<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910904-0017</DOCNO><DOCID>910904-0017.</DOCID><HL>   Freedom's Perils:   Soviet Economy Holds   Potential for Disaster   As the Union Weakens   ---   Various Republics Squabble   Over Assets Though They   Are Very Interdependent   ---   Will Uzbeks Stick to Cotton?   ----   By Craig Forman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- At the Moskovsky department store, the fewtelevision sets for sale are genuine products of the SovietUnion. Lithuanians make the picture tubes. Byelorussianssupply electrical parts. Cabinets and assembly are Russian.   As shoppers watch televised Kremlin debates on the union'sfuture, many rejoice at the possibility for democraticchange. But economically, the threat that the union maydisintegrate could mean no more Soviet TV sets -- or manyother products.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Politically, we want independence. But economically, thebreakup of the union is disaster,&quot; says Richard Ezmanis, asales clerk from the separatist Baltic republic of Latvia.&quot;What good is a Lithuanian picture tube without Russianassembly?&quot;   The long-troubled Soviet economy is sliding towardcatastrophe. Even before the failed coup last month,inadequate supplies and incompetent distribution were fuelingsocial tension, ethnic strife and a devastating economicdepression. Soviet inflation is running anywhere between 40%and 250% a year, depending on which Soviet economist you ask,and could reach 1,000% by year end, some say. Gross nationalproduct and living standards have sunk to their levels 20years ago. Then, the ruble bought more than a dollar ofimports; now, it buys three cents' worth.   In the long term, the political changes here raise hopesfor economic improvement by breaking the Communist Party'sgrip on power and thereby removing the biggest obstacle toreform. But in the short term, the upheaval is pushing theeconomy into chaos. With the central authorities in disgrace,no one is truly in command of the world's biggest commandeconomy. An emergency committee named by President MikhailGorbachev is still getting organized, but its power hasalready been usurped by the republics.   Squabbles over economic assets and natural resources pitrepublics against one another. The battles will escalate asthey confront such questions as who controls genuinely Sovietassets such as Aeroflot, the national airline, and who willpay the Soviet Union's $64 billion hard-currency debt. And asthe economy veers out of control, prospects that Westernfinancial and food aid, if offered, would get to the rightpeople or places are dimming.   &quot;The disintegration of the economy was happeningperiodically before. Now it is happening like an avalanche,&quot;says Andrei Anikin, an economist at the Institute of WorldEconomy and International Relations in Moscow. &quot;The politicalsituation is changing for the better, but the economy will befar worse off.&quot;   Though the collapse of the Soviet system has ignited talkof a &quot;grand bargain&quot; of Western financial aid in return forreform, a look at the highly integrated Soviet economysuggests that money can't solve its problems. More than cashor credits, the Soviets most desperately need two things theWest can't provide: consensus on a new federal economicstructure and some economic stability.   Western aid won't alter the fact that most Soviet productsare made from raw materials or parts from more than onerepublic. Moreover, military cutbacks won't produce morerefrigerators if no one has the authority to supervise theconversion.   Without a federal structure, the Soviet economy iscollapsing like a body without a skeleton. But there's plentyof talk in Moscow about a deal aimed at halting the slide.Leaders from 10 republics reached broad accord with PresidentGorbachev Sunday on the outline for a new, looser federationof sovereign states. They expressed a desire to create &quot;asingle economic space&quot; and, optimistically, to ensure &quot;thenormal functioning of the economy.&quot;   Yevgeny Velikhov, a leading Soviet scientist, warned thatfailure to preserve at least some current economic linkswould turn the Soviet Union into little more than a ThirdWorld nation. &quot;We would just be producers of raw materials,&quot;he said.   But ominously, the country seems to be heading in justthat direction. In Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, officialswant to introduce their own currency and have already bannedexports of scarce consumer goods to other republics. TheBaltic republics -- now gaining independence -- and Russiaclaim control over federal assets in their territory.Oil-rich Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan say thosereserves belong to them.   Russia, especially, is making the other republics nervous.First, it suggested that internal borders may be redrawn.Then, it made a grab for all Soviet gold and hard-currencyreserves and tried to install its own people in the top twojobs in the Soviet banking system. Russian President BorisYeltsin was forced to back off by other republics and someWestern banks.   Sorting out this mess is the task of a new committeecomposed of representatives from most republics. Thecommittee was created this week at the stroke of a pen, andwho will serve on it and what its precise functions will bearen't clear. Headed by Russian Prime Minister Ivan Silayev,the committee includes Arkady Volsky, a Gorbachev economicaide, and Grigory Yavlinsky, an economist and one of theauthors of the &quot;grand bargain.&quot;   Mr. Silayev told a news conference yesterday that theeconomy is the link holding the union together, and he addedthe republics are making progress on cooperation. &quot;Theeconomy is acting like a cold shower&quot; on the republics' hopesfor independence, he said. He even raised the prospect of aneconomic union that would include the former East Blocnations.   The committee's headquarters, in the shadow of theKremlin, has the air of a war room. &quot;We are working aroundthe clock,&quot; Mr. Volsky says. Two major tasks: first, toorganize food assistance and keep transportation moving, and,second, to devise a platform for an economic federationacceptable to the republics. &quot;This is extremely difficult,&quot;he adds.   It's already clear that minimum conditions for a newfederation include a single monetary system, a single fiscalsystem, a customs union so that republics can't set up tariffbarriers and an agreement on uniform commercial and civillaws. Nikolai Petrakov, former economic adviser to Mr.Gorbachev, says that for the economy to survive, the Sovietsmust ensure that &quot;there are no national barriers for economicactivity or political obstacles to enterprise or freemovement of capital.&quot;   Already, the economic collapse is threatening geopoliticaland human upheavals. A potentially huge migration of people,both within the Soviet Union and to the West, could redrawEurope's political landscape. In the Middle East, Israel isbracing for a surge in Soviet immigrants. In addition, morethan 60 million Soviets live in republics other than wherethey are nationals, and they may find themselves unwelcome ifthe union breaks up.   Meantime, the Soviets are bracing for aworse-than-expected harvest. And with the central monetarysystem so shaky, high inflation could lead to labor unrest,strikes and violence.   Economic issues have been on the agenda since April, whenMr. Gorbachev and nine republics agreed to a new uniontreaty. Since then, there has been talk about dividingforeign debt, handing resources over to the republics,forming a national budget and maintaining centralizedtelecommunications and transport. But that agreement inprinciple was torpedoed by the failed coup, and all therepublics want to renegotiate the terms.   Meanwhile, some are striking out on their own. Last week,Russia signed cooperation agreements on military and economicmatters with the Ukraine and Kazakhstan. But discord breaksout when the republics start talking specifics. The divisionof economic resources and power &quot;appears to be headed towarda very uncivilized process,&quot; says Abraham Becker, director ofthe Rand Corp.-UCLA Center for Soviet Studies in California.It is &quot;working by seizure: `If it's in my backyard, it'smine,'&quot; he adds. And as republics take charge of monetary andfiscal policies, &quot;you are going to see some very funny thingshappening as incentives drive goods and services from oneplace to another.&quot;   Funny things are already evident. Each republic is settingup its own banking system, and each central bank can set anindependent deposit rate for rubles in its territory. Therates vary from 9% in the relatively well-off Ukraine to 13%in Russia.   When Peter Derby, who heads Dialog Bank, a Soviet-Americanbanking venture, recently tried to move rubles from Kiev toMoscow, he was stymied by local authorities who don't wantcapital to flow out of the Ukraine. &quot;If a ruble in Kiev istreated differently from a ruble in Moscow, you are alreadydealing with a non-unified monetary system,&quot; he says. &quot;Thissort of thing may happen more and more.&quot;   The republics' independence drives greatly complicate howfood and other goods move in the Soviet Union. For instance,no one knows what will happen to the long-term agreement onU.S. grain exports to the Soviet Union. The accord is withthe central government, which has a grain-importing agencycalled Exportkhleb. But Western analysts wonder whetherExportkhleb, which now buys for all the republics, willsurvive. Some republics are mulling whether to import ontheir own; others can't afford to.   Mr. Gorbachev and his allies cite such problems in arguingfor more than just a skeleton central government. But how --and even whether -- such a government might be strungtogether isn't clear.   And because no one knows who is in charge, business,especially involving Western companies, is paralyzed. ViktorMozolin, a Soviet attorney, says a major American oilconcession in Siberia is on hold because of the turmoil. &quot;TheSoviets don't seem to have the authority&quot; to negotiate, hesays, &quot;but we don't know if the Russians do, either.&quot; Andthere's no agency to settle such questions anymore.   In the old Soviet Union, one of the world's mostcentralized economies, political pragmatism forced plannersto create a regionally diversified economy that couldn't beworse positioned right now. &quot;Our strength as an integratedeconomy is now our biggest weakness,&quot; Prof. Anikin says. &quot;Thedanger in disintegration is that the producers will losetheir market, and the markets will lose their source ofsupply. Everyone will be worse off.&quot;   Soviet central planners sought to ensure political peacein the hinterlands by giving them a piece of the action. Now,the republics all have bits and pieces of industry andagriculture -- but no republic is self-sufficient in goods orservices. Russia is best off, but still it must import grainfrom the Ukraine and the West, meat and milk from the Balticsand cotton from central-Asian republics. The breakawayBaltics are much worse off; they depend on other republicsfor two-thirds of their goods and services.   The Soviet economic machine would delight Rube Goldberg. Afactory in one region often makes a key part needed thousandsof miles away. To develop poor and potentially unstablerepublics, central planners built chemical plants -- and, inArmenia, the only Soviet factory making a filter used in allpower stations. Without Armenia, the lights would go outeverywhere.   Uzbekistan, in central Asia, was largely self-sufficientin food until Moscow decided that the Soviet Union neededmore cotton. So, in the 1950s, five million farmers therewere forced to switch. Now Uzbekistan imports food, and theSoviet Union depends on Uzbekistan for 70% of its cotton. Butnow that they are free, the Uzbeks can decide to plant foodagain and ignore the Russians' need for cotton. Indeed, theUzbeks are seeking to export cotton for hard currency, andsome Russian textile factories are already feeling the pinch.   The absurdity of the system is obvious at the centralagricultural market on Moscow's Tsvetnoy Boulevard. Farmersand traders from Georgia and Azerbaijan are haggling withcustomers amid piles of red peppers and apples. Theirpresence here is like a farmer from California's CentralValley flying to Capitol Hill to sell tomatoes himself. Yetevery year, they come to Moscow laden with bags of produceand vegetables, paying artificially low Aeroflot fares orbribing flight attendants to carry their freight free.   While the Georgians and the Azeris like the higher pricesthey currently get in Moscow, their loyalty lies at home.&quot;Our future is in the East, not here in Moscow,&quot; says AtaerMuzadil, hefting a green Azerbaijan melon. &quot;My father wasIranian. My people are Muslim. We need to trade with Turkeyand Iran, not with Moscow.&quot;   With such centrifugal forces at work, &quot;I'm not sure anyonecan make the current situation better,&quot; says Karen Galustyan,an Armenian economist who works at Dialog Bank in Moscow. &quot;Wewere very afraid during the coup that they would shut usdown,&quot; he says. &quot;So now, politically, we are happy. Buteconomically, perhaps we should start all over.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>