<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910419-0159</DOCNO><DOCID>910419-0159.</DOCID><HL>   The America's:   Mexico's Environment Will Improve With Free Trade   ----   By William K. Reilly</HL><DATE>04/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>ARIZONA (AZ)CALIFORNIA (CA)MEXICO (MX)</RE><LP>   Almost every international issue today has consequencesfor the environment. And few environmental issues can befully addressed without international cooperation. Thus, itcomes as no surprise that the proposed free-trade agreementwith Mexico has raised fears about pollution problems alongthe border with Mexico and about disparities betweenenvironmental-protection standards and enforcement in thatcountry and the U.S.   Critics argue that pollution-intensive U.S. firms mightrelocate to Mexico to take advantage of less-stringentenvironmental standards or laxer enforcement, as some believealready is occurring along the border. Others raise questionsabout air and water pollution and untreated waste in theborder region. Some contend that the proposed free-tradeagreement would bring more people, more cars, more industrialactivity, more of everything to an already stressedenvironment.</LP><TEXT>   These are not trivial concerns. But I part company withthose who prophesy environmental degradation if such anaccord is negotiated. To the contrary, I believe the economicopportunities arising from a free-trade agreement would offeran unprecedented chance to improve environmental protection,not just along the border, but throughout Mexico.   Some want to use Mexico's and the U.S.'s interest in freetrade to ratchet up Mexican commitment to environmentalprotection. That is a reasonable tactic. But I stronglycaution against abetting protectionist arguments against freetrade and urge environmentalists not to permit theenvironment to be used to defeat what can be a major advancefor the environment: an invigorated economy able to provide abetter standard of living for 85 million Mexicans. This, inturn, will include a much higher measure of protection fortheir health and environment.   Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has made itclear that his country has never been more committed to itsenvironmental responsibilities. Indeed, Mexico now requiresan environmental-impact assessment before any new industrialfacility can be built. On Wednesday, Fernando Menendez, chiefair-pollution monitor for Mexico City, announced in SouthernCalifornia that any company seeking to relocate to Mexicowould have to comply with emission standards at least asstrict as where it came from, and possibly more so. Thus, anynew development spurred by free trade is likely to raiseMexican environmental-quality standards and put pressure onexisting facilities to improve their operations.   Our two governments already are taking steps to addressthe most critical issues -- both along the border and acrossall of Mexico. This is one of the many important reasons theU.S. Environmental Protection Agency now has the first-everenvironmental attache posted at the U.S. Embassy in MexicoCity.   Along the border, the environmental issues are twofold:pollution from the so-called &quot;maquiladora&quot; industries, andpollution from untreated or insufficiently treated airemissions or water discharges, some attributable to rapidpopulation growth. At the direction of Presidents Bush andSalinas, the EPA is working with Mexico to develop anintegrated environmental border plan.   We are documenting the extent and causes of pollution fromthe maquiladora plants and are developing collaborativesolutions. When hazardous waste that is supposed to returnfor disposal in the U.S. vanishes south of the border, wewill cooperate closely with Mexico to crack down on theoffending companies. Mexico has recently added 50 newenforcement professionals to police environmental violationsin the border area.   Officials from the EPA and Mexico's environmental agency-- Urban Development and Ecology (SEDUE) -- have joined withthe U.S. State Department and the International Boundary andWater Commission to tackle several large-scale borderprojects. Most notably, the U.S. and Mexico agreed last Julyto construct a $200 million treatment plant to solve theserious water-pollution problem from Tijuana, Mexico, thathas closed San Diego beaches and threatens to destroy theTijuana Estuary. The EPA's fiscal 1992 budget includes $100million for this project.   In Arizona, the U.S. State Department and Mexico areinvesting $16 million in Nogales to expand its overburdenedinternational sewage-treatment plant. Our State Department iscontributing $19 million for sewage-treatment facilities inNuevo Laredo, Mexico, across the border from Laredo, Texas.   We also are cooperating on the broader range ofenvironmental issues that involve Mexico's interior. InOctober 1989, SEDUE Secretary Patricio Chirinos and I, andsecretaries of state for both countries, signed an agreementto promote cooperative environmental projects in and aroundMexico City. To illustrate his seriousness, President Salinason March 18 closed a major Pemex refinery in Mexico City toeliminate its unacceptable pollution.   Finally, what we know about Mexico's 1988 comprehensiveenvironmental law indicates that it may be sufficientlystringent to rebut the &quot;pollution haven&quot; argument. Properlyenforced, the law should result in greatly improvedenvironmental protection.   The U.S. will continue to work with Mexico to achieve theenvironmental safeguards both countries seek. Yet we must berealistic and sensitive to Mexican concerns. Had we insistedthat Canada meet U.S. acid-rain requirements, we might neverhave negotiated a free-trade agreement with our northernneighbor. As it was, we not only successfully concluded thatagreement, but we also recently signed an historicair-quality accord in which the Canadians agreed for thefirst time to new emissions-monitoring requirements, newstandards to protect visibility, and a permanent, nationwidecap on sulfur-dioxide emissions.   Canadians were moved to make these commitments by the sameconsiderations that will motivate Mexicans to upgrade theirenvironmental standards: a desire to improve the health andenvironment of their people. They did not need, and wouldn'thave accepted, Americans threatening tariff retaliation ifthey failed to cease polluting.   We will address legitimate environmental issues with adirect bearing on trade relations -- such as pesticidestandards -- in a free-trade agreement. But don't ask that weencumber negotiations on this agreement with unrelated,albeit valid environmental concerns that we can addressreadily in other forums, and that imply that Mexico will notimprove its environment unless we make it do so.   I urge Congress to support the &quot;fasttrack&quot; procedures thatwill allow negotiations between our two countries to proceedexpeditiously. Environmental improvement will not occur inMexico or any other developing country without the money toreduce pollution, apply new technologies, support governmentprograms, and pay for inspectors, regulators and prosecutors.   ---   Mr. Reilly is administrator of the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency.</TEXT></DOC>