<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900516-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>900516-0107.</DOCID><HL>   SEC Ruling Creates a New Market   ----   By Sara Hanks</HL><DATE>05/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><IN>STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)</IN><GV>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   The Securities and Exchange Commission recently set off afresh round of debate over how to make the Americanmarketplace more competitive when it introduced a new programfor private-placement security sales known as Rule 144A.Opponents of the change argue that the rule, which provides a&quot;safe harbor&quot; from disclosure and registration burdens forlarge traders, favors those traders at the expense of thesmall investor. But Rule 144A actually can benefit the smallinvestor. More important, 144A will benefit the entire marketby lowering the cost of capital in the U.S.   The SEC was designed to protect the smallest investor --widows and orphans whose pensions might depend on stockshares. Companies could traditionally avoid some of the SEC'smore onerous disclosure and registration rules by sellingtheir securities privately to institutional investors. Thesedays, the private-placement market is growing rapidly -- some35% of all corporate financings last year were privateplacements. But before rule 144A, such transactions faced animportant obstacle. SEC regulations limited resale ofprivate-placement stocks, reducing their liquidity.</LP><TEXT>   For a long time, this system hurt the competitiveness ofthe U.S. as a marketplace. For years, rival marketscomparable to the U.S. market in size, liquidity and qualityof participants have been springing up. Arguably, thesemarketplaces are less efficient. But they make up for thisdisadvantage by being less regulated. When a U.S. companydecides to raise capital, one of the first places it looks isthe Euromarkets. Why would a U.S. issuer ignore the hugemarket on its own doorstep? Because it's too expensive. TheSEC's regulations were not only discouraging foreign issuersfrom raising capital here but also encouraging U.S. companiesto go overseas. The large number of foreign issuers listed onthe London Stock Exchange compared with the relatively smallnumber listed on the New York Stock Exchange provides someevidence of this.   Rule 144A identifies a category of transactions involvinglarge institutions that do not need the protection providedby the SEC's disclosure provisions. These are transactionsthat cannot be carried out efficiently under the SEC'sexisting regulatory system -- paper work and long waitingperiods slow the process up.   There are, of course, a variety of occasions wheninstitutional investors must unload securities: When, forexample, the securities no longer fit in the portfolio orwhen the institutions are required by law to dispose of them.The latter often becomes the case in these days of leveragedbuyouts and frequent recapitalizations. Investment funds,many of which are limited in the amount of non-investmentgrade securities they can hold, often find they must divestdowngraded stock.   Before the change, U.S. securities laws provided no clearway for traders to resell private-placement securitieswithout registering them with the SEC, or holding them fortwo years. Rule 144A says the traders may resellprivate-placement securities without registration and withouta waiting period. The rule permits such transactions only ininstances where the buyer has a portfolio of $100 million ormore. From a technical point of view this is all the ruledoes.   The practical implications of Rule 144A, however, are muchbroader. By providing a mechanism for privately placedsecurities to be resold outside the registration process, andwithout much of the legal hullabaloo and paper work thatcurrently accompany such transactions, the SEC authorized thecreation of a third market. In the future there will be threetypes of markets in the U.S. The first is the public retailmarket. The second is the established private-placementmarket, in which securities are sold on a negotiated basis toinvestors with whom the issuer expects to have a continuingrelationship. The new market is the Rule 144A market, inwhich institutions will trade securities among themselves.   Observers expect that this market will be competitive withthe older Euromarkets. They believe that U.S. issuers will beable to raise capital in the private markets here asefficiently as, and probably at lower transaction cost than,in the Euromarkets. Foreign issuers, who are frequentlydeterred from entering the U.S. public markets by the SEC'sdisclosure and reporting provisions, are expected to widentheir issuances in the newly liquid U.S. private markets.U.S. investors, whose interest in foreign securities isgrowing, will benefit from easier access to these securities.   Will the new market shut out the small investor? Reps.Edward Markey and John Dingell have expressed concern thatthe rule will result in a two-tiered market, with smallinvestors in the public market being frozen out of the bestdeals. But Messrs. Markey and Dingell have missed the point.A two-tiered market already exists. Large institutions canbuy in the private market securities that are not availableto small investors, and can go overseas to buy securities offoreign issuers that are reluctant to venture into the U.S.markets.   It may well be the case that a few issues of securitiesthat would have been made in the U.S. public markets will nowbe made privately. It is even possible that some of theprivate issues will include issues that would have been soldto small investors. It must be remembered, though, that manyissues of securities that appear to be offered publicly arein fact entirely sold to institutions and are registered withthe SEC only to provide liquidity. What is far more likely,however, is that issues that would otherwise have been madeoverseas will now be attracted to this country. Many of theplayers in the private market, it should be noted, are theproxies of small investors: Pension funds and mutual fundsmake up a large proportion of the participants.   Indirectly, at least, then, the smaller investor will havea larger market to work in. Direct foreign issuer access tothe U.S. can only serve to benefit all investors. Should werisk this benefit to preserve the fiction of a level playingfield?   The answer to Rep. Dingell's concern is not to retaininefficient and unnecessary barriers to raising capital inthe private market but to improve the competitiveness of thepublic market. Some obstacles are unlikely to budge soon --excessive litigation, for example. The U.S. also has some ofthe world's most burdensome disclosure requirements. Fulldisclosure is necessary for a fair and efficient market, butthe SEC has come to the realization that it doesn'tnecessarily have to be the exact kind of disclosure mandatedby its current rules.   The proposal by the SEC last year of the&quot;Multijurisdictional Disclosure System&quot; shows the way. Thatsystem would permit Canadian issuers to make public offeringsin the U.S., and to comply with the SEC's continuousdisclosure requirements on the basis of documents that meetthe disclosure requirements of Canadian regulatoryauthorities. If other foreign companies listed on their ownnational exchanges were able to use documents approved bytheir home regulators, it seems reasonable to assume thatthey would be more likely to offer their securities publiclyand to small investors in this country. Rule 144A in any caseis a good step in the right direction. Critics may be rightin sensing that work remains to be done. But the changethat's needed is more Rule 144A-style flexibility -- in otherareas of U.S. securities law.   ---   Ms. Hanks, who worked on the preparation of Rule 144A atthe SEC, is an attorney in New York.</TEXT></DOC>