<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900814-0061</DOCNO><DOCID>900814-0061.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Ozal of Turkey Joined Sanctions `on Principle,'   But Enjoys New Leverage, Importance Anyway   ----   By Philip Revzin   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   EUROP MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   ANKARA, Turkey -- A few hours after Iraq invaded Kuwait,Turkish President Turgut Ozal broke off his vacation onTurkey's Mediterranean coast and spoke by telephone to theleaders of Syria, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Egypt, Canada and theU.S., as well as the deposed emir of Kuwait.   That Mr. Ozal's telephone log during a crisis oftenresembles a United Nations roll call is no fluke: Turkey andits ebullient 62-year-old president more often than not findthemselves smack in the middle on strategic planners' maps.The Iraqi crisis is just the latest example: Turkey is withinmissile range of eastern neighbors Iraq, Iran and Syria. ButTurkey has in the past, and will in the future, come underpressure from the west and north, too.</LP><TEXT>   It fights with neighbor Greece over Cyprus and otherislands. It quarrels with Bulgaria from time to time. Fornow, at least, its most open and peaceful border is the onethat was most tense a year ago: a long stretch along theSoviet Union's southern flank. The North Atlantic TreatyOrganization listening posts and military bases that kepttrack of Soviet activity are now a valuable means ofmonitoring and reacting to the Iraq crisis.   East-West tensions may have cooled, but the Middle Eastcrisis puts Turkey back in the middle. And this time Mr. Ozalis determined to harvest all the long-term benefit he can. Bytaking actions that not only back the U.S. and WesternEurope, but also support Saudi Arabia and other conservativeGulf states, Mr. Ozal is extracting economic and politicalconcessions in return for his cooperation.   Mr. Ozal's callers asked him to make a painful and riskydecision to shut off two pipelines that carry half of Iraq'soil exports across Turkey to a Mediterranean tanker terminal.It took him only two hours to decide, last Tuesday, to shutoff the oil, thus giving a vital early boost to anti-Iraqsanctions. In return, Turkey wants an economic and militarycushion against fallout from this decision, and a much moreelusive payoff: international respect and membership in theEuropean Community.   In an interview Saturday in his large office in Ankara'sPresidential Palace, a jaunty but tired-looking Mr. Ozal sayshe decided to shut the pipeline &quot;on principle: to go to acountry and make them accept your conditions by force (asIraq did to Kuwait). This cannot be accepted.&quot;   Because of that decision Turkey now has a chance to getwhat it has lacked for many, many decades: attention, and aplace in Europe. It has already started. Mr. Ozal wasdelighted that President Bush called him a &quot;staunch friend ofthe United States&quot; during the president's televisedannouncement that he was sending U.S. troops to Saudi Arabia.Mr. Ozal was also flattered that Secretary of State JamesBaker came here first before going on to the NATO meeting inBrussels on Friday. In talks with reporters at that session,Mr. Baker and NATO Secretary General Manfred Woernermentioned five times that NATO would spring to Turkey's aidif it was attacked.   Attention brings leverage. Mr. Ozal trumpets Turkey'sresponse to the crisis as proof of its political maturity andits adherence to Western values as a means of pressuring theEuropean Community into accepting Turkey as a member. &quot;Thiscrisis gives the opportunity to show that Turkey is a veryimportant country for Europe,&quot; Mr. Ozal says.   &quot;Turkey is a very important country,&quot; he continues. &quot;Afree-market country. A modern country. A democratic country.And we are also a Moslem country.&quot; With a population 98%Moslem, and a land area 97% in Asia, Mr. Ozal's boldest movewas to apply for membership in the EC in 1987, posing WesternEurope a problem; Turkey's formal application to join hasbeen effectively shelved.   &quot;Although they won't say it out loud,&quot; Mr. Ozal says, &quot;theEC won't consider us for membership because of our Moslemidentity. But this incident in the Gulf should show thattension in the future won't be communism against capitalism.Instead there will be tension between Christianity and Islam,dangerous for the whole world. Turkey has a lot of influencein the Islamic world, so Turkey in the EC would help avoiddangerous incidents. We're a bridge.&quot;   When asked if he thinks this argument will really help getTurkey into the EC, Mr. Ozal shrugs, then laughs. &quot;No, Idon't. But this is my argument.&quot;   Both the way the pipeline decision was taken and the wayhe is now attempting to exploit it are typical of TurgutOzal's style. For 10 years the former international economicofficial has played a high-risk game with the Turkisheconomy, betting that the free market could create enoughwealth fast enough to satisfy a burgeoning population in oneof Europe's poorest countries. Even though his austerityprogram alienated many voters, he managed to move from theprime minister's to the president's office, taking the powerwith him.   His economic reforms, so far only partly successful, mustcomplete Turkey's transformation lest Islamic fundamentalismor old-style political anarchy return. Following a period ofmilitary rule, Mr. Ozal has mastered Turkey's chaoticpolitical system by amassing nearly all political andeconomic power in his own hands. When he was prime ministerhe ran Turkey nearly alone; after being elected presidentlast November by a parliament dominated by members of theMotherland Party, which he founded, he appointed a loyal butineffective prime minister. Mr. Ozal continues to run Turkey.   Political cartoons usually show the short, stocky, Mr.Ozal dressed in flowing Sultan's robes. Like his Ottomanpredecessors he travels with a retinue, taking a dozencabinet ministers with him on a foreign trip, or hauling twodozen businessmen with him to international conferences.Political opponents say his family has too much influence onTurkish affairs. His brother Korkut has close economic tieswith Saudi Arabia. Another brother and a cousin work for thegovernment, and his wife Semra, is said to have moreinfluence on her husband than his ministers.   Mr. Ozal exudes a confidence that borders on cockiness. Hehas been known to inspect a spit-and-polish army unit whilewearing jeans and a tee-shirt. When attacked in print he isquick to sue for libel, and usually wins. When people aresometimes jailed for insulting the president, a crime underTurkey's constitution, Mr. Ozal can be slow to pardon them.   As is now normal in Turkey, neither the opposition nor theparliament was consulted before Mr. Ozal shut off Iraq's oil.Erdal Inonu, chief of the main opposition Social DemocraticPopulist Party, says, &quot;Mr. Ozal is mixing up moves to raisethe reputation of the government with self-advertisement.&quot;   Not so, says Mr. Ozal, who explains his calculations. Onthe minus side, shutting the pipeline will cost Turkeyperhaps $2.5 billion in lost revenue, fees, and debt paymentsfrom Iraq, and some political capital among hard-line ShiiteMoslems. Higher oil prices raise the risk of reignitinginflation that his austerity measures had painfully shaved to56% from last year's 75% rate. Participating in the sanctionsalso opens Turkey to the threat of military reprisals fromunpredictable Iraq, not to mention the possible loss of morethan $2 billion in annual trade.   On the plus side, the crisis has brought Turkey anunequivocal reaffirmation of NATO's willingness to defendTurkey against any attack. In return for his action onsanctions and promises to let U.S. fighter planes use Turkishairbases in the event of war, Mr. Ozal extracted from Mr.Baker promises to compensate Turkey, largely from Kuwaitiassets held outside the country, for any financial impact;more economic and defense aid; and help in raising U.S.import quotas for Turkish textiles.   Although he says it didn't come up directly with Mr.Baker, Mr. Ozal says Turkey would like to see the U.S. Senateshelve forever a recently defeated bill sponsored byRepublican Sen. Robert Dole blaming Turkey for the 1910massacre of Armenians, and would like Congress to drop itsratio of giving Greece $7 in aid for every $10 it givesTurkey. In addition, Mr. Ozal says Mr. Baker agreed to give adiplomatic push to Turkey's EC application.   Officials in Brussels say they aren't deaf to Mr. Ozal'sarguments, and say the pipeline shutdown will help as ittries to get into the EC. But they also say Turkey's economicproblems, as well as alleged human rights abuses and itsshaky political system leave it too far out of step with therest of the EC to allow early entry. Most Eastern Europeancountries are expected to join before Turkey, which Mr. Ozalfinds exasperating.</TEXT></DOC>