<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911001-0077</DOCNO><DOCID>911001-0077.</DOCID><HL>   Pray for high Interest Rates   ----   By Robert Barro</HL><DATE>10/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES andamp; COMPANIES (ANL)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><GV>FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>BELGIUM (BEL)CANADA (CN)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)JAPAN (JA)NETHERLANDS (NL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SCANDINAVIA (SCA)SWEDEN (SW)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The markets are expecting the Federal Reserve to cut thediscount rate once again -- close on the heels of its lastcut on Sept. 13. But don't expect the stock market to go up.After the Sept. 13 drop in the discount rate, the U.S. stockmarket went down, not up. Analysts said that the market fellbecause the decline in the discount rate signaled that theFed thought that the prospects for the economy were worsethan people had believed.   Worse, because the rate was dropped by half a point,instead of one-quarter of a point, the analysts contend, theFed must have thought that the outlook was particularlybleak. One analyst even suggested that the stock market wouldhave gone up if the discount rate had been cut, but by asmaller amount]</LP><TEXT>   It is, of course, dangerous to put much weight on themusings of stock-market analysts. All the same, the recentcommentary on the discount-rate change makes some sense. Inparticular, it is true historically that an increase in realinterest rates has usually signaled good economic times,while a decrease in rates has typically signaled economicdecline.   Shifts to the expected profitability of investment, andhence investment demand, mean that real interest rates arehigh in good times, such as the mid-1980s, and low in badtimes, such as the middle and late 1970s. It is not that highreal interest rates are good, per se, for economic activity,but rather that high real rates are typically symptomatic ofother events that make investment attractive.   This may sound paradoxical. To understand the paradox, onemust abandon the belief that interest rates are determinedlargely by domestic policy. It is often thought, for example,that the Federal Reserve controls U.S. interest rates andthat the only inhibition against very low rates is the fearof inflation. Or that budget deficits, which increase thestock of public debt over time, raise interest rates in theabsence of an offsetting monetary policy.   The conventional emphasis on domestic monetary and fiscalpolicies as the principal influences upon domestic interestrates has several shortcomings. To begin with, thewillingness to invest and save depends on real interestrates, the nominal rates less the prospective rate ofinflation. These real rates are determined in the marketplaceand balance the overall demand for credit against the overallsupply. In other words, they balance the total of investmentdemand against the total willingness to save.   While domestic monetary and fiscal policies can changereal interest rates by altering desired saving and perhapsalso by changing investment demand, these effects tend to besecondary. Because of the integration of capital and goodsmarkets among the developed countries, the real interestrates in the U.S. depend mainly on international forces, suchas world-wide monetary and fiscal policies and worldwidestock-market fluctuations. Domestic monetary and fiscalpolicy affect domestic real interest rates only to the extentthat the local government can affect the world aggregates ofmonetary and fiscal policies.   Of course, real interest rates in individual countries dovary from what might be called the world real interest rate.These departures are sometimes substantial, but they turn outnot to relate systematically to the individual country'sstock return, investment spending, monetary and fiscalpolicies or any of the other variables that I have examined.   For instance, the U.S. short-term real interest rate inJuly was 1.8%; the real interest rate for six Europeancountries averaged 4.9%. It is tempting to explain thisunusually large gap between U.S. and European real interestrates by appealing to differences in investment opportunitiesand monetary and fiscal policies in the two regions.Unfortunately, analysis of the historical data does notsupport this kind of interpretation. The one thing that isclear at this point from the data is that spreads inshort-term real interest rates between the U.S. and Europetend to be temporary.   More is known about the determinants of the world realinterest rate than about the causes of the gap between anysingle country's rate and the world rate. I have calculated aworld real interest rate by comparing interest and inflationrates from 1957 to 1990 for the nine developed countries withthe best data on historical short-term interest rates:Belgium, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, theNetherlands, Sweden and the U.S.   In the 1960s, the real world interest rate fluctuatedaround an average of about 2%. It hit very low levels --close to zero -- from 1974 to 1979. It then rose above 4% inthe early and middle 1980s, declined to about 2 1/2% in1987-88, and rebounded to around 3 1/2% for 1989-90.   These movements cannot be explained by the variousmonetary policies of the nine economies. Nor do local fiscalpolicies seem to matter very much: The variations in budgetdeficits and government expenditures for the main developedcountries do not relate significantly to the variations inreal interest rates. There is, however, a weak empiricalrelationship between the world ratio of public debt to grossdomestic product and real interest rates. It is the totalstock of world public debt that influences real interestrates in each of the developed countries, rather than eachcountry's own debt.   But what matters above all is the shifting perception ofthe profitability of investment, which shows up asfluctuations of stock-market prices. For example, from 1973to 1979, the value of the stock markets of 10 major economies(the nine mentioned above plus Italy) dropped an average of9.5% per year after inflation. This dismal performanceincludes the sharply negative responses to the first oilshock. Real stock prices declined by 25% and 35%,respectively, in 1973 and 1974.   In contrast, the average real capital gain on the stockmarkets from 1982 to 1986 was a robust 15% per year. Thus,investment prospects were bleak in the middle and late 1970s,but were strong in the 1980s. The corresponding variations inthe demand for credit explain why the world real interestrate was near zero from 1974 to 1979, but averaged 4.1% from1982 to 1986.   The relationship between stock prices and interest rateswould be the other way around -- high rates in bad times, lowrates in good times -- if it were the supply of credit,rather than the demand, that moved markets. And sometimesthis relationship does hold: The world monetary contractionin 1979-80 contributed to the rise in real interest rates in1980-81 and the world monetary expansion in 1986 induced adecline in real interest rates in 1987.   But normally it is the demand for capital, and not itssupply, that is the determining factor. Look at the interestrate movements of the past two years. At the beginning of1990, the world economy was in an economic boom. Stock marketreturns were high in 1988-89 and investment spending wasgrowing. The pressure of strong investment demand on creditmarkets raised the world real interest rate from 2.4% in 1988to 3.5% in 1989 and 4.3% -- a value comparable to the peakrates experienced in the 1980s -- by the middle of 1990.   Then the invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 shoved up oilprices and knocked down stock-market prices: The 20% plungein real stock prices in the 10 developed countries during1990 was the third worst crash of the past 40 years. Theshock reduced investment demand, and the world real interestrate tumbled to about 2 1/2% at the beginning of 1991.   When the U.S. counterattack opened in January, oil pricesdropped and the value of world stock market prices jumped byabout 12%. These favorable responses foreshadowed a recoveryfrom the world recession, and as the recession lifts, so willreal interest rates. I estimate that the world real rate willaverage about 3% for 1991.   The monetary and fiscal policies of the governments of themain developed countries operate as relatively minor actorsin the arena of world credit markets. Governments exert asubstantial influence on real interest rates but theirinfluence is exerted through through political events, whichinfluence the private sector's willingness to invest andsave.   ---   Mr. Barro, a Wall Street Journal contributing editor, is aprofessor of economics at Harvard and a research associate atthe National Bureau of Economic Research.</TEXT></DOC>