<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910405-0135</DOCNO><DOCID>910405-0135.</DOCID><HL>   The New Fed:   Democracy Comes   To the Central Bank,   Curbing Chief's Power   ---   He Can't Shift Course as Fast;   Heads of District Banks,   Governors Grow Assertive   ---   A Delay in Fighting Recession   ----   By Alan Murray   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ECONOMIC NEWS, TRENDS, INDEXES, PROJECTIONS, ANALYSES (ECO)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- In the war to liberate the U.S. economy fromrecession, the key skirmish was fought behind closed doors inthe Federal Reserve Board's paneled conference room last Oct.2.   The Fed's policy committee, meeting as always in secret,was arguing over whether and how much to reduce interestrates. The doves on the panel wanted to cut ratessubstantially to help the economy. The hawks, determined tofight inflation and still uncertain a recession was at hand,were resisting such a move.</LP><TEXT>   Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan sided with the doves. Hisproposal was two separate, quarter-point cuts in short-terminterest rates. But the hawks would have none of it: Theyrevolted.   After a heated discussion, they forced Mr. Greenspan toretreat. The panel approved only a single quarter-point dropin short-term interest rates. What's more, the change wouldbe delayed until Congress worked out a new budget-cuttingdeal -- which, as it turned out, was nearly a month later.   It was a startling defeat for Alan Greenspan. With theeconomy in trouble, monetary policy, a potent stimulus, wasput on hold for four critical weeks. Credit remained costly.Layoffs mounted. Instead of combating the recession, theFed's lack of action exacerbated it.   &quot;Greenspan got behind,&quot; says Paul Samuelson, the Nobelprize-winning economist. &quot;He's got three or four colleagueswho are {anti-inflation} zealots, and he didn't lean on them.You can't be both a good guy and a powerful leader. He was agood guy.&quot;   This is life at the new Fed, where the tradition ofall-powerful chairmen such as Paul Volcker and Arthur Burnsis now a memory. In the last few years, democracy has invadedone of the last bastions of authoritarianism in the U.S. Asort of perestroika has come to the Federal Reserve.   There is little doubt these changes move the Fed -- longattacked for being arrogant and autocratic -- closer to thefinest traditions of American governance. Fed officials areunanimous in praising the new spirit of democracy, arguingthat it makes for better policy and a more rewarding place towork. &quot;It's now a more collegial group,&quot; says Wayne Angell,one of the Fed's governors, &quot;rather than a schoolmarmlecturing third graders.&quot;   But there is a price -- particularly when the economy ischanging rapidly. The new Fed is more cumbersome. Thechairman can't rule with Olympian disdain; he must coaxrather than command. Forming a consensus isn't always easyand, as the events of last October illustrate, lengthydebates can have serious consequences for the economy.   &quot;Democracy,&quot; says Martha Seger, who recently resigned as aFed governor, &quot;is messier than dictatorship.&quot;   For his part, Mr. Greenspan, a former Wall Streeteconomist, shrugs off the October delay. &quot;There is noevidence of which I am aware that suggests accelerating ordelaying policy actions by a matter of weeks has any materialeffect on the outcome,&quot; he said. &quot;It is the cumulative thrustof policy that matters.&quot;   Moreover, he argues that the best way to manage thecentral bank is to tolerate different points of view. &quot;TheFed cannot effectively be run by executive fiat. If the Fedchief executive officer cannot persuade his colleagues of therightness of his policies and recommendations, he cannotprevail.&quot;   When the Federal Reserve System was created by Congress in1913, it was chiefly meant to ensure the stability of thebanking system, not regulate the economy. But the Fed soonfound its powers could have broader effects. For example, itspolicy committee -- the seven Fed governors in Washington andfive of the 12 district Fed bank presidents -- can &quot;ease&quot;credit by pumping money into the banking system. This causesthe federal funds interest rate, the rate banks charge eachother for loans, and other short-term interest rates to fall;and that, in turn, makes it easier for businesses andindividuals to borrow and for the economy to expand.   On the other hand, the committee can &quot;tighten&quot; credit bydraining money from banks, which causes short-term rates torise and the economy to slow -- a strategy for fightinginflation. Always, the Fed walks the narrow line betweencredit that is too easy, and thus risks worsening inflation,and credit that is too tight, which risks recession.   These days, keeping the Fed on track requires considerableskills of persuasion. Notably, the presidents of the districtFed banks have assumed a powerful new voice in policy. Theseofficials, based in outside-the-Beltway outposts such asRichmond, Minneapolis and Dallas, have become vanguards inthe war on inflation. That frequently pits them against theFed governors who tend to favor easier credit.   His supporters say Mr. Greenspan balances theseconflicting interests with skill and that he usually, thoughnot always, gets his way on major issues. Mr. Greenspanhimself says that in his 3 1/2 years as chairman, &quot;I cannotrecall an important decision which I personally felt waswrong.&quot;   The chairman's detractors, on the other hand, worry thathe is sometimes blown about by prevailing winds. At the WhiteHouse, there is even some talk of replacing him when his termexpires in August, although top administration officials sayhe probably will be reappointed.   One thing is clear: The Federal Reserve under AlanGreenspan has changed, and changed dramatically, as wasevident at the Oct. 2 meeting.   At the time, the Gulf crisis had pushed the price of oilover $30 a barrel. The credit crunch was biting. Congress wason the verge of slowing things further by enacting spendingcuts and tax increases. The economy was in trouble, and withthe White House and Congress locked in debate over a newbudget, the Fed was the best source of help.   Governor David Mullins, a newcomer to the Fed from theBush administration, was among the most vociferous in callingfor cuts in interest rates. His argument centered on atechnical issue. The hawks believed recent growth in themoney supply foreshadowed an economic rebound. Not so, saidMr. Mullins. Money growth was limited to just two areas --currency and money market accounts -- that were both boostedby temporary factors.   Mr. Angell, siding with the hawks, derided Mr. Mullins'thesis. &quot;I'm not as smart as David,&quot; he said sarcastically.&quot;I can't tell you what each component of the money supply issupposed to do.&quot;   There was other friction under the surface. Publicly, Mr.Greenspan had all but promised a cut in interest rates oncethe White House and Congress agreed on a budget. To some Fedofficials, that was a mistake. Mr. Greenspan was involvingthe Fed in the administration's budget gamesmanship, theyfeared. The central bank's cherished independence was atstake.   &quot;There were a lot of things going on that I didn'tunderstand or appreciate,&quot; said former Dallas Federal ReserveBank President Robert Boykin later. &quot;I couldn't figure outwhat was going on at the Washington level.&quot; His sentiments,shared by others on the policy committee, helped defeat Mr.Greenspan's plan for easier credit.   To be sure, the Fed committee eventually recognized itsOctober mistake and, in the months following, cut interestrates aggressively. But the going since then has sometimesbeen rocky. On Jan. 29, for instance, Mr. Greenspan wasprepared to make another major move toward lower rates. Thatevening, however, in the State of the Union address,President Bush declared that &quot;interest rates should be lowernow.&quot; Anxious to avoid looking as if he were bowing to WhiteHouse pressure, Mr. Greenspan delayed the planned move,according to top Fed officials.   Three days later, on Feb. 1, a report showing a sharp risein unemployment gave Mr. Greenspan a new opening to cutrates. He first got the Fed governors to approve a half-pointcut in the discount rate, the rate the Fed charges on loansto financial institutions. Then he told other members of thepolicy committee he had decided to use his discretion to cutthe fed funds rate by the same amount. It would be thebiggest easing move to date.   The grumbling began almost immediately. The discount rateis largely symbolic and is controlled solely by the Fedgovernors. But the funds rate, a more important policy tool,is controlled by the full policy committee.   In an unusual challenge to Mr. Greenspan's authority, twoof the district Fed presidents -- Roger Guffey of Kansas Cityand Thomas Melzer of St. Louis -- questioned whether Mr.Greenspan could make the move without the full committee'svote of approval. This time, however, Mr. Greenspan refusedto yield. He insisted the Fed's rules, although murky on thisissue, gave him authority to cut the funds rate unilaterally.The presidents backed off.   As it turns out, the internal rebellion had been threeyears in the making.   Open debate and dissent are common in Washington, butthroughout most of its 88-year history, the Federal Reservehas been different. Its congressional charter was designed toprotect it from the usual pressures of politics.   The seven Washington-based governors, although appointedby the president, serve 14-year terms that give themconsiderable independence. The 12 presidents representingregional Fed banks are chosen by private citizens on theboards of those banks, subject to the approval of the Fedgovernors. The presidents in particular are an oddity indemocratic government: They are answerable to no electedofficial.   Until recently, the arcane nature of the Fed's activitieshelped shield it from political meddling. The White Houseoften appointed governors picked by the reigning Fedchairman, usually veteran insiders. It made the Fed an inbredinstitution. Chairmen, for their part, often ruled withenormous discretion.   That all began to change in the mid1980s. TreasurySecretary Donald Regan detested Fed Chairman Paul Volcker,and urged President Reagan to appoint governors who wouldvote independently.   Ms. Seger was the first of the new breed -- afree-spirited rebel who broke Fed tradition by frequentlydissenting in favor of easier credit. Ms. Seger's desire forindependence was so strong that she once held her own 4th ofJuly party on the top floor of the Fed's Washington building,rather than accept an invitation to Chairman Greenspan'sparty down the hall.   Then came Mr. Angell, a diminutive and energetic farmer,economist and banker from Kansas, and Manuel Johnson, aformer Army Ranger and supply-side economist from Mr. Regan'sTreasury. Both had been critics of the Fed, including itspenchant for secrecy.   By 1986, Mr. Volcker faced a board of governors filledwith dissidents. At one point that year, in a watershedevent, four governors ganged up to outvote him on a keydiscount-rate move.   Into this rapidly evolving institution stepped AlanGreenspan in August 1987.   The new chairman immediately set out to create a differenttone. Unlike Mr. Volcker, he courted his fellow governors,speaking to them frequently and soliciting their opinions. Heand Mr. Angell became tennis companions. &quot;Given the board heentered,&quot; says Mr. Angell, the new chairman's collegialmanner &quot;was the most effective way to behave.&quot;   Courting the board in Washington, however, was only halfof Mr. Greenspan's task. The growing problem was with thedistrict-bank presidents.   In years past, the 12 district presidents -- with theexception of the chairman of the New York Fed bank -- hadseldom been policy power brokers. They had enormousadministrative responsibilities at home; and although theygenerally favored tighter money than the governors, theyoften seemed willing to leave key policy decisions to theboard in Washington. &quot;The bank presidents were the juniorcitizens that were treated as necessary appendages,&quot; saysWilliam Greider, author of &quot;Secrets of the Temple,&quot; a book onthe Fed.   But after Mr. Greenspan became chairman, the districtpresidents began flexing their muscles. Many had been withthe Fed for years, even decades. The chairman and his fellowgovernors, on the other hand, had little experience in theFed's traditions. With Mr. Volcker gone, the presidents beganto see themselves as defenders of the institution.   Mr. Boykin, who retired as president of the FederalReserve Bank of Dallas in February, was in some ways typical.He joined the Fed after graduating from law school 38 yearsago. He abhors debt, refusing to buy a car on credit. And hefiercely defends the role of district presidents in makingpolicy.   &quot;There's a lot of institutional memory among thepresidents,&quot; says Mr. Boykin. &quot;Not to put Washington down . .. but I don't think we're totally dumb. We damn sure knowwhat's going on in the hinterlands and I think it's importantsomebody can go to Washington and say, `Hey, here's what'sgoing on in the boondocks.'&quot;   Mr. Greenspan got his first taste of the presidents' newassertiveness in late January 1988. The stock-market crashwas only three months past and, though evidence was sketchy,the economy seemed to be weakening. Urged on by Vice ChairmanManuel Johnson, Mr. Greenspan decided to cut the federalfunds rate by a quarter point.   Some district presidents were displeased. At the nextmeeting, Mr. Guffey of Kansas City, a 20-year Fed veteran,complained that Mr. Greenspan shouldn't have made the movewithout at least consulting them. He worried that the actionsmacked of micro-managing the economy, and might have to bereversed.   Mr. Guffey and his fellow presidents proved right. The badeconomic numbers in January 1988 were an aberration; itturned out the economy was growing nicely. Soon, the Fedreversed itself and started a campaign of graduallytightening credit to head off inflation. The episode leftsome presidents more convinced than ever that they had totake the lead in the fight against inflation.   Several presidents were also increasingly disgruntled thatgovernors in Washington were talking about policy in public.Schooled in traditional Fed etiquette, they felt only thechairman should make such comments; otherwise, the publicmight become confused about the course of monetary policy,they argued.   But many of the governors favored public debate. &quot;I havethis strong preference, almost missionary zeal, about the Fedbeing open,&quot; says Mr. Angell. &quot;We have to remember we are anindependent central bank in a democracy. It's important thatthe Congress and the public and the financial markets havesome notion of what we are trying to do, and that we havesome semblance of debate.&quot;   In the summer of 1988, the discount rate brought thatdebate to a head.   It was a presidential election year. And while few wouldacknowledge it, politics exacerbated the split between theFed's governors and district-bank presidents.   Led by the presidents, the policy committee pushed the fedfunds rate up steadily through the year to combat potentialinflation. But the governors in Washington by and largeremained reluctant participants. They refused to raise thediscount rate.   The presidents were worried. Although they never said soin meetings, some wondered privately whether the governors --all of them Republican appointees -- were holding down thediscount rate to help George Bush win the coming presidentialelection. By August, several of the presidents had decided,in the words of one, to &quot;go to war&quot; with the governors.   In a telephone conference on Friday, Aug. 5, the mosthawkish of the presidents laid down their demands. Nine ofthe 12 regional banks had submitted formal requests for adiscount-rate increase. It was clear that if the rate wasn'traised, the following week's meeting of the Fed policycommittee could be a battle.   In an informal discussion among the governors after thecall, Mr. Angell at last said he was willing to compromise.Others followed suit. By Monday morning all the governorswere in agreement, except Ms. Seger, who had missed theFriday discussion. Mr. Greenspan took on the task ofconvincing her.   Ms. Seger says it was the only time in his years aschairman that Mr. Greenspan asked for her vote. &quot;I didn'tthink a discount rate hike was needed,&quot; she said. But shesays that, with the election approaching, Mr. Greenspanwanted unanimous approval to increase the rate so the Fedcouldn't be accused of playing politics.   On Tuesday morning, the board voted unanimously for theincrease. Open warfare had been averted -- for now.   With the Republican national convention just a week away,James Baker, the Treasury secretary who was about to becomeMr. Bush's campaign manager, complained to Mr. Greenspan. Butit was too late. The district presidents had won.   &quot;Three years ago, no one had ever heard of most of thepresidents. Volcker kept his thumb on them,&quot; says Ms. Seger.But in 1988, &quot;some of them figured out that they could makethe case they were on the side of the angels and that thegovernors, who are political appointees, are weaklings. Theygot a lot of publicity. A number of them found that veryappealing -- certainly better than being hidden in Richmondor Cleveland or San Francisco.&quot;   As soon as the national election was over, the campaign tobattle inflation began anew, again led by hawkish presidents.The Fed raised the fed funds rate several times in smallincrements.   The final tightening move came on Feb. 24, 1989. Mr.Greenspan called a meeting of the governors to seek anotherrise in the discount rate. Vice Chairman Johnson suggested acompromise: raising the fed funds rate by only a quarterpoint. But Mr. Greenspan wanted a bigger move, a half point.After a long discussion, all the board members except Ms.Seger agreed to go along.   It was to be the Fed's last rate increase -- and thebeginning of the economy's long, slow slide into recession.   President Bush was traveling in Asia when the rateincrease was announced and he criticized the Fed in public.&quot;I can't say I'm happy about the rise in interest rates,&quot; hesaid at a news conference in Tokyo.   Unlike Mr. Volcker, Mr. Greenspan had cultivated closerelations with the White House. The president and many of histop aides had worked with Mr. Greenspan during the Fordadministration and in Ronald Reagan's 1980 campaign. As Fedchairman, Mr. Greenspan continued to be part of their circle,consulting frequently with the president in the Oval Office.Relations extended beyond work: He and his companion, NBCcorrespondent Andrea Mitchell, are regulars in thepresidential box at the Kennedy Center, and he plays tenniswith the president's chief economic adviser, Michael Boskin,and Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.   Indeed, to some district Fed presidents, the chairmanseemed too cozy with the White House. The presidents weremostly proteges and admirers of Paul Volcker, who had gone togreat lengths to maintain independence from the executivebranch, once even refusing to meet with President Reagan atthe White House.   But by the spring of 1989, Mr. Greenspan's friends at theWhite House were becoming increasingly upset. In an unusuallobbying effort, Secretary Brady even called for a meetingwith Messrs. Greenspan, Johnson and Angell to urge them tocut rates.   By mid-May, some Fed governors were privately advocatinglower rates. But the hawkish presidents, intent on holdingdown inflation, stood firm. Although the economy was slowing,unemployment was low; some presidents feared that if the Fedstimulated the economy with lower rates, employers might bidup wages for the already-low supply of labor, and thustrigger wage-led inflation. &quot;We should continue the restraintthat has been put in place,&quot; said Mr. Guffey in a publicinterview.   Finally, on May 31, 1989, Chairman Greenspan convened atelephone conference of the committee to urge a small ratecut. But unable to reach agreement, he delayed a vote untilthe following Monday. An unusually weak report on job growthFriday afternoon melted the resolve of the hawks, who agreedto a quarter-point cut in the fed funds rate.   Throughout the fall of 1989, the Fed continued to easerates, but slowly and grudgingly. The hawks among thepresidents and governors were determined not to fuelinflation, whatever the cost. In unusual congressionaltestimony in July, Mr. Greenspan even acknowledged arecession might result: &quot;I cannot rule out a policy mistakeas the trigger for a downturn.&quot;   By December 1989, the Fed had lowered the federal fundsrate to 8.25% from its peak of 9.75%, moving only a quarterpercentage point at a time. &quot;Baby steps,&quot; Governor Segercalled them.   Then the easing stopped altogether, for the dynamics ofthe policy committee suddenly changed. Governors Johnson andAngell, who had led the moves to ease credit, observedchanges in the financial markets that suggested inflationmight be heading up. Mr. Johnson saw the red flag in risingrates on long-term bonds, while Mr. Angell got the samemessage by watching commodity prices. They joined the hawksin opposing further easing of credit.   Despite continued economic sluggishness, the Fed made nomoves to ease credit during the first half of 1990. And aslate as June, Mr. Guffey of Kansas City concluded thatdespite cries of tight money and a credit crunch, the Fed was&quot;accomplishing precisely what we set out to do&quot; -- to holddown growth and inflation without causing a recession.   Within the Bush administration, however, concern about theFed's inaction grew more intense. Messrs. Brady and Boskinand Budget Director Richard Darman had persuaded PresidentBush to drop his no-tax pledge and pursue a deficit-cuttingagreement with Congress partly by arguing that interest rateswould come down if he did. But officials worried that the Fedwouldn't allow rates to fall fast enough when the time came.   But Mr. Greenspan and the Fed stuck to their tight-creditstance. In July, the panel agreed to a small quarter-pointdecline in interest rates, justified by Mr. Greenspan as aneffort to ease a growing &quot;credit crunch.&quot; The small move wasbarely felt in the weakening economy.   Then on Aug. 2, Iraq invaded Kuwait. And the Fed froze.   Oil prices soared, sparking fears of 1970s-styleinflation. Yet the economy also seemed likely to tip intorecession. Unable to decide how to navigate between the twinthreats, the Fed did nothing.   It was at the critical October meeting two months laterthat Mr. Greenspan hoped to break this logjam. But therebellion of the hawks stopped his effort. As a result, theFed didn't set about nursing the economy's ills until earlyNovember -- long after many private economists had concludeda recession was inevitable.   It was the money-supply figures that finally persuaded theFed's hawks to join the move to ease credit aggressively. Mr.Mullins had been right in October: The surge in money growthwas temporary. By January, the Fed had launched a fullblownanti-recession campaign. The fed funds rate came down twopercentage points. The discount rate was cut twice, by a halfpoint each time. And the Fed even took the highly unusualstep of cutting the amount of reserves it requires banks tohold.   To keep the pressure on, the White House launched aninformal campaign against the hawkish Fed presidents. Whenthe chief executives from the Big Three auto firms recentlyvisited Washington, for instance, administration officialspointed out that TRW Inc., a major auto-parts supplier, washeadquartered near the Cleveland Fed, headed by the hawkishLee Hoskins. If Detroit was concerned about the economy, whynot get the brass at TRW to meet with Mr. Hoskins?   Fed Chairman Greenspan has argued that if Saddam Husseinhad not invaded Kuwait, a recession wouldn't have occurred.The implication of his comments: The Federal Reserveshouldn't be blamed for the current downturn.   But the Fed certainly must take responsibility for helpingslow growth to a lethargic rate of about 1.5% in the yearbefore the invasion. And while prompt action after theinvasion probably wouldn't have prevented a recession --monetary policy, economists say, usually takes six months toeffect the economy -- it could have made the recession milderand shorter.   At the new Fed, however, prompt action isn't easy to comeby. &quot;Greenspan tries to lead by persuasion,&quot; says DavidJones, an economist and veteran student of the central bank.&quot;But it takes a long time to persuade this group to dosomething.&quot;   To be sure, some people minimize the difference betweenthe old Fed and the new. Insists New York Fed PresidentGerald Corrigan: &quot;If you put Greenspan into the Volcker yearsand Volcker into the Greenspan years, the differences inpolicy would be undetectable.&quot;   But something has definitely changed. The new Fed is lessprone to the large and rapid shifts in policy thatcharacterized the Volcker years. It is more conservative,less vulnerable to mistakes in judgment by one man, but morevulnerable to the delays that inevitably accompany governmentby committee. And while the personalities will change -- Mr.Johnson, Ms. Seger and Mr. Boykin have all left the Fed, andMr. Guffey recently announced his retirement -- theinstitution may never return to its previous autocratic ways.   The most frequently heard criticism of Mr. Volcker and hispredecessors is that, in the words of economist Jerry Jordan,they were &quot;hard on the brake, hard on the accelerator, andoccasionally went into the ditch.&quot; The new Fed, no longercontrolled by the whims of one man, is less energetic aboutpumping the pedals. But when the road takes a sharp turn, itcan still end up in the ditch.</TEXT></DOC>