<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900705-0035</DOCNO><DOCID>900705-0035.</DOCID><HL>   Weather Alert:   Florida Has Been Dry   For Years, Prompting   Fears of Climate Shift   ---   Some Experts -- Not All -- Say   Massive Swamp Drainage   Reduces Local Rainstorms   ---   Alarm for a Go-Go Economy   ----   By Peter Waldman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   After scouting the great South Florida swamp in 1905, Gov.Napolean Bonaparte Broward proposed a plan of conquest. Bybuilding a system of canals to drain four feet of water fromflood-prone Lake Okeechobee, Florida could gain as much newfarmland as all the land then under cultivation in the state.   And with the drainage extended south to the Everglades, hetold the state Legislature, &quot;ultimately about six millionacres of the finest land in the country would be renderedcultivable -- an area capable of producing the entire tonnageof cane sugar produced in this country.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   And so the muck was won. For 50 years, state and federalengineers diked and dug along Florida's southeast coast, fromPalm Beach County in the north to Dade County in the south.They spent $30 million building 1,400 miles of canals, 2,000floodgates and 19 pumping stations. The results wereextraordinary: A vast expanse of teeming raw nature becamedry land for crops, providing irrigation and drinking waterfor millions of new inhabitants.   Now, however, nature may be biting back. The Floridapeninsula, in spite of some recent rains, is sufferingthrough the second year of its worst drought in decades. Thiscomes on the heels of a nearly 30-year spell during whichSouth Florida's rainfall has averaged 10% below normal. Andnow the huge flood-control project that made possible theregion's boom is at the center of a scientific controversy:Have the man-made changes in terrain affected the veryclimate of South Florida?   At first glance, the notion seems silly. Florida has wateron three sides, so how could draining part of its surfacemake a difference? And anyway, climates aren't the sort ofthing especially amenable to human influence, to say theleast. Many Floridians dismiss the proposal out of hand.   What's significant, however, is the number and stature ofthose who don't. A vanguard of experts, some buttressed byexhaustive studies, suggest that draining South Florida'swetlands has made the region permanently drier.   There are two basic sources of rainfall, here aselsewhere: large disturbances, or fronts, that crisscross theglobe (and show up on TV-news satellite photos); and local,so-called meso-scale thunderstorms, which build on hot daysand come crashing down in the late afternoon.   Local storms normally account for much of South Florida'srainfall. The current drought involves declines of both kindsof storms. But in the 10%-below-normal rainfall noted since1960, the deficit has been mostly in the local, meso-scalevariety.   Most of the water in those local clouds comes from theAtlantic or Gulf of Mexico via sea breezes. But, somescientists contend, the sea breezes are more likely to turninto rainstorms if they get saturated, at low altitude, bywater evaporating from below. If the land below is dry, lesswater vapor rises to meet the breezes than if the land ismarshy.   Dry land also is hotter, as is the air above it. Over dryland, these scientists say, clouds habitually form higher inthe sky, become less saturated -- and yield scantierrainfall. &quot;When you dry out a landscape, the lower{atmospheric} layers don't have enough water vapor to formclouds,&quot; contends H.T. Odum, a University of Floridaclimatologist and an early researcher of this so-called rainmachine theory. &quot;If the ground is dry, clouds form higher,and it doesn't rain.&quot;   There are probably as many weather and climate experts whodismiss this theory as embrace it. &quot;It is certainly appealingto say that draining the wetlands has had an effect&quot; onrainfall, say Wayne C. Huber, a University of Floridahydrologist. &quot;Scientifically, I don't think it holds up.&quot;   It is an issue of considerable importance. If SouthFlorida is getting permanently drier, the impact on theregion could be staggering. Already, salt water has beguncontaminating wells along both populous coasts, forcingconservation measures in some areas and expenditures fordesalinization equipment. In April, a moratorium on newwater-use permits was imposed in 1,400 square miles east ofTampa Bay and extending south to Sarasota. &quot;We expect to seewater-quality deterioration all along the {west} coast&quot; fromsalt-water intrusion, says David Moore, of the SouthwestFlorida Water Management District. The underground reservoir,he says, &quot;is being de-watered, and it isn't being rechargedby rainfall.&quot;   Drainage, by removing the moderating effect of wetlands onair temperatures, has also brought more winter frosts to thearea, scientists say, devastating huge citrus groves. As forwildlife, &quot;the Everglades National Park is in jeopardy ofbecoming a biological desert,&quot; says Robert Chandler,superintendent of the park, whose withered marshes wereravaged by wildfires this spring. The park is home to 12endangered animal species.   Scientists debated the rain-machine theory about a decadeago, during South Florida's last major drought. After weatherreturned to near normal in the mid-1980s, the debate faded.But research continued, with some disquieting results.   In 1985, Colorado State University scientists JefferyMcQueen and Roger Pielke devised an elaborate computer modelshowing that thunderstorms form much more slowly over thoseparts of South Florida containing dry land than over thosewith wetlands.   The following year, one alternative to the rain-machinetheory took a hit. That alternative holds that the long-termrainfall decline is due to a drop in the number of tropicalstorms and hurricanes passing over the area. But a 1986 studyfound that the largest rainfall deficits had come in July, amonth that never has many hurricanes and tropical stormsanyway. The study's author was Cecil Palmer,environmental-services coordinator for Polk County, east ofTampa.   Perhaps the most unsettling report was a study of what hashappened in a much larger area of wetlands drainage: theAmazon. Computer simulations based on extensive historicaldata suggest the Amazon's rainfall can be expected to declineradically as drainage and deforestation proceed; then, asrainfall dwindles, reforestation becomes nearly impossible.The report, in the March issue of Science, is by researchersat the University of Maryland's Center forOcean-Land-Atmosphere Interactions.   Its lead author, J. Shukla, says the lessons would applyto South Florida as well. &quot;There's no doubt that meso-scaleclimate is influenced by land changes,&quot; he says.   The drought has renewed concern in Florida that somethingbig and irreversible is going on, and a growing chorus offinger-pointing politicians, developers, farmers andenvironmentalists is circling the state's water regulators ina perverse sort of rain dance. Urbanites say farmers irrigatetoo much. Farmers say the cities are growing too fast. Animaladvocates call both cities and farms enemies of Florida'svanishing wildlife. And rain-machine scientists say the staterefuses to confront the real culprit: swamp drainage.   &quot;One of the most important needs now,&quot; says Evergladessuperintendent Chandler, a rain-machine proponent, &quot;is for athorough understanding of how the total Florida water systemreally works.&quot;   It used to be much easier to understand. Before thedrainage network was built, Lake Okeechobee would spillsouthward in an annual flood that slowly flowed in a wide&quot;river of grass&quot; into Florida Bay 100 miles away. The vast,shallow marsh formed a rich wildlife habitat and primeconditions for the evaporation/cloud-formation/rainfallcycle. A century ago, more than 90% of South Florida wasswamp, compared with about half today.   But now, the arbiter of water flow isn't the land'snatural contours but the South Florida Water ManagementDistrict. Its mandate, to protect urban and farm areas fromflooding, dates from a time when water and rain were seen asthreats to Florida civilization.   Wildlife is low on today's priority list of water users.&quot;When I first came to South Florida, there used to beliterally millions of birds roosting in the trees andmarshes,&quot; says Gerald Parker, who, working for the U.S.Geological Survey in the 1940s, first mapped Florida's water.&quot;Now, if you see a hundred birds while driving across thestate, it's a good day.&quot;   In the two wildlife preserves carved from South Florida'salluvial past, the Everglades National Park and LoxahatcheeNational Wildlife Refuge near West Palm Beach, the marshesare nearly dry. What little water would normally wash throughduring drought is routed to farms for irrigation and intocanals to bolster the coastal water table against saltwater.   The tradeoffs are stark. The number of alligators in theLoxahatchee has fallen 40% in just two years; in theEverglades it has plunged by more than two-thirds. In bothplaces, gators that survive -- generally larger, older onesthat have eaten many of the smaller offspring during thedrought -- are beginning their summer nesting season, andrainfall is essential for their reproduction. The few wadingbirds still to be seen in the dry saw grass are a vestigialreminder of the giant flocks that once carpeted Floria's wetgreen plains.   The possibility that draining those plains has permanentlycut the fresh-water supply threatens the soul of this go-gostate: growth. The implications for development of all sortsare so grave that state officials have shunned the issue,contend scientists who have worked within state governmentand at universities. Environmentalists, federal wildlifemanagers and even county government officials claim that theyhave tried for years to get the water districts and otherstate agencies to finance research on rain patterns, but thetopic has been ignored, they say, and even suppressed.   In the past three years, Mr. Palmer, the Polk Countyofficial who did the rainfall studies, has urged the state'slegislature to initiate climatic research, but to no avail.&quot;Our universities are doing polar meteorology, tropicalmeteorology, mountain meteorology -- most everything exceptFlorida meteorology,&quot; he says.   Robert Livingston, a biologist who heads Florida State'sCenter for Aquatic Research and Resource Management, claimshe was blackballed by state financing sources for focusinghis research on ecological issues. Until two years ago, hesays, the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation hadprovided him with $100,000 to $300,000 a year for his work,but the grants dried up after he released a critical reporton lakeside development. A spokesman for the departmentdenies Mr. Livingston was blackballed. &quot;He's just one of manypeople that we draw on as a research source,&quot; the spokesmansays.   Within the South Florida Water Management District,several scientists want more research, but management, whichserves a board appointed by a conservative governor anddominated by agricultural and real-estate interests, ranks&quot;climate change planning&quot; last on a list of 31 priorities.The reason, says deputy executive director Thomas MacVicar,is that &quot;nobody has convinced us that, number one, it's areal phenomenon, and number two, that we have any controlover it, assuming we could find the relationships.&quot;   In Polk County, a key runoff area whose rainfall helpssupply the entire region, lake levels are down by as much as30 feet. Housing built on the shores of Star Lake now lieshundreds of feet from the water. Piers are high and dry.   Water district officials say Polk County's water table hasbeen drawn down through heavy ground water pumping by citrusgrowers, but the citrus growers blame the cities. &quot;If we werereally serious about planning, we'd stop urban developmentuntil we had something in place to correct the watershortage,&quot; says James Griffiths, a farm lobbyist who has hisown explanation, with maps and drawings, of how urban wellsnear the coast have lowered inland lakes. &quot;I don't see anyevidence that we're thinking about the bigger picture,&quot; hesays.   Agribusiness is also on the defensive in the EvergladesAgricultural Area just south of Lake Okeechobee, the plain ofmuck and saw grass that inspired Gov. Broward's visions. Itis now one of the most productive cane-growing areas in theworld -- and the heaviest consumer of South Florida water.But rain-machine scientists say diverting the &quot;river ofgrass&quot; down canals to the coast not only dried out thelandscape but also caused the organic muck to oxidize andcondense in the sun, creating a permanent dip in thethree-inch-per-mile slope that once fell nearly perfectly allthe way to Florida Bay.   The soil loss probably means agriculture is doomed in thearea within the next 20 years, most experts agree. Land inthe southern stretches is already being retired from farming.But the river of grass will never return. If Lake Okeechobeewere allowed to flood its banks again, the soil subsidencewould cause the water to form a giant puddle to the south andflow no further.   &quot;They'll probably try to restore the saw grass, thewaterlilies, the turtles, the alligators, the gar fish someday,&quot; says Mr. Parker, the scientist who first mappedFlorida's water flows. &quot;But the Everglades will never berestored as long as there's the general feeling here inFlorida that water is the enemy of the people.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>