<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900802-0054</DOCNO><DOCID>900802-0054.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Manville Trust Supports Payments Freeze   ----   By Wade Lambert and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   MVL UNRI EPI CCB FREST</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)</GV><LP>   The Manville personal-injury trust, which has run out ofcash needed to pay thousands of claims by asbestos victims,said it supports a court-ordered freeze temporarily barringit from paying any settlements or judgments.   In a brief filed in federal appeals court in New York, thetrust said the freeze ordered last month by U.S. Judge JackB. Weinstein will give it some breathing room as it tries tosolve its current cash shortfall. The brief was filed inresponse to requests by two groups of asbestos victims whowant the freeze lifted.</LP><TEXT>   The trust, which was formed as part of Manville Corp.'sbankruptcy-court reorganization plan in 1986, also told theappeals court that its financial condition has worsenedrapidly in recent weeks. Judge Weinstein began pressuring thetrust to restructure its financing after it told asbestosvictims that current settlements wouldn't be paid at all formore than 20 years-long after most of the claimants will havedied. Asbestos, once widely used in insulation, causes cancerand respiratory ailments.   The trust said that as of June 30 it had total assets of$2.62 billion, but only $156.2 million in cash. To pay theclaims that already have been settled, the trust needs cashtotaling $365.7 million, of which $68.9 million is payablebetween now and March 31, 1991. After paying operatingexpenses and litigation costs, the trust will need to borrowat least $30 million by March 31, assuming that no additionalclaims are settled in the meantime.   &quot;To date, the trust has been unable to find a lendinginstitution willing to make such a loan,&quot; the trust said inthe brief. &quot;Pursuant to the terms of the Manville plan ofreorganization, the trust must continue to settle cases andthus the trust's borrowing requirements will become moresevere.&quot; The trust said it is &quot;severely restricted&quot; in itsability to convert its assets -- mainly Manville stock -- tocash.   Judge Weinstein also filed a response with the appealscourt, defending his power to issue the freeze and making itclear that he has staked out broad authority over allproblems arising out of the Manville reorganization plan. Thejudge's response said the trust faces a deficit of $19.6million this year on claims that have already been settled,and that the trust's current value will cover less than afourth of the 130,000 claims that so far have been filed.   The response, filed on the judge's behalf by KennethFeinberg of the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman,Hays andamp; Handler, said the freeze and other changes sought inthe trust by Judge Weinstein shouldn't be seen as amodification of the Manville reorganization plan. Instead,Mr. Feinberg wrote, the changes are needed to ensure that theplan is implemented as planned. Huge injury claims pushedManville into bankruptcy proceedings.   In its filing, the trust said it won't object to anextension of the freeze, which now is set to end Monday.Judge Weinstein has given the trust until Monday to propose arestructuring of its finances to alleviate the cashshortfall.   ---   FORMER ASBESTOS MAKERS can pursue case to hold U.S. liablefor damages.   The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reverseda federal claims court judge who had thrown out themanufacturers' cases. The companies, which face thousands ofpersonal-injury suits for illnesses caused by asbestos, wantthe government to be held partly responsible. Many of thesuits stem from workers' exposure to asbestos at Navy yards.   The claims court judge had ruled that the suit had to bethrown out because the companies had similar claims pendingin other courts when they brought the suit. But the appealscourt said the restriction on suing in claims court, whichmainly deals with contract disputes with the U.S. government,only applies if the other suits are still pending when theclaims court takes action.   The appellate decision sends the case back to the claimscourt to decide whether the U.S. government is liable forsome of the damages. Joe Hollingsworth, an attorney for UNRIndustries Inc. and Eagle-Picher Industries Inc., said thefederal government should be held liable for some of thedamages because the U.S. specified that asbestos be used inthe shipyard work even after the government knew of thehealth risks. He said that under contract law, the U.S. alsohad a responsibility to disclose to the asbestos makersinformation about the risks of the product.   A spokesman for the Justice Department said the U.S. isreviewing the decision and declined to comment further.   Mr. Hollingsworth, of the Washington firm Spriggs andamp;Hollingsworth, said that more than half of all asbestos casesinvolve work for the U.S. military.   ---   BLACK LAWYERS SAY High Court's pro-civil rights era hasended.   A panel of constitutional law and civil rights expertstold lawyers attending the annual National Bar Associationmeeting in Houston that they should not look to the U.S.Supreme Court as a defender of civil rights and liberties incoming decades.   The NBA, a predominately black organization, was formed 65years ago as an alternative to the American Bar Association,which at the time didn't allow blacks to join. An estimated1,000 attorneys attended the weeklong convention.   The prevailing mood among some 200 lawyers who attendedthe opening seminar early this week, &quot;Minorities and theSupreme Court 1990's: Reconstruction Revisited,&quot; was bleak.There seemed to be a consensus that the second ReconstructionEra had ended.   &quot;Do you remember the phrase, `I'm going to take this allthe way to the Supreme Court?'&quot; asked panelist Kim Taylor,director of the Washington's Public Defender Service. &quot;Nowthat phrase strikes terror in my heart.&quot; Ms. Taylor said theHigh Court is made up of &quot;mean-spirited conservativecrusaders who have no experience with poverty and racism.&quot;   The panelists likened the coming years to thepost-Reconstruction period. During Reconstruction, the timefollowing the Civil War, the civil rights of blacks werebolstered by new constitutional amendments and legislation.But in the 1890s, the court turned its back on blacks byadopting a separate-but-equal approach to racial equality.   Linda Greene, a professor at University of Wisconsin LawSchool, sounded the most pessimistic note when she said, &quot;Ifwe are still resolving 19th century questions in the 21stcentury, we must ask if significant change is possible withinthe {legal} framework.&quot;   But Stephen Carter, a professor at Yale University LawSchool, said the hard times ahead might force blacks to bemore resourceful.   &quot;Most social movements . . . have succeeded without thehelp of the courts,&quot; Mr. Carter said. &quot;We have to ask what itis we can offer as a common cause with the great majority ofvoters. That's the only way you can elect a president.&quot;   Julius Chambers, director-counsel of the NAACP LegalDefense Fund, said he shared the panel's assessment of theSupreme Court, adding that if nominee David Souter isconfirmed &quot;we'll have two or three decades of conservativedecisions.&quot;   Mr. Chambers called on the lawyers to lobby Congress sothat the proposed Civil Rights bill of 1990 is passed. Thatlaw, in effect, would overturn a number of civil rightsrulings by the high court in the past few years.   Still, Mr. Chambers urged the lawyers not to ignore theSupreme Court. &quot;Even if we devote more attention to thepolitical process we still need to focus on the court,&quot; hesaid.   ---   A NEW SUIT IS FILED in the wake of the second McMartintrial.   Raymond Buckey, the former California preschool teacheracquitted last week of child-molestation charges, has filed acivil lawsuit against defendants that include Los AngelesCounty, the former Los Angeles district attorney who broughtthe 1984 indictment against Mr. Buckey, as well as CapitalCities/ABC Inc. and a former reporter who covered theMcMartin case.   A spokesman for the county declined to comment on thelawsuit. The former prosecutor and ABC couldn't be reachedfor comment.   Mr. Buckey is claiming damages for violation of his civilrights, malicious prosecution, defamation and conspiracy,according to his attorney, Scott Bernstein of the Los Angeleslaw firm of Bauer, O'Brien andamp; Bernstein.   Mr. Bernstein said his client &quot;will be seeking millionsand millions of dollars. . . . We can't give him back thefive years he spent in prison but maybe we can help him puthis life back together.&quot;   ---   AMERICAN FIRMS IN HONG KONG are seeking help from the U.S.government.   The law firms want the government to intercede in theirtwo-year effort to get permission to hire local lawyers. Lastweek, Hong Kong Attorney General Jeremy Mathews informed theLaw Society, which represents the interests of Hong Kongfirms, and several foreign law firms that the rules wouldn'tbe altered. The Law Society has agreed to terms providing for&quot;close association&quot; between local and foreign law firms andfee-sharing arrangements, but it's opposed to the hiring oflocal lawyers by foreign firms.   &quot;We are going to continue&quot; to fight the policy by using&quot;the resources of the U.S. government,&quot; said Ben Fishburne,co-chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce LegalCommittee in the territory. &quot;There are trade-law remediesthat are available to us. In the meantime, we will work withthe U.S. consulate and do what we can through jawboning,&quot;said Mr. Fishburne, a partner with the U.S. law firm ofJones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue.   In an interview during a visit to Hong Kong recently, U.S.Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher said that for Hong Kong&quot;to take such a narrow view seemed out of character.&quot; Hedescribed the government's decision as an &quot;aberration&quot; inHong Kong's reputation as a free market. Mr. Mosbacher saidthat he was planning to raise the issue during his visit. Hedeclined to say with whom he would speak, but Mr. Fishburnesaid later that Mr. Mosbacher discussed the matter with HongKong's governor, Sir David Wilson.   &quot;We don't want to practice local law,&quot; said Mr. Fishburne.&quot;We just want local legal services under our roof. Lawyersthat work on the same projects work best in close proximity.&quot;   ---   PAUL, WEISS, Rifkind, Wharton andamp; Garrison, a New York lawfirm, plans to open a London office next week. Corporatepartner Neale M. Albert and two associates will handle mostlycorporate transactional work, according to another partner.The office also will work with the Paris branch to expand thefirm's European practice.   ---   Stephen F. Stine contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>