<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900927-0104</DOCNO><DOCID>900927-0104.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS:   Can Asian Games Wipe Out the Stain of Tiananmen?   ----   By Linda Jaivin</HL><DATE>09/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><LP>   Beijing -- Among the myriad souvenirs of the 11th AsianGames on sale here are pins showing the jolly panda Panpanplaying Asiad sports. As he moves, Panpan's eyes flash with abattery-fed red light. Panpan rows, Panpan plays baseball --and Panpan the sharpshooter wields a rifle. This makesBeijing residents gasp at what they suppose is a HongKong-produced satire: Panpan as a People's Liberation Armysoldier whose eyes, as the Chinese expression goes, &quot;haveturned red with killing.&quot;   Live pandas, however, seem to share the Beijing public'sgenerally dim view of the Asian Games, which opened Saturdayand run through Oct. 7. Several months ago, pop singer Hu Yuesang the official Asian Games tune, &quot;Raise High the Torch ofthe Asiad,&quot; in the panda cage at Tianjin Zoo. As Ms. Hucrooned on live television, China's cuddliest creature, who'dbeen lying decoratively in the background, rolled almostimperceptibly forward and sank its fangs into the singer'sleg. The song dissolved in a shriek and the broadcast wasabruptly cut. The Chinese leadership, which is staking morethan half a billion dollars and an incalculable amount offace on the 16-day spectacle, isn't about to let somebamboo-muncher spoil the show.</LP><TEXT>   China has been planning for the Asiad since winning thebid for the Games in 1986. If all goes well during the Games,Beijing figures it has a fighting chance of hosting theOlympics in 2000, a gold-medal event in internationalprestige. Since June 4 last year, the preparations have takenon a fresh urgency. The leadership sees the Asiad as a chanceto undo some of the damage it inflicted on China's image whenit ordered the tanks into Tiananmen Square.   As a public relations exercise, the Games are aimed at theright target. Despite ideological differences, Asiancountries -- some of which are in no position to chastiseChina on human-rights issues -- have made far fewer officialnoises over the violent suppression of the 1989 protestmovement than the West. Despite initial rumblings last year,not one of the 38 countries invited has boycotted the Games,though the Olympic Council of Asia voted to exclude Iraqbecause of its invasion of Kuwait. (Several Americanpublications reported that Jordan isn't participating, butChina's Xinhua News Agency could not confirm this.) SouthKorea, which does not have diplomatic relations with China,sent advisers to help work out the logistics. Even Taiwan,which arguably has more reason to boycott the Games thananyone else, is participating, sending more than 400 athletesas its largest overseas athletic delegation ever.   Beijing has been given a major facelift for the event. InAugust, road workers finished resurfacing Changan Avenue toobliterate the tank treads from last year's violence. Inkeeping with the avenue's new look, only vehicles officiallydeemed attractive are allowed to cruise along it; Jeeps andtwo-seaters have been banned as too downmarket for Beijing'spremier boulevard.   According to one of the half-dozen books of Asian Gamestrivia available here, 2.31 million workers toiled to plant500,000 trees and 200,000 flowers, and lay down 480,000square yards of lawn in the new Asian Games Village andaround the stadiums of the northern suburbs alone. They alsocultivated an additional 1.89 million trees, 700,000 flowersand 2.4 million square yards of lawn in the eight other keydistricts.   Workers also applied fresh paint to buildings and wallsalong major arteries in the capital as well as those close tocompetition sites. New walls hide homes too ramshackle forfresh paint to improve.   Where it's possible that athletes or visitors might strayinto residential buildings, they've been given a touch ofinterior redecoration. In one apartment block, workersspray-painted the entire stairwell white -- including thewindows, the floor and a few bicycles that happened to bechained to the railings. Foreigners call the result aPotemkin City. The Chinese expression is earthier: &quot;donkeyturds,&quot; meaning something that's shiny on the outside but youknow what in the middle.   If the people of Beijing do not seem impressed with allthe construction and planting, perhaps that's because theyhave to pay for it. Having been told that China's economy isnot doing as well as hoped and that they will have to tightentheir belts, they are not amused that they have been forcedto buy Asiad bonds to help foot the Games' $530 million bill.   They also have had to put up with a whole slew ofcampaigns to beautify the human environment. Parents areforbidden to carry their children on bicycle handlebars.Squadrons of citizens have been pressed into &quot;volunteer&quot;service as traffic controllers, and stiff fines are forcingMad Max bicyclists into line. Even toilet attendants have amission: Enforce the rule that no more than six mosquitoesinhabit any public toilet. Police are empowered to fine notonly spitters and litterers but also shop attendants whodon't wear ties. Beijing's surly waiters have been instructedto be friendly, an order that that does not appear to havehad much effect.   As an additional measure of preventive social medicine,mental patients and neighborhood bullies have been put safelyunder lock and key. Itinerant provincials have been roundedup and sent home. The Beijing Housing Service Corporation forDiplomatic Missions also has put in its oar, issuingdirectives asking foreign residents to put their cigarettestubs in ashtrays, lock their doors when going out and watchthat their children do not play with fire.   Drivers of the more than 2,500 vehicles commandeered forofficial use during the Games had to take special classes insuch subjects as traffic safety and foreign languages. Onetaxi driver assigned to the Games happily demonstrated hismethod for mastering the latter: &quot;How do you do?&quot; isremembered as &quot;rats' stomachs have poison&quot; (haodu youdu).That, he explained, is how you greet people in Japanese.   The authorities hope that as many as 200,000 tourists willvisit Beijing during the Games. Once they've got them, theyare hitting them up. The Far Eastern Economic Reviewestimated that taxi fares would rise almost 70% during theGames, while already pricey hotel tariffs would rise 35%.Tourists might feel ripped off, but they should be safe. Amassive anti-crime campaign was launched earlier in the year.According to Liu Fuzhu, head of the Supreme People'sProcurate, there were 210,000 arrests nationwide betweenJanuary and May, a large increase over last year. The law andorder campaign intensified over the summer; AmnestyInternational noted with concern that &quot;secret executions havebeen extensive.&quot;   The unusually wet summer weather has prompted speculationthat Beijing will be rocked by an earthquake during theGames, a possibility officially denied in late August by LiQinghua, spokesman for the State Seismological Bureau. Withbreezy confidence, Mr. Li assured Beijing residents that notonly would no earthquake strike, but that the weather duringthe Games would be the finest of the whole year.   The weather may be the least of the authorities' worries.They seem to fear that the citizens of Beijing will try totake their revenge for the massacre of 1989 on the Games of1990, particularly since the Communist Party has so obviouslystaked its prestige on the Asiad. The head of the ChineseAsian Games committee is, after all, Mayor Chen Xitong,widely identified with the violent suppression of the 1989protest movement and subsequent purges. The word in Beijingis that the workplaces responsible for the distribution oftickets to the Games have to provide the police with the nameof each person given a ticket together with his or her seatnumber. Even the holders of the 200,000 passes issued toworkers, athletes, guests and so on are subject to securitychecks each time they enter one of the Games' sites.   Security measures can prevent sabotage, but not mockery.&quot;Do you know what `Panpan' {literally `hope hope'} standsfor?&quot; asks one typically cynical Beijing resident. &quot;They hopethe foreigners come, and they hope they bring lots of moneywith them.&quot;   Which brings us to another Beijing joke: &quot;What's thespirit of the Asian Games? Live for today, for there will beno tomorrow.&quot;   ---   Ms. Jaivin is a writer and associate of the ContemporaryChina Centre at Australian National University.</TEXT></DOC>