<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900420-0056</DOCNO><DOCID>900420-0056.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Suit Against Fannie Mae Claims Redlining   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Wayne E. Green   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B12</SO><CO>   FNM LABOR WNEWS XON DD</CO><IN>DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC (FIS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE BANKERS, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A St. Louis developer is suing the Federal NationalMortgage Association, claiming that the agency has declinedto finance projects in a section of North St. Louis becauseit is too blighted.   The suit is the first in the nation against Fannie Mae toallege redlining, the practice by lenders of rejecting loanapplications in poor neighborhoods. Filed by developer BruceRing, the suit seeks $103.5 million in damages against bothFannie Mae and First Interstate Mortgage Co. of Illinois, itslocal agent in St. Louis.</LP><TEXT>   Fannie Mae is a federally chartered, publicly ownedcompany that stimulates housing development in poor andmoderate-income neighborhoods by buying mortgages andrefinancing them at reduced rates to qualified developers.   A Fannie Mae spokesman said this is the first time thecompany has been accused of redlining. &quot;Fannie Mae does notaccept or condone or permit redlining in any fashion,&quot; saidDavid Jeffers. &quot;All you have to do is look at ourunderwriting standards and see that is something we take veryseriously.&quot; The agency says it has provided refinancing forfour projects in North St. Louis.   Mr. Ring's allegations are being investigated by Sen. JohnC. Danforth, (R, Mo.), and Reps. William L. Clay and RichardA. Gephardt, both Democrats from St. Louis. All three haveasked Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp toinvestigate.   Mr. Ring applied to Fannie Mae through First Interstatelast August to refinance $3.6 million in short-term loans sohe could renovate seven run-down apartment buildings in St.Louis. Five of the buildings are in the city's depressednorthern section. According to his suit, filed in U.S.District Court in St. Louis, Fannie Mae rejected the entireapplication after a First Interstate assistant vice-presidentinspected the properties.   According to the suit, the bank official described two ofthe properties as &quot;pioneer locations,&quot; adding that he &quot;wouldnot personally want to invest in either location.&quot; Anotherlocation, he wrote, &quot;definitely had some rough areas within afew blocks.&quot;   Mr. Ring is asking for $100 million in punitive damagesplus $3.5 million, which he says is the difference betweenhis aggregate mortgage payments over 35 years throughconventional financing and the 8.1% rate available throughFannie Mae.   Pretrial hearings in Mr. Ring's suit are scheduled forApril 27.   ---   COMPANIES MUST DISCLOSE shaky finances to some applicants,a Colorado court rules.   An employer may not have to divulge its financialcondition to every job applicant it interviews, the ColoradoCourt of Appeals said. But full disclosure is required if acompany has made statements to an applicant that would createa &quot;false impression&quot; about its outlook and the applicant'sfuture employment prospects.   The decision earlier this month upheld a jury's award of$250,000 in damages to Roberta Berger, who had sued SecurityPacific Information Services Inc. for fraudulent concealmentarising out of her hiring and termination by the Denvercompany.   Ms. Berger was recruited by the company, and had movedfrom New Orleans to Denver to accept a job in January 1986.She was terminated some eight months later, after thecomputer project she had been hired to manage wasdiscontinued. Ms. Berger contended that in interviews for thejob, Security Pacific Information had presented a positivepicture of the company and her future, concealing itsfinancial losses and the &quot;substantial, known risk&quot; that herproject might soon be abandoned.   The appeals court upheld a jury award that included nearly$92,000 in actual damages, covering lost earnings and losseson the sale of a house Ms. Berger bought in Denver. Punitivedamages made up the balance of the award.   Andrew T. Brake, a Denver attorney who represented Ms.Berger, noted that Colorado is a state that permits employersunder certain conditions to terminate a worker without causeunder a so-called employment-at-will law.   Attorneys for Security Pacific Information couldn't bereached for comment.   ---   CHIEF ATTORNEY IN ATandamp;T antitrust litigation will open hisown law firm.   George L. Saunders Jr., a partner with the Chicago lawfirm of Sidley andamp; Austin, is leaving the firm in June to openhis own law firm. He hopes to recruit a small group of&quot;older, successful lawyers&quot; who want to leave big-firmpractice, he says.   Mr. Saunders, 58 years old, is not taking any businesswith him, including American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., theclient that brought him national attention. Mr. Saunders wasATandamp;T's lead trial counsel in the long-running antitrustlitigation brought by the Justice Department and MCICommunications Corp. that led to the breakup of the BellSystem.   H. Blair White, a Sidley andamp; Austin partner, says he wassurprised Mr. Saunders decided to leave after 28 years at thefirm. &quot;It's a very ambitious thing to do in your career atthat point,&quot; Mr. White says. Sidley partner Howard J.Trienens said Mr. Saunders has been frustrated by having toturn away some business because of conflict-of-interestproblems with other clients of the law firm.   Mr. Saunders says he has long contemplated the move.&quot;Maybe you could call it a midlife crisis,&quot; he says.   ---   JUDGE CLEARS THE WAY for lawsuit accusing Exxon and Conocoof rigging oil prices.   In federal court in Manhattan, Judge William Connerrejected the oil companies' motions to dismiss the suit,which was filed in 1986 by Transnor Ltd., an oil trader basedin Bermuda. The suit accuses Exxon Corp., Conoco Inc. and aConoco subsidiary of conspiring to depress certain crude oilprices in order to evade taxes in Britain. It seeks damagestotaling about $261 million, stemming from losses Transnorsays it suffered because of the lower prices.   Transnor accused the companies of forcing down the priceof Brent oil, a widely traded North Sea crude oil, by sellingcargoes of the oil at below-market prices. Transnor hadbought two cargoes of Brent oil, but then refused to acceptdelivery after the market value plunged. Transnor allegesthat after forcing the oil prices down, the oil companieswere able to use a trading technique know as tax spinning toincrease profit margins on the refined oil products. Britaintaxes refinery profits at a lower rate than crude oilprofits.   Exxon and Conoco argued that the case should be thrown outon several grounds -- including their claim that a conspiracyis unlikely because they would have hurt themselves bydepressing oil prices. Judge Conner, however, said it isplausible that the alleged pricing scheme's tax benefits andother advantages could have offset the companies' lower crudeoil revenue.   The oil companies, which previously have said the suit iswithout merit, also claimed that the case should be dismissedbecause the Brent oil market is an international market. Theyargued that a U.S. court has no jurisdiction in suchdisputes. But Judge Conner said that most of the trading inoil contracts is done in New York and Boston.   A spokesman for Exxon said the company was disappointedthat Judge Conner refused to dismiss the case. Officials atConoco, a unit of Du Pont Co., couldn't be reached forcomment.   Edward Swan, an attorney for Transnor, said the trial isset to begin May 21.   ---   BASKIN FLAHERTY suffers Pittsburgh defections.   Half the members of the Pittsburgh office of BaskinFlaherty Elliott andamp; Mannino, a Philadelphia-based regional lawfirm, have resigned, including name partner and formerChairman Philip Baskin.   Mr. Baskin left last week. About 15 of Baskin Flaherty's32 lawyers in Pittsburgh also have left to begin their ownfirm. All of the defections took place amid rumors ofdissatisfaction over the direction of the firm.   Baskin Flaherty is developing a more specialized practicein complex litigation, financial services, health law andenvironmental law, said the firm's President Edward F.Mannino, who specializes in banking litigation, and John M.Elliott, also a name partner.   The Pittsburgh office, said Mr. Elliott, was more orientedtoward less sophisticated litigation in domestic relations,personal injury and real estate, which Mr. Elliott said werenot compatible with the firm's goals.   &quot;It's a question of how you emphasize things,&quot; said Mr.Baskin. &quot;We happen to think that while the new area is veryimportant and should be properly addressed, you don't throwthe old things out, too.&quot;   Baskin Flaherty is currently filling the positions andopening a seven-lawyer office in Washington D.C.   In Pittsburgh, meanwhile, the firm recently hired CharlesSheehey, former U.S. attorney for the Western District ofPennsylvania, as head of that office's litigation department.</TEXT></DOC>