<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900404-0097</DOCNO><DOCID>900404-0097.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Indonesians Divided on Life After Suharto   ---   Economy Is Lively But   National Identity Unclear   ----   By James P. Sterba   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   JAKARTA, Indonesia -- Who will be the next leader ofIndonesia? It is the question inside Indonesia these days.   But outside Indonesia, the question often becomes: Whocares? That's because Indonesia, after 45 years ofindependence, remains perhaps the world's most nebulousnation.</LP><TEXT>   Indonesians began thinking about a new leader afterPresident Suharto, who was elected to a five-year term in1988, hinted that he might step down at the end of his termin 1993, when he will be 72. But so far, they don't seem tohave warmed to the idea of anyone else in particular takingover. After a quarter-century of quiet economic developmentunder Suharto -- helped by hefty oil-export earnings --Indonesians believe they are approaching the economic&quot;take-off&quot; stage and wonder where it will take them.   Many foreigners don't know where Indonesia is goingeither. In fact, they don't know where Indonesia is. Theyoften confuse it with Indochina. Foreign Affairs, the Councilon Foreign Relations' quarterly publication, headlined itslatest article about the place &quot;Invisible Indonesia.&quot;   Fifteenth-century Europeans knew it better. Indonesia,then called the Spice Islands, is where Columbus was tryingto go when he bumped into America.   Today, with 178 million people, it is the fifth largestnation in the world, after China, India, the Soviet Union andthe U.S. It has the world's biggest population of Moslems,who make up roughly 90% of the population.   Indonesia ranks 15th in the world in land area. But onething that makes Indonesia less noticeable abroad is that itis scattered over 13,667 islands and parts of islands,including three of the world's six largest islands: NewGuinea (which is bigger than Texas), Borneo (bigger thanFrance) and Sumatra (bigger than California). Placed over amap of North America, Indonesia would stretch from Alaska toNew York.   Only China and India surpass it in Asia, population-wise,and as a big potential marketplace and labor source. But muchof China's glow was tarnished at Tiananmen Square last June.And India sputters along in its mire of red tape. Indonesia,meanwhile, looks bright in comparison, so businesses eager toexpand in Asia care very much about who leads Indonesia next.   Diplomats and geostrategic thinkers certainly care. Theyremember when Indonesia, under the rule of the flamboyantSukarno and containing the world's third largest CommunistParty, was a major source of instability in the region.   Suharto's New Order regime changed all that. It was bornin trauma Oct. 1, 1965, when an attempted coup within thearmy was put down by Suharto and other generals in acountercoup that turned into ethnic, religious and politicalviolence that killed hundreds of thousands of Indonesians --many of them ethnic Chinese. More than 100,000 suspectedCommunists were jailed or exiled to island prisons.   &quot;What Suharto did was to put this place on the shelf for25 years,&quot; says a Western diplomat. Suharto stopped shovingIndonesia's weight around in the region -- with the exceptionof its annexation of Portuguese Timor in 1975-76, for whichit continues to be condemned by human-rights groups -- andbecame a moderating influence in the Non-Aligned Movement andthe Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.   Suharto's focus was on internal development, especially inrural areas where 80% of the population lives. He built roadsand irrigation projects, stressed food production and familyplanning. Some Western diplomats in Jakarta say Suharto isenormously popular in the countryside, so much so that hewould win a direct election for president. But Indonesiansvote indirectly, electing members of a parliament who, alongwith members the president chooses in equal number, pick thenext president. The system is stacked to favor the incumbent.   Ask middle-class Indonesians in urban areas what kind ofsuccessor they want and one often hears, &quot;Someone just likeSuharto,&quot; though they sometimes add, &quot;but without his kids.&quot;Suharto's children -- and allegations of them using theirinfluence to accumulate business networks and enormous wealth-- run a close second to the succession itself as topics onthe Jakarta cocktail circuit.   Western-educated technocrats -- who have had a largelyfree rein unique in the developing world to run the economyand plan development -- are in no hurry to see Suharto go. Hehas protected and fostered them in ways a successor would behardpressed to match even if he wanted to.   Suharto is an authoritarian ruler, a tough enforcer ofstability. He hasn't hesitated to crack down on militants onthe left or right, usually accusing them of being Communistsor radical Moslems, the twin threats to Indonesia's stabilityin the Suharto lexicon. He has thus alienated students andreligious leaders, journalists and others wanting lesscensorship and more due process and has been condemned byinternational human-rights groups.   It is generally agreed that the three most importantforces in the succession selection will be, first, PresidentSuharto himself, followed by the military and then by Golkar,the ruling political party.   Dozens of names have been floated. But a single manemerges. Born in a poor village in central Java, son of aminor irrigation official, he chose a military career androse through the ranks. He emerged as a patriot with a strongreligious faith who carried on as a respected politician,quietly helping his nation prosper.   His name is mentioned favorably by government officials,businessmen, young intellectuals, religious leaders,technocrats and villagers. That name is Suharto.   &quot;You had FDR I, FDR II and FDR III,&quot; says a think-tankscholar in the Indonesian capital. &quot;Why can't we have SuhartoVI?&quot; Yet to this scholar, that is a distasteful thought. Thelonger Suharto rules, the more uncertain will be thesuccession, he says. But Suharto personifies stability, justwhat Indonesia needs at this stage in its development.   Less than a year ago, Indonesia's political observers wereconfident that Suharto was serving his last term. He said asmuch in his autobiography, and military men were pressing forhis retirement.   Now, the only serious question about his seeking anotherterm seems to be whether he will stay healthy. He's reportedto be in good health now. He plays golf regularly and travelsaround Indonesia looking like an unannounced candidate. Healso made three trips abroad last year -- to the U.S., theSoviet Union and to Japan for the funeral of EmperorHirohito.</TEXT></DOC>