<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900511-0010</DOCNO><DOCID>900511-0010.</DOCID><HL>   MEDICINE andamp; HEALTH (A Special Report): Red Flags   ---   Body and Soul:   Is It Possible to Die of a Broken Heart?   New Research Suggests That It May Be   ----   By Robert Johnson</HL><DATE>05/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R10</SO><LP>   &quot;I AM SICK AT HEART,&quot; said Hamlet.   Who among us hasn't been? Who among us hasn't noticed thatwhen we are tranquil, our hearts tick peacefully? Or thatwhen we are excited or frightened, this muscle poundsviolently in our chests?</LP><TEXT>   Yet surprisingly, the medical establishment has onlyrecently begun paying more attention to the connectionbetween emotions and the heart. It's not surprising, theysay, that the symptoms of a panic attack -- an emotionallytraumatic event -- closely parallel those of a heart attack:chest pains, shortness of breath and nausea.   Researchers, for instance, are learning more about theprecise way in which stress can damage arteries. They aredeveloping new models for the type of personality likely todevelop heart disease. And they are advising doctors to treat-- and be aware of -- patients' emotional, as well asphysical, symptoms.   One relatively new area of exploration is how the heartitself can rule our emotions. Researchers know that theheart, like the brain, stores neurochemicals and hormones ofthe sort that help send messages through the nervous system.The heart occasionally releases such agents into thebloodstream. This may affect other organs, including thebrain, although researchers aren't sure how.   &quot;It's suspected but not proven that the heart is a centralcommand place that mobilizes in time of trouble,&quot; saysStephen Weiss, a heart researcher at the National Heart, Lungand Blood Institute. &quot;The heart and nervous system {are} allpart of a reverberating circuit with the heart sometimesdirecting emotional states.&quot;   A sick heart, for instance, can send emotional warningsignals. Redford Williams, a heart researcher at DukeUniversity, says that before a heart attack -- and sometimesright after -- people feel &quot;a sense of doom, despair anddepression.&quot; It's believed those feelings may be related to apoorly functioning heart that isn't pumping as much blood asusual. &quot;It isn't hard to see how the rest of the body couldperceive this as something wrong,&quot; says Dr. Williams.   Doctors have a better understanding of how emotionsoriginating in the brain affect the heart. The brain sendsmessages to receptors in the heart via the nervous system.These nerve impulses are analogous to a car engine's powerbeing transmitted to the wheels. The receptors near the heartact as both clutch and brake to keep the brain's strongerimpulses from, among other things, fueling the heart into apumping frenzy. Heart-attack victims often have nervoussystems that do a poor job of calming themselves.   When we are scared or angry, nerve impulses also causeadrenaline, a stimulating hormone, to flow. In response,blood vessels in the kidneys and near the skin constrict andmuscles get bigger as the body prepares for trouble. Theneurochemicals and hormones triggered by what cardiologistscall &quot;the fight or flight response&quot; are largely used up instimulating muscles to high performance.   But not always. An increasingly popular theory holds thatthese chemicals are toxic and that their cumulative effectcauses long-term damage to the arteries. Recent experimentswith monkeys done jointly by Wake Forest University and theUniversity of Pittsburgh show that emotional stress from thebrain can cause plaque to form on the arteries of someanimals.   Researchers made the discovery on monkeys who were movedfrequently into new cages, where they were forced toestablish new relationships and be socially aggressive. Theresult: arterial plaque. Adding fat to the diet of suchmonkeys accelerated the formation of arterial plaque. Butmonkeys who exercised by walking on treadmills didn't addarterial plaque -- presumably because their muscles wereusing up the toxic neurochemicals and hormones.   &quot;If more research proves all this to be true, we're on ourway to understanding the differences between physical andemotional stress,&quot; says Dr. Weiss at the National Heart, Lungand Blood Institute. &quot;This is an exciting area but one wherewe don't have the answers.&quot;   The accumulation of stress-related plaque on the arteriesmay be one reason people with certain temperaments are morelikely to die of a heart attack than others. Thus, the bigemotional blowup we so often associate with a heart attackmay be &quot;just the last straw,&quot; says Dr. Weiss. Some people maybe overreacting to events dozens of times a day -- each timecontributing to heart problems down the road.   At the same time, however, doctors have substantiallyrefined what sort of emotions they think are harmful. One ofthe biggest changes is the abandonment of old theories aboutthe doomed &quot;Type A&quot; personality: the hard-driving, obsessedworkaholic who puts in 70 hours a week. No longer is thispersonality by itself seen as being a great risk of coronarydisease. In fact, more recent studies have shown that thehardest workers may be the healthiest.   Instead, medical fears are now focusing on those who giveup on their dreams in life and love. &quot;The person who's out ofdanger isn't necessarily the one who quits the company tosell daisies on the roadside. It's the one who's solvingproblems at his job and feeling needed by his wife andchildren,&quot; says Robert S. Eliot, a cardiologist who ischairman of the Institute of Stress Medicine in Denver.   Bernard Lown, professor of cardiology at Harvard School ofPublic Health, says he learned this lesson the hard way --from the death of patients. One such man, a 36-year-old truckdriver, complained of chest pains on the job even though heclimbed mountains on vacation without discomfort. &quot;He wasangry about the contradiction in his life -- being bright andquitting school to end up in a job he didn't like,&quot; says Dr.Lown. He died suddenly at the wheel of his truck.   Another of Dr. Lown's patients complained of chest painwhenever his phone rang at about 10 a.m., the hour when hepreviously received word of his son's death. The patienteventually had a fatal heart attack one morning when thephone rang.   Physicians must minister more carefully to the emotions ofpatients, says Dean Ornish, a cardiovascular researcher atthe University of California School of Medicine at SanFrancisco. He notes that 50% of heart-attack victims die inthe first 24 hours. He wonders whether impersonal treatmentin emergency rooms -- with cold catheters and coolcalculations by doctors -- unnecessarily raises patients'anxieties and hurts their chances for survival.   &quot;The heart-attack patient typically suffers depression --a sense of doom and loss,&quot; says Dr. Ornish. &quot;They're deeplypersonal feelings that the poets have felt but medicalscience just can't explain. Emergency treatment has to domore to relieve the sense of fear and helplessness.&quot;   Feelings of powerlessness can bring on a heart attack,recent research shows. A Harvard study of 117 victims ofsudden coronary death shows that 25 had &quot;trigger events&quot;within 24 hours of the heart attack. They included a mangiving a speech being jeered by his audience, a man whosewife surprised him with a divorce request, and a patient whobecame enraged in a traffic jam.   Indeed, many doctors now believe that emotional stressesare far more likely to trigger a heart attack than arephysical demands. In a study of 28- to 35-year-old aerospaceengineers at Cape Canaveral, their rate of death was threetimes higher than the rate for the rest of Florida'spopulation, including retirees. The mysterious deaths evenattracted attention from the Central Intelligence Agency,suspecting sabotage. But researchers learned the engineerswere dying after major rocket launches, when layoffssometimes occur.   &quot;One week they're working on rockets and the next weekthey're bagging groceries,&quot; says the Institute of StressMedicine's Dr. Eliot, who studied the engineers. &quot;I foundthat in most of the deceased, the coronary arteries were inpretty good shape.&quot;   But he also discovered ruptures of heart-muscle fibersthat other researchers have duplicated in animal experimentswith overdoses of adrenaline, a stress hormone. Among otherthings, adrenaline constricts arteries in the arms and leg;it's the reason your hands may feel cold in stressful times,and it's the principle that allows &quot;stress cards&quot; to changecolor as blood vessels tighten and relax.   Interviewing colleagues of the dead engineers, Dr. Eliotlearned that many of the heart-attack victims shared a fearof losing four things: jobs, self-esteem, personal identitiesand control of their lives.   A momentary flare-up of disappointment and frustration ismore dangerous than fatigue from long hours or job pressure.A recent study at Yale University shows thatheart-threatening stress has nothing to do with jobinvolvement or ambition. &quot;The vulnerable ones are those whobecome too annoyed at waiting in a restaurant line or beingseated near a cigar smoker when they get in,&quot; says LyndaPowell, a psychologist and researcher at Yale. Her study ofpeople with recurring heart attacks shows they share&quot;annoyance, impatience . . . a feeling that there's someoneagainst them and there's a paucity of time.&quot;   On the more hopeful side, there is now growing evidencethat stress-management techniques can reduce plaque inpartially clogged arteries. Findings last year by researchersin Houston and San Francisco showed that meditation and talktherapy reduced coronary-arterty blockages in a group of 24patients -- some of whom had already had heart attacks.   Still, much needs to be learned. Dr. Ornish says that notenough research is under way on the emotions that affect theheart-or how to control them-especially in comparison to thework being done on diet and exercise. Adds Harvard's Dr.Lown: &quot;The public comes to the doctor with an aching heart .. . a no-good son or a bad boss, and he often ignores it.&quot;   ---   Mr. Johnson is a staff reporter in The Wall StreetJournal's Chicago bureau.</TEXT></DOC>