<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910517-0148</DOCNO><DOCID>910517-0148.</DOCID><HL>   Bush Administration Prepares to Give   Humanitarian Aid to Cambodian People   ----   By Nayan Chanda   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9A</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- As quietly as it started nine years ago, asecret U.S. program of assistance to help the Cambodianresistence in its armed struggle against the Vietnam-backedCambodian regime was terminated early this year. But inanother switch, the Bush administration, under pressure fromCongress, is preparing to provide humanitarian assistance topeople inside Cambodia.   Administration and congressional sources say the covertmilitary aid program, run by the Central Intelligence Agency,was terminated as mandated by the House and Senateintelligence committees.</LP><TEXT>   The covert aid to the noncommunist Cambodian resistencewas started during the Reagan administration in 1982, growingat one point to some $24 million a year. But followingdiscovery of diversion of the covert fund by the Thaimilitary in 1988, the program was cut back, most recently toabout $12 million a year. The funds were used to provideuniforms, vehicles, communications gear and clandestine radiostations as well as for training of guerrilla soldiers by theThai and Malaysian military.   The end of the covert program came partly as a result ofwithdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia in the fall of1989 and from a growing controversy over the possibility thataid to noncommunist forces could strengthen the communistKhmer Rouge, who were members of the anti-Vietnamesecoalition.   Congressional sources said termination of the covertprogram didn't indicate willingness by the intelligencecommittees to abandon the noncommunist resistence. They saidcommittee members wanted to encourage noncommunist groups toengage in political struggle rather than in dubious militaryoperations that could end up helping the Khmer Rouge. CIAofficials, too, reportedly were wary of half-heartedinvolvement in an effort that could end in a disastrous KhmerRouge return to power. Before they were routed from power inearly 1979 by Hanoi's invading army, the Khmer Rouge isestimated to have killed, or contributed to the deaths of, asmany as three million Cambodians.   In connection with the new nonmilitary aid program, theBush administration is sending to Congress a report onhumanitarian needs in Cambodia prepared by the U.S. Agencyfor International Development, or AID. The report wasmandated by Congress in legislation that provides foreventual disbursement of as much as $20 million in assistanceto Cambodia.   The AID report is based on an account prepared by theconsulting firm John Snow Inc., which presents a picture ofhunger and disease facing the people of Cambodia. Thecountry, ruled by the Hanoi-installed Heng Samrin regime, hasbeen subject to a U.S.-led international embargo, and morerecently has lost more than 80% of aid from the Soviet Union.In its 56-page report, prepared after a trip to Cambodia,John Snow said that unless emergency food, fuel and medicalaid is provided, Cambodia could fall into chaos.   U.S. foreign-aid legislation approved in November providesfor as much as $20 million in humanitarian and developmentassistance to Cambodia, &quot;including the Cambodiannon-communist resistance, along the Thai-Cambodian border andthroughout Cambodia.&quot; According to the legislation, the moneyis to be spent in accordance with priorities set forth in theAID report. But when he signed the legislation, PresidentBush said he had concerns about a number of its provisionsand would treat them as advisory.   Apart from its longstanding objection to letting Congressmicro-manage foreign policy through control of the nation'spurse, the administration feared that sending an official AIDteam inside Cambodia would confer legitimacy to theHanoi-installed regime and encourage Phnom Penh'sintransigence in peace negotiations. Mr. Bush said an AIDteam could go only to certain areas along the Thai-Cambodianborder, and from there could &quot;gather information aboutconditions along the border and in Cambodia itself.&quot;   As the deadline for submission of the report approached,the administration, anxious to avoid conflict with Congress,hired John Snow to make the trip to Cambodia. While thehiring of a private contractor removed the perception of anofficial U.S. presence, the direness of the situation maynevertheless force Washington to do more than it wants toinside Cambodia.   The report said the government of Cambodia &quot;cannot meetcivil service payrolls, and has run out of fertilizer, paperand basic medicines. Without salaries, doctors, nurses,teachers, technicians, and administrators will work less andless in the public sector. . . .&quot;   Furthermore, without emergency delivery of fertilizer, theannual shortfall of rice will be greater. Perhaps mostserious is a run on the country's diesel fuel stock, suppliedfor so long by the Soviets. The new Soviet trade policy ofrequiring payment in hard currency has resulted in a200,000-gallon shortfall in diesel oil to run the four powerstations in Phnom Penh. (Last week, a U.N. official in PhnomPenh reported that, because of the fuel shortage, only one ofthe generators in the capital was working, causing long hoursof power outage.)   The John Snow report also warned that the water pumpingsystem will fail without diesel fuel, compromising safety ofthe water supply for more than one million people.   The report recommended that emergency supplies of dieselfuel be earmarked for water systems, shipments of reliefsupplies and electricity for hospitals and schools.   A Senate aide who worked for passage of legislationauthorizing aid inside Cambodia said, &quot;The administration hasaccepted that they will send some aid inside the country. Iexpect them to come up with a decent pot of money, between$10 million and $13 million.&quot; But he added that the amount issecondary to the question of how the money is allocated. &quot;TheAID is wrestling with the problem of how to provide helpwithout strengthening the government or leading tocorruption,&quot; he said.   The gravity of the situation outlined in the report islikely to add to the pressure from Sens. John Danforth, JohnKerry and Bob Kerrey for U.S. humanitarian assistance.However, congressional sources say the administration, whichundertook the study inside Cambodia with great reluctance,most likely will also drag its feet in providing aid.Meanwhile, although the looming crisis in Cambodia may makePhnom Penh more amenable to the U.N.-based peace plan thatWashington has promoted, it also raises the specter of acollapse that would facilitate the return to power of theKhmerRouge.   Administration officials, however, say that if Phnom Penhfaces collapse, it isn't an American problem. A senioradministration official said, &quot;The kind of long-term,systematic problem that the report mentions can only beaddressed if the war stops. What the AID report does isunderline the need for a settlement before large-scale aidcan flow in. . . .&quot;   This official said inter-agency consultations are underway to prepare an aid package for Cambodians both inside thecountry and along the Thai-Cambodian border. A major problemin administering the aid would be the absence of anon-governmental organization large enough to do the job. Theadministration doesn't want its assistance to reach thepeople through the regime it considers illegal, or worse,have help disappear through corruption. So as a human crisislooms in Cambodia, a new battle may be shaping up inWashington over what the U.S. should do and how to do it.</TEXT></DOC>