<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900905-0022</DOCNO><DOCID>900905-0022.</DOCID><HL>   Bush Wants U.S. to Forgive Egypt Debt;   Prolonged Presence in Gulf Is Indicated   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Robert S. Greenberger   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration asked Congress toforgive Egyptian military debts to reward the nation foropposing Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. It also signaled itanticipates having a long-term presence in the Persian Gulfeven after the current crisis ends.   Meanwhile, the U.S. Navy for the first time took controlof an Iraqi-flagged vessel attempting to carry goods to Iraqin violation of a United Nations trade embargo against Iraq.U.S. officials said American sailors are taking the ship,apparently carrying tea, to a neutral port. Separately,almost 300 Western women and children, including 25Americans, arrived in Amman, Jordan, yesterday from Baghdadon three Iraqi Airways planes, according to the AssociatedPress. And 175 Western nationals were expected to leave Ammanearly today aboard a Virgin Atlantic jumbo jet.</LP><TEXT>   The White House said it is asking lawmakers to write offalmost $7 billion in bills Egypt ran up in the years afterCairo's 1979 Camp David peace treaties with Israel.Economically strapped Egypt has fallen chronically behind inrepaying the debt, and its ability to make payments has beenhurt further by the loss of income from the trade embargoagainst Iraq.   But although Congress is generally grateful for Egypt'sopposition to Iraq's invasion and its decision to send troopsto serve in Saudi Arabia, it isn't clear that lawmakers willagree to forgive the debt. Lawmakers immediately expressedreservations about setting a precedent in which other nationswill seek similar debt forgiveness -- particularly Israel,whose officials immediately declared that they want their own$4.5 billion in debts to the U.S. written off if Egypt'sdebts are forgiven.   &quot;I don't think it makes a hell of a lot of sense toconsider the Egyptian situation in a vacuum,&quot; said Rep. DavidObey (D., Wis.), chairman of the House subcommittee thathandles foreign aid. &quot;I want to know what the next shoe isgoing to be, and the next one.&quot;   The administration tried to head off criticism that ithasn't adequately explained why the U.S. should be willing toendure a long-term military confrontation with Iraq.Secretary of State James Baker told the House Foreign AffairsCommittee that the crisis involves more than stopping SaddamHussein and protecting oil reserves. He said that it alsowould help determine &quot;how the post-Cold War world will work.&quot;   Calling the Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait &quot;one of the definingmoments of a new era,&quot; Mr. Baker said international,collective action was necessary because &quot;new hostilities andthreats could erupt as misguided leaders are tempted toassert regional dominance before the ground rules of a neworder can be accepted.&quot; He indicated that the U.S. could havea continuing presence in the region as part of aninternational security force even after the crisis isresolved. Mr. Baker also said the U.S. military operationwould cost about $6 billion during the remainder of 1990.   Mr. Baker even couched the protection of Mideast oilfields in broader terms. He told the panel, which generallysupported the administration, that &quot;a dictator&quot; whocontrolled much of the world's oil &quot;could strangle the globaleconomic order, determining by fiat whether we all enter arecession, or even the darkness of a depression.&quot;   Mr. Baker's congressional testimony seemed crafted toaddress concerns lawmakers have expressed in recent daysthat, after rushing thousands of troops to Saudi Arabia toprotect that kingdom's oil fields from Iraqi advances, theadministration hasn't adequately explained the U.S.'s broaderstake in the region. By casting it in such broad terms, theadministration is trying to make the case that the crisis hasglobal implications rather than simply short-termimplications on such narrow issues as the price of gasolineor the fate of the ousted emir of Kuwait.   In addition, Mr. Baker was preparing the public for thelikelihood that some residual U.S. military force mightremain in the Gulf region indefinitely, even after thecurrent crisis passes, as part of a regional &quot;securitystructure.&quot; A senior State Department official said thesecurity structure idea hasn't been fleshed out. But he saidit might involve the Soviets and seek to ensure, among otherthings, that Iraq can't become a nuclear power or build morechemical weapons even if Baghdad's weapons plants survive thecrisis over Kuwait. He said similar peacekeeping forces mightemerge in other regions besides the Middle East as one aspectof the post-Cold War world order the U.S. hopes to constructafter the Gulf crisis.   As Mr. Baker spoke, the U.S. Navy was taking its mostdirect action yet to enforce the U.N.-ordered embargo ontrade with Iraq. U.S. sailors in the Gulf of Oman boarded asmall Iraqi-flagged freighter headed from Sri Lanka to Iraq,after the captain refused to change course or stop. Pentagonspokesman Pete Williams said the crew of the Zanoobia didn'toffer any resistance when the boarding party took over thebridge. Mr. Williams didn't indicate where the vessel is nowheaded, though other U.S. military officials said it isscheduled to dock in Oman.   According to Mr. Williams, some 20 other vessels have beenboarded by U.S. sailors since the international embargoagainst Iraq was put into place, but those ships either wereallowed to proceed on their original course or were divertedsomewhere else under the control of their own crew. ThePentagon said this was the first time members of a boardingparty actually took control of a vessel and began sailing toa neutral port themselves.   The latest incident comes on the heels of U.S. action lastweek against another Sri Lankan vessel, which was interceptedsailing toward Iraq. Pentagon officials said the Sri Lankangovernment promised at the time to halt all further shipmentsto Iraqi ports.   The action on the high seas dovetailed with political anddiplomatic moves by the administration to strengthen thetrade sanctions. The administration is seeking debt relieffor Egypt in large part to demonstrate that nations that arehurt by honoring the sanctions against Iraq will be rewarded.   The Gulf crisis is hurting Cairo by disrupting the flow ofhard currency from Egyptians employed in Iraq and Kuwait whoare fleeing home by the thousands because of the politicaltensions between Egypt and Iraq. In addition, Egypt is losingrevenue from fees normally paid by ships that travel throughthe Suez Canal while carrying goods to Iraq.   Egypt's civilian and military debt to the U.S. totals morethan $12 billion. Though Egypt has been making payments onits debt, the payments have been behind schedule, and it is$1.2 billion to $1.5 billion in arrears. The White Houseaction, if approved by Congress, would affect only theroughly $7 billion portion in the debt that arises frommilitary sales.   The move would have an immediate impact on the U.S. budgetdeficit. Egypt was scheduled to make $750 million inrepayments this year, the White House said, and that moneywon't be coming into Treasury coffers if debt forgiveness isapproved.   But the broader impact could come if other nations seek tofollow suit. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater declaredthat the move doesn't set a precedent for other nations, butIsraeli Finance Minister Yitzhak Modai declared in a radiointerview this week that &quot;When I visit Washington next monthI will ask for equal treatment.&quot;   Turkey, another nation that has been a high-profilesupporter of the economic campaign against Iraq, owes theU.S. $1.25 billion on military loans, congressional officialssaid. And some influential lawmakers already had been pushingfor forgiving some of Poland's non-military debts.   The administration also began a campaign that a seniorofficial suggested is designed to gather more than $25billion from allies to help Mideast states hurt by the crisisand to help fund the U.S.-led military effort in the Gulf.   Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady arrived in Paris for thefirst leg of a tour to discuss &quot;cooperation&quot; and&quot;burden-sharing&quot; among Western and Asian nations. Mr. Bradyrefused to comment on the amounts of money the U.S. isseeking, but the senior official said that the administrationdoes have specific amounts of aid in mind that nations inEurope and Asia should contribute.   Aid to Mideast nations is being divided into two distinctpools, a short-term emergency fund that would tide them overuntil the end of 1990, and a medium-term effort to addresstheir needs through 1991, officials said. More than $10billion could be needed through 1991 to aid Turkey, Egypt andJordan, the nations hit hardest.   In his explanation of the confrontation with Iraq, Mr.Baker insisted that it is particularly important to stopintimidation and force in the Middle East because of itsvirulent regional hatreds, stockpile of weapons of massdestruction and huge energy reserves.   He said toppling Saddam Hussein isn't one of theadministration's objectives. He repeatedly said the way tocontain the Iraqi leader and the threat of weaponsproliferation he represented would be by building what hecalled a &quot;security structure&quot; in the region. Although Mr.Baker didn't provide details, he said that the U.S. wouldhave &quot;some continuing presence&quot; in such an internationalsecurity arrangement, perhaps with U.S. naval forces.   Mr. Baker, responding to a question about why gasolineprices have risen so swiftly, expressed irritation at oilcompanies. &quot;I fail to see how oil that's purchased at $16 abarrel and refined into gasoline has to be jacked up withintwo days of an action like this,&quot; he said. &quot;And then when theprice goes back down, the price of gasoline is not reduced.So that's a very good question. I think it ought to beaddressed to the people who raised the prices.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>