<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900627-0022</DOCNO><DOCID>900627-0022.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Federal Civil Cases Rarely Reach a Trial   ----   By Ellen Joan Pollock and Edward Felsenthal   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   CDN LABOR FREST</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   Almost 95% of all private civil cases filed in federalcourts never reach trial, ending instead in settlements orother pretrial dispositions, according to a study by RandCorp.   Moreover, the percentage of cases tried appears to bedeclining steadily. Researchers at Rand found that about10.9% of the cases that concluded in 1971 reached the trialstage, whereas only 6.6% reached trial in 1986. Thisrepresents roughly a 40% decline during the years covered bythe study.</LP><TEXT>   Because of the increase in lawsuits filed during thisperiod, however, the number of trials increased. The studywas based on statistics generated by the AdministrativeOffice of the U.S. Courts.   Terence Dungworth, the Rand researcher who co-authored thereport, called the proportional drop in trials &quot;a significantreduction.&quot; Judges may be disposing of cases by &quot;differentmethods due to the fact that the courts are overburdened,&quot; hesuggested. &quot;Perhaps it's not possible for trials to be heldin as many cases.&quot;   The study itself did not reach conclusions about thereasons for the trend. But the statistics showed thatcompared with 1971, a greater percentage of cases wereconcluded in 1986 after judges got involved -- that is, aftermotions had been filed by the parties or after the partiesmet with the judge.   Several lawyers and judges suggested that fewer civiltrials are being held because of pressure on judges to hearthe burgeoning criminal case load. &quot;Civil cases may begetting squeezed out,&quot; said federal Judge William WSchwarzer, director of the Federal Judicial Center inWashington.   &quot;Trials are very expensive and burdensome,&quot; he said. &quot;Ifthe parties can find a way of disposing of their disputewithout a trial, that's good. If a dispute cannot be disposedof after all reasonable efforts and the parties cannot get totrial, that's bad.&quot;   Judge Joseph F. Weis Jr. of the federal appeals court inPittsburgh said that as civil and criminal caseloads haveincreased, judges have stepped up their efforts to managelitigation effectively, and that often leads to settlement.Judges' efforts to bring parties together earlier may be onereason for the drop in trials, says Judge Weis, chairman ofthe Federal Courts Study Committee, which has been charged byCongress with studying the federal court system.   Defense and plaintiffs lawyers also point to the increasedcost of litigation as one reason that parties are settlingearlier. Stephen J. Paris, a Boston litigator who is a vicepresident of the Defense Research Institute, views theapparent increase in settlements as a favorable development.&quot;Those cases are using up less of the judge's time and legalexpense,&quot; he said. But Mr. Paris noted that some litigantscould be settling out of &quot;frustration&quot; because the increasedcriminal caseload means it is harder to get a civil trial.   The possibility that frustration may be an impetus tosettlement worries even plaintiffs lawyers who often preferto settle cases. &quot;Trial is the lifeblood of the system,&quot; saysPaul D. Rheingold of the New York law firm of Rheingold andamp;McGowan. &quot;Everyone is entitled to their day in court. Ifthere's some factor working that's coercing people into nothaving their day in court -- which they want -- that's notgood.&quot;   Another finding of the Rand study was that &quot;the aggregateperformance of the federal district courts had remainedremarkably stable during the 1970s and 1980s, despite asubstantial increase in caseload during that period.&quot;Nationwide, according to the report, &quot;delay was about thesame in 1986 as it was in 1971&quot; and there was little evidence&quot;to support the view that time to disposition has beenlengthening.&quot; That conclusion, says Rand researcher Mr.Dungworth, &quot;is a surprise to most people.&quot;   ---   PASSIVE SMOKING CONTRIBUTED to worker's heart disease,lawsuit alleges.   A former employee of ComData Network Inc. filed suitagainst the Brentwood, Tenn., company claiming that cigarettesmoke in his work environment aggravated his heart condition.   The complaint, filed earlier this month in a Dallas statecourt, alleges that Michael Attar &quot;suffered extreme physicaland mental pain&quot; partly because of his &quot;continual exposure tocigarette smoking second-hand&quot; while working as a salesmanager for ComData.   Although cases against employers have attempted to linksecond-hand tobacco smoke with lung and respiratoryillnesses, this case appears to be among the first that seeksto prove that so-called passive smoking contributed to anemployee's heart disease.   A recent study by doctors at the University of Californiaestimated that 37,000 Americans die each year from heartdisease caused by passive smoking. That figure is nearly 10times higher than the number of lung cancer deaths attributedto passive smoking in an Environmental Protection Agencyreport released this week. The EPA has not taken a positionon the effects of passive smoking on heart disease.   Because heart disease is more common than lung cancer andresults in more deaths, lawyers say that evidence linkingheart disease to second-hand tobacco smoke could spur anincrease in litigation over passive smoking. If theUniversity of California study is right, &quot;we're going to seea gigantic increase in the number of worker {compensation}suits and probably product liability suits,&quot; says RichardDanard, a professor of law at Northeastern University.   A spokesman for the Tobacco Institute, an industryadvocacy group, warned that &quot;People are now using these scareheadlines as an attempt to take legal action.&quot; He says thatthe University of California study is unsubstantiated and&quot;decidedly political.&quot;   Litigators and medical experts say that it could bedifficult to prove in court that passive smoking caused orsignificantly worsened a plaintiff's heart disease. Becausethere are so many factors other than second-hand tobaccosmoking that can cause heart disease, such a case &quot;would bedifficult to prosecute,&quot; says Marc Edell of Budd Larner GrossRosenbaum Greenberg andamp; Sade in Short Hills, N.J. Mr. Edellrepresents the family of Rose Cipollone, a smoker who died oflung cancer, in its suit against Liggett Group Inc., atobacco company.   Still, the possibility of court battles over passivesmoking and heart disease adds a new worry for businessesalready under pressure from anti-smoking groups and employeeswho advocate a smoke-free workplace.   A company that permits its employees to smoke &quot;does so atgreat legal risk,&quot; says Mark Pertschuk, executive director ofAmericans for Nonsmokers' Rights in Berkeley, Calif.   ---   JUDGES SAY NO to proposed legislation on federal courts.   Congressional leaders are pushing legislation aimed atreducing delay and expense in civil lawsuits. Butrepresentatives of the Judicial Conference, the policy-makingarm of the federal courts, told the Senate JudiciaryCommittee the conference opposes a bill that would requireeach federal trial court to develop and adopt a plan to cutcivil litigation costs and delay.   The conference supports another provision of thelegislation that would create 77 new federal judgeships, butbelieves more additions are needed to handle mountingcaseloads, Judge Walter McGovern testified. The JudicialConference has recommended 96 new judgeships.   The bill in question has bipartisan support: JudiciaryCommittee Chairman Joseph Biden of Delaware introduced itjointly with the panel's ranking Republican, Strom Thurmondof South Carolina. The committee is expected to vote on thelegislation next month, and the creation of more judgeshipsis expected to pass easily. There is probably a majority onthe Judiciary Committee willing to support some kind ofsystem designed to manage civil cases more efficiently,committee staff members said.   Some Democratic lawmakers have privately expressedsurprise and anger that Mr. Biden would lead an effort toexpand the federal judiciary during a Republicanadministration. The president nominates federal judges, andthe nominees require confirmation by the Senate.   Republicans have praised Mr. Biden's action on judgeshipsas demonstrating his willingness to be a conciliator on asharply divided committee. &quot;Rather than take a narrow,partisan view of the dire need for new federal judgeships,the senator from Delaware has done the responsible thing,&quot;said Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah).   As to the case-management proposal, Judge Robert Peckhamof the Judicial Conference testified that such legislationwould duplicate a management program recently adopted by theconference. Judge Peckham also said that as a constitutionalmatter of separation of powers, Congress shouldn't interferewith the procedures of the judiciary. He softened hiscriticism by saying that federal judges have long supportedthe &quot;concerns that inspire this proposed legislation.&quot;   The Biden-Thurmond case-management proposals had alreadybeen made more flexible in response to objections from theJudicial Conference that Congress was trying to&quot;microregulate&quot; judges.   ---   MARCOS ATTORNEY says case is &quot;fantasy&quot; based oncircumstantial evidence.   In closing arguments, Gerry Spence, Imelda Marcos's leadattorney, said the former first lady of the Philippines knewnothing more about money than how to spend it. Mrs. Marcos,on trial in federal court in Manhattan, is accused of using$200 million in money stolen from the Philippines to buyjewelry, artwork and real estate in the U.S.   &quot;She's a world-class shopper,&quot; Mr. Spence said. &quot;But sheis a world-class decent human being too.&quot;   Mr. Spence told the jury that Mrs. Marcos may have helpedspend the money but that didn't mean she knew where it camefrom. He said she was being unfairly held responsible foralleged wrongdoing by her late husband, Ferdinand, who diedin September.   &quot;Where's the beef? Where's the evidence that she knew?&quot;Mr. Spence said. He said that instead of proving racketeeringand fraud charges, prosecutors had built a case based oncircumstantial evidence that is open to interpretation.   Mr. Spence said Mrs. Marcos had no reason to suspect thatthe wealth of President Marcos, who was ousted in 1986, waswrongfully gained. &quot;Suppose the truth is, he embezzled themoney? What's the wife supposed to do? Is she supposed toinvestigate him? Isn't a woman entitled to believe herhusband?&quot; Mr. Spence said.   Assistant U.S. Attorney Charles LaBella told jurorsearlier this week to use their common sense to conclude thatMrs. Marcos, who was a member of President Marcos's cabinet,must have known where the money came from. Prosecutors claimthat Mrs. Marcos used various fronts to transfer funds andmake purchases.   Closing arguments for Mrs. Marcos's co-defendant, AdnanKhashoggi, will be made today, and jury deliberations couldbegin later this week.   ---   BOWIE KUHN THREATENED with contempt in bankruptcyproceeding.   A federal Bankruptcy Court judge ordered the formerbaseball commissioner and his attorney to explain why theyshouldn't be held in contempt of court.   U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Prudence B. Abram issued the orderand scheduled a hearing for Monday afternoon. The judge saidthat Mr. Kuhn and his attorney, Cory Friedman of Kelley Dryeandamp; Warren, had violated a temporary restraining orderprohibiting them from &quot;commencing, continuing or prosecutinglitigation against&quot; former partners of the New York law firmof Myerson andamp; Kuhn, which has disbanded and filed for Chapter11 protection.   Marine Midland Bank had sued Mr. Kuhn seeking to recoverabout $3 million in debt that he had personally guaranteed.Mr. Kuhn, in turn, sued his former partners for the money.Mr. Kuhn has pursued his claim in federal court in Manhattandespite the stay on litigation issued by Judge Abram. JudgeAbram said in her order that Mr. Kuhn's action had costMyerson andamp; Kuhn more than $10,000 in legal fees that he shouldnow reimburse.   Mr. Kuhn now lives in Florida. He is one of only a fewpartners who hasn't made a commitment to contribute personalassets to a plan that would end the bankruptcy proceedings.   Mr. Friedman said of the order, &quot;We think it's totallywithout merit and we'll be responding to it.&quot;   ---   Paul M. Barrett and Wade Lambert contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>