<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910520-0189</DOCNO><DOCID>910520-0189.</DOCID><HL>   Technology (A Special Report): The Basics   ---   Technology, Economics and Ego Conspire   To Make Software Difficult to Use   ----   By William M. Bulkeley</HL><DATE>05/20/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R7</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><LP>   YOU'RE ON THE ROAD. A friend has lent you his desk so youcan dash off a letter. You sit down at his computer and facea screen that is bare but for the letter &quot;C&quot; and an arrow.   This shouldn't be difficult. You use word-processorsoftware in your own office. But you can't even find his wordprocessor. You type &quot;dir,&quot; and an unfathomable list of namesrolls up the screen. Like a stranded motorist shaking thespark-plug wires under the hood, you tap a few keys. Thecomputer responds: &quot;Bad command or file name.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Eventually, your friend sets you up in the word processor.But your troubles have barely begun. Hitting the F3 key onyour own computer gets you electronic help. You hit F3 onthis computer and it says &quot;no define block.&quot; Haplessly, youstart to type. But you can't make the words appear on themain part of the screen -- just along the top line. Yourchest tightens, your fingers clench. You are ready to scream.   Why is software so hard?   That same question vexes practically every software user-- from the first-time technophobe to the code junkies whoprogram deep into the night, fueled by pizza and candy bars.Mitchell Kapor, founder of Lotus Development Corp., anddesigner of the 1-2-3 spreadsheet, has said that &quot;not a daygoes by that I don't want to throw my computer out thewindow.&quot;   Some software designers insist that's changing. They talkabout radical software designs that will simplify programs,and about new easy-to-use computers that are controlled bypens. But many software experts are unconvinced. They say acombination of economic factors, technical difficulties andthe creative pride of software designers conspire to makesoftware hard. Software, they say, will remain difficult forat least another decade, until computers understand spokeninstructions.   If so, computer and software makers are missing out on alot of money. The industry estimates that about 60 millioncomputers are in use around the world. But that means thatabout three-quarters of the workers and homeowners who coulduse computers don't have them, says David Liddle, chairman ofsoftware designer Metaphor Computer Systems. Mr. Liddlethinks that the computer business has stalled in part becausesoftware developers continually add more complex features tothe same basic programs. &quot;We've gone from the baroque to therococo,&quot; he says.   Proponents of easy-to-use software like to draw analogiesto the U.S. automobile industry, which exploded afterCadillac introduced the electric starter in its 1912 model.Starting a car was suddenly acceptable for women, doublingthe potential market. Similarly, simple software mightencourage many users to buy computers for the first time. Andit would lead current users to buy more software packages.   It isn't that software developers haven't tried to maketheir programs easier. The search for the better mouse hasbeen an obsession throughout the short history of computerprogramming. For a while, Hewlett-Packard Inc. touted thetouch-screen, which could detect a finger pressed against thetube. Users complained of smeared screens and tired arms. Onedeveloper came up with a foot-mouse as an alternative to theusual hand-held version: It was rolled around under a desk tocontrol the cursor on a screen. Users were totally baffled.Another firm came up with the head-mouse, a headset that leta user control the screen by moving his head. Userssnickered.   To some extent, the computer is bound to be complex. &quot;It'sa machine with 101 buttons on it. That's complicated,&quot; saysDaniel Bricklin, co-developer of Visicalc, the firstspreadsheet. Mr. Bricklin is now writing software forcomputers that are controlled by pens rather than keyboards.Michael Wilding, president of Productivity PointInternational, a Hinsdale, Ill., computer-training firm, sayssoftware is &quot;becoming easier to use.&quot; Nevertheless, it willremain difficult because &quot;software is so powerful. There areso many things you can do.&quot;   Compounding the difficulty is that for most software, theeducation never ends. Computer users don't mind learning howto compute; after all, they once took the time to learn howto type or drive. The problem with software is that mostknowledge can't be transferred to the next program. Companiesoften find that training a user on a new software packagetakes a week of classes and costs $500. &quot;People don't mindspending time on the first application,&quot; says Howard Elias,vice president, computer merchandising, for Tandy Corp. &quot;Theyresent it on later applications.&quot;   W.E. &quot;Pete&quot; Peterson, executive vice president ofWordPerfect Corp., the Orem, Utah, maker of the leadingword-processor program, says: &quot;When you switch programs,sometimes you get digital paralysis,&quot; fearing that fingermotions that open a file in one program will clear a screenin another.   Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh forces developers to useconsistent commands for many different programs. But in theInternational Business Machines-compatible world, no suchstrictures exist. Indeed, when competitors designed commandsto mimic Lotus's popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet, Lotus sued forcopyright infringement.   Even with consistent commands, individual programs aredifficult, because developers have concluded that ease of usedoesn't sell well. &quot;We could make a word processor very easyto use if it just did what a typewriter does,&quot; says Mr.Bricklin, the software developer. But by adding spellingcheckers, automatic footnotes, boldface, italics, and theability to move and erase blocks of texts, the program getsmore complex. &quot;There's a level of difficulty we're willing totolerate to get all that,&quot; he says.   &quot;Ease of use is overrated,&quot; says Gordon Eubanks, chairmanof Symantec in Cupertino, Calif., the publisher of Q andamp; A,which many reviewers have praised as an easy-to-use database. Mr. Eubanks says that since any useful software willtake some time to learn, it's a mistake &quot;to put energy intolearning something simple and then finding out it can't domuch.&quot;   Buyers appear to agree. Companies that have made morelimited, easier-to-use versions of their best-sellingproducts have found sales weak. And although Apple'sMacintosh is easy to use, IBM-compatible computers outsellthem by 10-to-one, because the IBMs are cheaper and much moresoftware is available for them. In fact, the Macintosh didn'tbecome a hit until a complex desktop-publishing program,Aldus Corp.'s PageMaker, came out, providing a significantcapability that wasn't available in the IBM-compatible world.   At the same time, producers of easy-to-use programsusually can't charge as much for them as for complexprograms, reinforcing companies' reluctance to pushsimplicity. A few low-priced, easy-to-use programs likeQuicken, a $49 check-writing program from Intuit in PaloAlto, Calif., have become best sellers. But all the bigsoftware companies count on selling software for $300 ormore, and emphasize power over simplicity.   The whole process of software design also deserves some ofthe blame for complexity. For starters, when companies testtheir designs, they go to their existing customers.&quot;Designers design a lot of code for people just like them,&quot;says Roger MacNamee, who runs T. Rowe Price's science andtechnology fund. &quot;That explains why the current marketdoesn't get enlarged. There's no design step that says, `Putan idiot in front of the screen.'&quot;   Because there aren't many standards, each designer alsodevelops the best system he or she can imagine. The effect iscomparable to having each typewriter manufacturer lay out itsown keyboard, as they did before they standardized the QWERTYkeyboard after 1873. &quot;Everyone is reinventing the wheel,&quot;says Jan Davidson, president of educational software producerDavidson andamp; Associates Inc. The result: No user can easilyguess what keys will do what.   Even with a mouse, it often takes considerable pointingand clicking to be sure how to print out a line in boldfaceor indent a paragraph. &quot;We have to constantly rein in ourprogrammers,&quot; says Linda Pollin, chief financial officer ofInteractive Media, a Diamond Bar, Calif., software firm.&quot;Otherwise you get 40,000 icons that only two peoplerecognize, and it takes 27 clicks to get to the place whereyou want to go.&quot;   And then there's the issue of the installed base. Softwaredevelopers are so concerned about making it easy for currentusers to switch to new versions of their programs that theymaintain illogical systems that they think users areaccustomed to. Mr. Peterson of WordPerfect recalls, &quot;We knewin 1985 that F3 shouldn't be the `help' key. But we decidedwe didn't want to upset the {existing} customers. If we hadit to do over, we would have changed.&quot; Since then, millionsof people have gotten used to WordPerfect's unorthodoxsystem, making changes even harder.   Moreover, accommodating past software and vast amounts ofinstalled hardware takes programmers a great deal of time. Asoftware programmer joke: How could God create the world insix days? He didn't have an installed base.   But accommodating the installed base frustrates manyefforts to make software easier. Microsoft Inc. of Redmond,Wash., is pushing Windows, a Macintosh-like software packagefor IBM-compatibles. Windows uses a mouse and graphical iconssuch as trash cans to represent commands. But buyers ofWindows find it can take as long as four hours to adjust itfor particular networks, printers and video displays, saysCorporate Software Inc., a Canton, Mass., software-salescompany that surveyed its customers.   William Gates, Microsoft's chairman and chief executive,says, &quot;even as we make products simpler, the variety ofhardware configurations and things people want to do isextensive,&quot; requiring custom fitting.   There is some good news, however: Software is easier touse today than it used to be. WordPerfect gets an average ofone telephone call for help for every package it sells, halfthe rate three years ago. David Reed, chief scientist atLotus, recalls that when he started using minicomputers,&quot;they were only for people like me. You used all yourknowledge all the time, just to use the computer.&quot;   Consultants say that graphical programs like Windows andApple's Macintosh do make it easier to learn software.Temple, Barker andamp; Sloane Inc., a Lexington, Mass., consultingfirm, concluded that novices using graphical programs werehalf as frustrated as people using older software designs --and taught themselves 23% more. But many Windows users stillhave to deal with older application programs with disparatedemands.   New operating systems may offer more hope. Mr. Liddle ofMetaphor, who is heading up an IBM-sponsored project, saysthat future software will be written in small, reusablechunks that other programmers or even ordinary users canpatch together to make the exact package they want. &quot;Ideally,you want it as easy as a component stereo system to plugthings together,&quot; says Larry Tesler, vice president, advancedproducts, for Apple Computer. That currently is impossible,because there isn't any consistent way for one program totell another to perform a calculation or reduce the size of achart.   Other experts think the solution will be to get rid of thekeyboard. &quot;The keyboard will be dead in five or 10 years,&quot;predicts Mr. Bricklin.   The first big step in that direction will be so-calledslate computers -- flat, notebook-sized devices that arecontrolled by pens writing across the screen. Jerrold Kaplan,chairman of GO Corp., South San Francisco, says GO's Penpointoperating system permits &quot;software designed for people whoselives are focused on their work, and not on the tools to dotheir work.&quot;   Programmers say that Penpoint isn't designed for composingnovels, but it works well for editing letters, say, orscheduling time. The screen looks like a loose-leaf notebookand a user can move from program to program by touching thepen to the pages. &quot;We're able to deliver compellingsimplicity because it's the first time you're physicallytouching the computer program,&quot; says Mr. Kaplan. He believesthat removes some of the abstraction that discourages manynovices.   But the ultimate in simplicity will occur when computersbecome powerful enough to understand speech. Currently, eventhe best speech programs require the user to slowly train thecomputer to understand each speaker or pause between wordsand often repeat statements. But that's enough to be usefulin some applications. Emergency-room doctors now routinelydictate information on their patients to a computer systemdeveloped by Kurzweil Artificial Intelligence Inc., Waltham,Mass., in order to print out diagnoses and prescriptions.   Even sophisticated software programmers are surprised whenthey see how easy computers can be without keyboards. A fewmonths ago, Raymond Kurzweil demonstrated the system to anaudience of Massachusetts software developers. After a fewminutes of dictation, he ordered his computer: &quot;Printreport.&quot; The audience broke into applause.   ---   Mr. Bulkeley is a staff reporter in The Wall StreetJournal's Boston bureau.</TEXT></DOC>