<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910108-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>910108-0091.</DOCID><HL>   When Motherhood Is for Sale   ----   By Charlotte Allen</HL><DATE>01/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><LP>   If the popular press is to be believed, high-techreproduction -- in vitro fertilization, surrogate motherhoodand the like -- is now one of life's miraculous givens, likethe camcorder and the microwave oven.   Implanting a post-menopausal woman with someone else'segg? U.S. News and World Report described this as abreakthrough in &quot;overcoming infertility.&quot; Around the sametime, a California judge ruled that Anna Johnson, who hadcontracted to be implanted with a fertilized egg supplied byCrispina and Mark Calvert, was not the mother of the son shebore and wanted to keep. Judge Richard Parslow's ruling&quot;should be received as welcome news by the nation's millionsof infertile couples,&quot; declared Time.</LP><TEXT>   The seeming contradiction here -- in one case, you becomethe mother of the baby you bore who is a genetic stranger toyou; in the other, you don't -- should provide a clue thatthe new reproductive techniques are in fact highlyproblematic.   At their heart is the notion of buying and sellingmotherhood. If a California appellate court upholds JudgeParslow's ruling, a contract calling for multipartyreproduction on a cash basis will be legal and enforceablefor the first time in the U.S. The &quot;mother&quot; will be the onewho pays the money for the baby, whether it comes via anotherwoman's egg implanted in her uterus; her own egg implanted inanother woman's, as was the case with Crispina Calvert; orthe other woman's egg implanted in the other woman's uterus,as was the case with Elizabeth Stern in the &quot;Baby M&quot; case.   Commercialized surrogacy has split the ranks of feministsand abortion-rights advocates, and even some conservativesare uncertain about what legal stance to take. The pro-choiceNational Organization for Women has been unable to reach acomprehensive stance on surrogacy. In 1989, &quot;we wanted todevelop a position,&quot; says NOW Vice President RosemaryDempsey, &quot;but we came up with a resolution that talks moreabout the problems.&quot;   The debate goes to the heart of assertions about theequality of men and women before the law and as reproductiveagents. For decades, commercialized fatherhood via sperm&quot;donation&quot; (a time-honored way for medical students to earnpocket money) has been legal and relatively noncontroversial.But carrying and bearing a child is different.   Artificially induced pregnancy means infusions of hormonesto prepare for and sustain the implantation, a tedious embryotransfer process, then gestation and labor. The nine monthsof pregnancy are accompanied by kicks, heard heartbeats andthe feeding of flesh by flesh. Although there reportedly havebeen hundreds of mutually happy surrogacy arrangements, Ms.Johnson is not the first to claim to have bonded to theinfant she carried inside her.   Is it more respectful of a woman's dignity to forbid herbody to be used as an incubator or to let her freely sell herreproductive services just as men can? The answer depends onwhether one believes that there are some things that shouldnot be bought and sold. If one believes in, say, legalizedprostitution or a free market for human organs, one is likelyto view a surrogacy ban as a form of moralistic governmentintervention in the affairs of consenting adults.Conservative libertarians are probably the staunchestproponents of legally enforceable surrogacy contracts. &quot;Theprimary issue is a woman's right to do things with her ownbody,&quot; says Joan Kennedy Taylor, national coordinator for theAssociation of Libertarian Feminists.   Although permitting surrogacy contracts squares with mostfeminists' support for abortion rights, it does not squarewith suspicions among many of them that the contracts favorfathers over mothers and turn lower-income women intobreeders for those with more money (an estimated 40% ofsurrogate mothers are on welfare). Virtually all surrogacycontracts require amniocentesis and penalize surrogates whodo not abort defective fetuses while otherwise forbiddingabortion.   In 1988, the New Jersey Supreme Court unanimously ruledthat the Baby M contract violated state criminal laws againstbaby-selling. The standard-form contract the Calverts and Ms.Johnson signed reflected some effort to get around suchconsiderations by paying Ms. Johnson in installments ratherthan in a lump sum after the baby's birth, as was the casewith Mary Beth Whitehead's contract with William andElizabeth Stern in the Baby M case. Nonetheless, otherclauses in the Calvert-Johnson contract required Ms. Johnsonto assume all medical risks of the pregnancy, includingdeath, and purported to make her liable for intentionalinfliction of emotional distress if she breached thecontract, exposing her to open-ended liability for damages.   While the Whitehead case worked its way through the NewJersey courts, pioneer feminists such as Betty Friedandenounced the contracts. The NOW resolution supports women'sright &quot;to make their own reproductive decisions&quot; but callsfor the retention of all maternal rights in the woman whogave birth to the child until some months have passed afterthe birth. The organization hopes to issue a morecomprehensive resolution this year.   Feminists for Life, a politically liberal women's-rightsgroup that opposes abortion, has no official position onsurrogacy but is concerned about the destruction offertilized eggs produced in multiple by in vitrofertilization and never used. In the Johnson case, says theorganization's president, Rachel McNair, &quot;a judge couldn'tbelieve that a woman could love an embryo. There are realconcerns about the social meanings of parenthood.&quot;   Further to the right, Phyllis Schlafly, president of theEagle Forum, expresses the government-off-our-backssentiments that leaven many conservatives' moral reservationsabout surrogacy. &quot;It verges on buying and selling a baby;it's something you shouldn't be able to do,&quot; she says. &quot;Butit doesn't help mothers to have a law. If people want to havethe contracts, let them go ahead.&quot;   The Roman Catholic Church takes the strictest stance,opposing all forms of conception that take place outside thebody of a woman married to the baby's father. &quot;There areconcerns about splitting motherhood,&quot; says Germain Grisez,professor of Christian ethics at Mount St. Mary's College inEmmitsburg, Md. Surrogacy is &quot;a real attack on what it is tobe a woman and a mother.&quot;   Surrogacy contracts also run directly up against stateadoption laws. Virtually all states ban the payment ofconsideration to a birth mother in an adoption (she can bereimbursed for expenses) and no state allows a woman toconsent to an adoption before the baby's birth. Almost allstates give the mother a &quot;grace period&quot; after the birth inwhich to reconsider whether to terminate her rights. Bycontrast, all standard-form surrogacy contracts include anagreement by the surrogate before conception to relinquishher rights.   Not surprisingly, both the National Committee on Adoption,a coalition of adoption agencies, and the American AdoptionCongress, which helps adoptees and birth mothers locate eachother, vehemently oppose surrogacy.   &quot;No adoption code allows a legal decision about a childuntil after it is born,&quot; says Andrew Kimbrell, co-chairman ofthe National Coalition Against Surrogacy. &quot;Adoption is a wayof solving the tragedy of the unwanted child, but surrogacycreates a tragedy&quot; when it creates a baby. The coalitionopposes all commercial surrogacy transactions and is notparticularly enthusiastic about voluntary arrangements,citing family feuds that have arisen where one sister hasagreed to bear a child for another.   After the Baby M case, there was a wave of anti-surrogacysentiment. Two states passed statutes makingsurrogacy-brokering a crime. Nine others specifically madethe contracts unenforceable. France, Germany, Israel andJapan, among other countries, have also outlawed surrogacy.Some legal scholars and domestic-relations lawyers haveproposed a middle course -- allow the contracts but subjectthem to court supervision at every stage -- but so far nostate legislature has endorsed regulated surrogacy.   A failed Minnesota bill in 1989 that would have imposedcivil fines on surrogacy brokers had the backing of 28 of thestate's female legislators, whose views on abortion rangedfrom pro-choice to pro-life. &quot;No one who signs any other kindof personal service contract is required to give specificperformance,&quot; says Ann Rest, the pro-choice Democratic staterepresentative who introduced the bill. &quot;It's patronizing toexpect women to fulfill a contract that we'd expect no oneelse to fulfill.&quot;   Public opinion may not be so kind to Anna Johnson as itwas to Mary Beth Whitehead, who shared genes with the babyshe bore. Two months before baby Christopher Michael's birth,Ms. Johnson pleaded guilty to taking welfare while working,and she mailed the Calverts a harshly worded letter demandingsurrogacy payments after she had apparently decided to keepthe baby. Nonetheless, California law embodies an age-oldlegal presumption that the woman who gives birth to a childis its legal mother unless she consents to an adoption or isproved unfit, making it possible that Judge Parslow erredwhen he ruled for the Calverts. In 1989, the U.S. SupremeCourt allowed the termination of an out-of-wedlock father'srights on the ground that genetics does not necessarily makeparenthood.   Until recently, sex, marriage and childbearing all wenttogether, bonded by the glue of biological necessity andstern social sanctions. During the past 25 years, the twinforces of sexual liberation and advances in reproductivetechnology have pried the sides of the triangle apart. Oneresult has been that parenthood has become something thatscience can manufacture and money can buy. Courts in thefuture may not be able to resist the aching desires ofinfertile couples for children at any cost. It is going to bea wise child who knows his own mother.   ---   Mrs. Allen is an editor at Insight magazine.</TEXT></DOC>