<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910111-0056</DOCNO><DOCID>910111-0056.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   UN Negotiations Not Among   Casualties of War in El Salvador   ----   By Alvaro de Soto</HL><DATE>01/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   In light of the recent escalation of the war in ElSalvador, the downing of a U.S. helicopter and the apparentkilling of U.S. servicemen, one may be forgiven for wonderingwhether the United Nations-sponsored talks between thegovernment and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la LiberacionNacional (FMLN) are leading anywhere.   Last April, in accordance with an agreement signed inGeneva, the parties in the conflict accorded a very activerole to the secretary-general of the U.N. and hisrepresentative in the negotiating effort. This role involvesconstant shuttling combined with a central role when theparties meet face to face. As the secretary-general'srepresentative in these talks, I can report (withoutbreaching confidentiality) that the talks are on track andproceeding apace -- but quietly, out of the limelight, asbefits serious negotiations. There is no doubt in my mindthat this effort can lead to success.</LP><TEXT>   The effort began auspiciously in the wake of El SalvadorPresident Alfredo Cristiani's bold gesture in turning to theU.N. This should be seen as a parallel to the FMLN's decisionto discard much of its own ideological baggage. The FMLNbegan calling for an El Salvador that, in the words of itscommander, Joaquin Villalobos, is &quot;open, flexible,pluralistic and democratic in both the economic and thepolitical spheres.&quot; Thus, the stage was set for the seriousnegotiations that are in progress.   A novelty of the Geneva agreement is the involvement inthe process of political parties and other socialorganizations in El Salvador. Another is the specificprovision for the secretary-general to rally internationalleaders who are in a position to assist in his efforts.   Two stages are foreseen in the negotiations. The first isaimed at concluding a wide array of political agreementsleading to a cease-fire. The agenda for these agreementsincludes the armed forces, human rights, the electoral andjudicial systems, constitutional reform, economic and socialquestions and U.N. verification. The parties have agreedunequivocally that a cease-fire, monitored by U.N.peacekeeping personnel, is to be put in place only after suchagreements have been reached. As in many or most attempts atconflict settlement, we are stuck with wartime negotiations,and the FMLN considers military pressure essential to pushthose negotiations forward.   The purpose of the second stage of negotiations -- once aU.N.-verified cease-fire is in place -- is to establish thenecessary guarantees and conditions for reintegrating themembers of the FMLN into the civil, institutional andpolitical life of the country.   Last July, the government and the FMLN signed an agreementon human rights that provides for an unprecedented on-siteU.N. verification mission to be set up early in 1991.Meanwhile, work proceeds on critical questions, such as thedemilitarization of society and the reform of the armedforces, where the stated positions of the parties are farapart but where much diplomatic groundwork has been laid overthe past eight months.   Sporadic, fragile truces have come and gone in the 10-yearwar. The goal of this effort is not merely to stop thefighting, but to establish conditions that will ensure thatonce fighting stops, it will not resume -- not just becauseof the presence of U.N. peacekeeping personnel, but becausethe root causes of the war are being addressed.   It follows that a cease-fire is not likely to come aboutwithout agreement on profound changes in El Salvador. Butsuch an agreement is now possible. The negotiating agendaagreed to last May offers an unprecedented opportunity tomake such changes. The involvement of broadly representativesectors of the country has stimulated ample debate.Politicians and other leaders are appearing on TV talk showsin San Salvador, with senior guerrilla commanders oftenjoining in via satellite. Formerly taboo subjects are debatedopenly. Even a member of the armed forces' high commandattends the direct talks as part of the government'snegotiating team, leaving no doubt as to the army's fullengagement in the process.   The airing of the issues has raised expectations both foran end to violence and for far-reaching, even institutionalchanges. There is evidence of widespread support for thereforms that are required to achieve a solid, stable peace inEl Salvador -- and not just because the FMLN demands them.Last October, President Cristiani expressed hope before theU.N. General Assembly that a negotiated solution to theconflict would result in &quot;a positive transformation ofSalvadoran society.&quot; The president, who evinced considerablecourage in engaging in the negotiating effort, is betterplaced than any previous Salvadoran leader to pull this off.   This is not a conflict that can be wished away. It is notone that superpowers simply can agree to earmark forsettlement, leaving the diplomatic mopping-up to the boys atthe U.N. It is far more than a nagging backwoods squabbleabout who is in charge at a given moment in the tiniestnation in the continental Americas. The fact that the ColdWar is over and yet the Salvadoran war goes on, and evenintensifies, says a thing or two about the nature of theconflict. The conflict has a life of its own, quite apartfrom the added intensity produced by the influx of militarymateriel from outside.   El Salvador has fundamental problems intrinsic to its ownhistory, structural makeup and social fabric that haveproduced an alarming human-rights record and deeply rootedmistrust. The nation is saddled with an ancestrally rigidsystem in which average Salvadorans are severely limited inthe ways in which they can express their entrepreneurialabilities to improve their lot.   None of this is to say that Salvadorans can or should beignored by powers from outside the region. They needassistance from the international community: That is why theycame to the U.N. Support for the U.N. effort must not waiver.The unity of the negotiations is essential: Peacemakingcannot be haphazardly subcontracted like bits and pieces of aconstruction project.   Five Central American presidents stated recently thatpeace in their region is &quot;one, undivided and indivisible.&quot; InEl Salvador, what is at stake is not just today's victims butthe very shape and texture of the nation's future. Soimpatience is unwarranted. It could even be pernicious. Thereis no such thing as instant peace in a conflict of thisnature. The Salvadoran people cannot settle for a slapdashjob. Perseverance, forbearance and political will of thehighest order are required.   ---   Mr. de Soto is an assistant secretary-general at theUnited Nations.</TEXT></DOC>