<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910116-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>910116-0008.</DOCID><HL>   U.N. Makes Final Appeal Designed to Give   Iraq a Face-Saving Way to Leave Kuwait   ---   Fears of Terrorist Attacks   Bring Iraqis, Other Arabs   Under Close Surveillance   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- If the U.S. goes to war in the Persian Gulf,U.S. intelligence agencies expect Saddam Hussein to make goodon his threats to order acts of terrorism against Americanand allied interests world-wide, including inside the U.S.   Americans will be prime targets of the terrorists,officials believe. They expect most attacks to occur outsidethe U.S., but privately concede they can't rule out thepossibility of at least a few attacks within the U.S.</LP><TEXT>   Already, according to senior Justice Department officials,the Federal Bureau of Investigation believes it has disruptedas many as several dozen plans for terrorist acts in theU.S., mainly by what the officials call &quot;individual zealots.&quot;   In one case, in New Jersey, a man named Jamal MohamedWarrayat has been charged with allegedly offering himself asan assassin to terrorist groups for the purpose of killingPresident Bush or Vice President Quayle.   Overseas, Bulgarian officials last month arrested andbriefly held several people who were believed to be planningto kill the U.S. ambassador. The FBI and intelligenceagencies are tracking other known terrorists who may be ontheir way here, and believe they have blunted efforts byothers to enter the U.S.   Since Iraq invaded Kuwait Aug. 2, hundreds of terroristthreats have been issued around the globe -- from Australiato Moscow, from Riyadh to Washington -- though only a handfulare considered credible and none has been carried out so far.The State Department's counterterrorism staff has logged thethreats with pins on a large world map. The pins runnorthwestward from the Persian Gulf through the Middle Eastand into Europe, all the way to Scotland.   U.S. and allied intelligence agencies have beencooperating closely to try to head off the assault. They havenoted numerous instances of suspected terroristsphotographing or otherwise examining possible American andallied targets, largely in Europe and the Middle East. &quot;Wehave a lot of people under scrutiny,&quot; said one official. &quot;Ourcounterterrorism network is fully up.&quot;   Federal officials said there hasn't been any surge ofknown terrorists trying to enter the U.S. since Kuwait wasinvaded. But one top counterterrorism official said, &quot;Webelieve there are people in place who are operatives ofMiddle East terrorist groups living in the United States.&quot;Such people were here before August, officials said, and areunder surveillance.   One senior Justice Department official said the governmenthasn't detected much evidence that Middle East terroristgroups are sending orders to operatives in the U.S.   Nevertheless, the FBI has alerted 16,000 U.S. lawenforcement agencies to be on guard for evidence of terrorismand established special anti-terrorist command posts in majorcities.   Officials privately concede that they are publicizing suchsteps in an effort to scare terrorists from the U.S. and thatthey can't completely assure the public the measures willwork.   If fighting gets under way in the Gulf, law enforcementagents world-wide are expected to start rounding up scores ofsuspected terrorists. In many countries, they intend to holdthe suspects -- even without bringing charges -- for as longas local laws allow. The object is to harass and disrupttheir operations.   The FBI says mass roundups and detentions won't beundertaken in the U.S., because American laws don't permitsuch sweeps. However, in concert with police in othercountries, agents here are expected to obtain search warrantsfor buildings where they suspect terrorists are hiding and toquestion and arrest some suspects.   Already, the FBI has begun a phased effort to put pressureon suspected terrorists. Agents have been paying conspicuouscalls on Arab-American community leaders, partly to seekinformation about new arrivals from the Mideast. This week,the FBI will begin tracking down 3,000 Iraqis in the U.S.whose visas have expired. And a much smaller group of peoplethat are suspected of terrorism -- not all of them of Iraqiorigin -- may soon be visited by agents to send a messagethat they are under surveillance.   Overseas, the State Department has evacuated many of itsemployees from Jordan, Yemen, Sudan, Pakistan and otherMuslim nations where terrorism may occur. It also has warnedother Americans to leave those nations and to be wary ofMediterranean passenger ships and flights. And security hasbeen stepped up at U.S. military bases.   In recent months, there have been few terrorist incidents,U.S. officials believe, because Iraq has ordered sympatheticterrorists to lie low and then be ready to go into actiononce a war began with the U.S.-led coalition. The officialsadmit that many terrorists are still unknown to them, andthey are bracing for bombings and other attacks they can'tprevent.   Likely foreign targets, according to the intelligenceagencies, include U.S. embassies, military bases, aircraft,ships, businesses, and tourists. Terrorists also are expectedto take aim at American Jewish groups. In addition, Britishinstallations are believed high on the terrorists' lists, anda major drive, including attempted assassinations, is fearedwithin moderate Arab countries.   Inside the U.S., where Middle East terrorist groups havebeen unable to do much in the past, the FBI has compiled along list of vulnerable installations such as power plantsand communications facilities. Its agents have visited policedepartments and companies to advise them on thesevulnerabilities.   Five potential sources of anti-American terrorism andviolence worry U.S. officials.   First is Iraqi intelligence itself, which maintainsnetworks in other countries and recently has been observedmaking use of front organizations abroad from which Libya'sterror activities once emanated.   Second is a network of Baghdad-based Palestinian terrorgroups. They include the Abu Nidal Organization, thePalestine Liberation Front, led by Abu Abbas, and the bandled by Abu Ibrahim.   Another source of concern is a collection of Palestinianterror bands not as close to Saddam Hussein, but which latelyhave pledged loyalty to him. These include the Syrian-basedPopular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-GeneralCommand, which is believed to have masterminded the 1988 PanAmerican 103 bombing, and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad,which has sparked some of the worst violence in thePalestinian revolt in Israel's occupied territories.   Non-Arab terrorists, such as those in the Philippines,also have threatened to attack U.S. bases there in the eventof war in the Gulf.   Finally, officials worry about spontaneous anti-Americanviolence conducted by angry individual Muslims or by mobsthat aren't part of any known terrorist group. Such fearshave been fueled by calls such as one recently issued byformer Algerian President Ahmed Ben Bella urging Arabs acrossthe Mideast to attack American and Western embassies if waroccurs.   (See related story: &quot;U.S. Issues Blunt Warning As BaghdadContinues To Fortify Its Positions&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 16, 1991)</TEXT></DOC>