<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900803-0105</DOCNO><DOCID>900803-0105.</DOCID><HL>   Free to Enjoy the Cruelty of the Streets   ----   By J. Douglas Ousley</HL><DATE>08/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><LP>   When a church opens its doors for worship, it opens themto everyone, and that should include the homeless, no mattertheir physical or mental condition. But this Christianresponse can also be dangerous -- witness last year'shorrifying murder of a worshipper in St. Patrick's Cathedralby a deranged homeless man.   At the church where I am rector, a midtown ManhattanEpiscopal parish, just such people -- homeless andunmistakably very mentally ill -- do sometimes wander induring our Sunday services. One man in particular, swathed intorn and dirty clothes and unable to speak coherently, hascome in several times; he walks quickly up a side aisle,enters a pew near the front, kneels and seems to pray, thoughit be only babbling.</LP><TEXT>   He even came in briefly while the new Episcopal bishop ofNew York was conducting confirmation ceremonies. As onprevious occasions, he knelt, seemed to pray, then jumped upand walked out down the center aisle, speaking franticallybut causing only minimal disturbance.   But on a recent Sunday, his pattern changed radically. Asmy associate minister was giving her sermon, the man camequickly up the center aisle in a very agitated state. Heentered a front pew, knelt and then stared at the woman inthe pulpit. Suddenly, he scrambled from the pew and rantoward her, shouting.   My associate stopped speaking but held her ground in thepulpit. Fortunately, two laymen reacted quickly and ran up toeither side of the man, touched his arms gently and quietlypersuaded him to leave. They escorted him back down thecenter aisle as he raged and shouted.   &quot;And we will pray for him, too,&quot; my associate told thecongregation.   Though only a brief intrusion, it left us all a bitshaken, realizing how differently and violently such anincident might have ended. And, of course, thoughts of ourown safety aside, we are concerned for the hundreds of peoplesuch as our anguished visitor who are living on the city'sstreets, most of them seemingly mentally ill. Our church,like so many in the city, has programs to aid the homeless.But our concern also leads us to a philosophical, legal and,sometimes, religious debate with ourselves: Should insanepeople who roam the streets be confined against their will orshould they be allowed to remain free?   Many are on the streets as a result of the closing ofmental institutions in the 1960s and '70s. Critics whocampaigned against these institutions said they were morebarbaric prisons than hospitals for healing; sadly, thecommunity-based outpatient clinics that were supposed to havereplaced them have never materialized.   When I began my ministry in New York City in the early1970s, I, too, argued that these unfortunates were better offon the street than in some hellish asylum. Now, I am not sosure.   A friend who is both a professor of philosophy and anEpiscopal priest doesn't accept the position that society'soverriding concern is for the freedom of movement of theinsane. &quot;I am a member of the American Civil Liberties Unionand I am a Christian,&quot; he told me. &quot;The ACLU part of me saysthey should not be locked up; the Christian part of me saysthat it is not right to let them roam the streets in suchterrible shape.&quot;   My friend's statement of the alternatives shows that it'snot simply a question of confining the disturbed againsttheir will or letting them live free -- for what does &quot;free&quot;mean in such cases? How could the man who lunged toward thepulpit in our church be described as exercising his free willif he is clearly unaware of what he is doing? How could he besaid to have civil rights that include freedom of movement ifhis actions are driven by inner compulsions over which he hasno control?   Surely not only the Christian would take a larger viewthat leaving the man in a degraded state not only doesn'thelp him but casts a moral shadow over the society that isguaranteeing him his putative freedom of movement. Surely notonly the Christian would wonder if we would all be better offif the man were confined and had a better chance for a morehuman existence.   We need, then, to recognize that confining at least someof the mentally ill may be the best thing for them -- notjust pragmatically, for the good of society, but in humanistand spiritual terms, for their own good. Already, in New YorkCity at least, there appears to be wide public sympathy formeasures to keep the homeless from bus and train stations. Asthese measures could reflect a coming wave of resentment ofthe homeless themselves, it may be time to find ways to getthe mentally ill homeless off the streets.   As for those who are not insane but who are in danger ofbeing committed by unscupulous relatives, their rights can besafeguarded, while those who clearly cannot care forthemselves are cared for. While the indigency of the streetpeople should make us careful about sweeping them out ofsight for our convenience, we can maintain institutions forthe mentally ill in humane and dignified ways rather thanallowing the least of these, our brothers and sisters, tosuffer the effects of their alleged freedom.   ---   Mr. Ousley is rector of the Church of the Incarnation inNew York.</TEXT></DOC>