<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910501-0020</DOCNO><DOCID>910501-0020.</DOCID><HL>   Tough Target:   Waste Disposal Giant,   Often Under Attack,   Seems to Gain From It   ---   Waste Management's Jousts   With Environmentalists   Deter Rivals From Field   ---   How It Sanitizes Its Image   ----   By Jeff Bailey   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   WMX</CO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)</GV><RE>ILLINOIS (IL)</RE><LP>   OAK BROOK, Ill. -- Environmentalists keep attacking WasteManagement Inc. And it just keeps getting stronger.   Citizens ClearingHouse for Hazardous Wastes Inc., ofArlington, Va., publishes a how-to guide giving local groupstips for combating the big trash-disposal company.Greenpeace, another environmental group, put out a 64-pagelist of the company's alleged misdeeds and now is preparingits second list, tentatively called &quot;An Encyclopedia ofEnvironmental Crimes and Other Misdeeds.&quot; Charles Cray, theGreenpeace official compiling the charges, says WasteManagement is &quot;the worst.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Yet, for all their enmity, environmentalists trying toclean up the trash business have helped Waste Management alot more than hurt it. The more pressure they have put on thecompany and its industry, the bigger, stronger and moreprofitable Waste Management has become. The business hasbecome so complicated and contentious that now only a companywith Waste Management's clout seems likely to succeed on abig scale. Although protests and sanctions may slow WasteManagement down, they make the business even less feasiblefor smaller rivals.   &quot;If it was easy, we'd have lots more competition,&quot; saysDean L. Buntrock, who helped fashion the company out of acollection of small sanitation firms and now is its chiefexecutive officer. &quot;A lot of CEOs of other companies figure,`Why do we need it?'&quot;   Even Borg-Warner Corp., a chemical and industrial-productsgiant, considered the garbage business in the early 1980s butwas scared off, says Jerry E. Dempsey, Borg-Warner's formerpresident and now head of Waste Management's 76%-ownedhazardous-waste unit, Chemical Waste Management Inc. &quot;It wasperceived as being a difficult business,&quot; he says.   Now, some environmentalists wonder whether they helpedcreate a monster. Luke Cole, an environmental lawyer for theCalifornia Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, says WasteManagement's savvy makes it a formidable foe. &quot;It's mucheasier for a community to run a smaller company out of town,&quot;he says.   In just four years, Waste Management's revenue tripled to$6.03 billion last year, and earnings doubled to $684.8million. Its growth has far eclipsed that of such glamorouscompanies as Apple Computer Inc. and Microsoft Corp. In 1971,when Waste Management went public, its market value was $20million. Today, it is $19 billion.   And its prospects for growth remain impressive. In the1990s, new federal rules will probably close half thenation's 6,000 garbage dumps, and make Waste Management'sdumps -- all of which already meet the new regulations --even more valuable. Its share of the U.S. garbage business isexpected to double from the current 12% within a few years.It is the only major company handling both everyday trash andhazardous wastes, and it is expanding into air- andwater-pollution control.   Waste Management has certainly become a tough opponent. Ithas 80 lawyers -- a legal army that it terms the largestprivate environmental practice in the country. At any onemoment, that army can be fighting for as many as 100 permitseither for expanding facilities or opening new ones. And itsattorneys are so adept that the Citizens ClearingHousehandbook advises opposition groups not to sap their energiestrying to fight it in court. Instead, it suggests such movesas persuading landowners not to sell to the company and usinggrass-roots political tactics.   Waste Management also has 22 Washington staffers who lobbyfor favorable legislation related to garbage and hazardouswaste. And the company's political action committee hasbecome a large political contributor, giving more than $1million in the past four years. In the same period, thecompany gave $1.5 million to environmental and wildlifegroups.   No one else in the business comes close to WasteManagement's size. Houston-based Browning-Ferris IndustriesInc. is half as big. Moreover, it dropped out of thehazardous-waste business last year, and it is having problemsin its traditional sanitation business because it doesn'thave enough dumps. The rest of the garbage business consistsmostly of smaller regional companies and mom-and-pop outfits.   Though Waste Management contends it is environmentallyresponsible, its grip on the industry troubles some people asdump space dwindles and the need to recycle and otherenvironmental problems increase. The company is rapidlybecoming the dominant player in many of these issues, and itsenormous influence is all the more worrisome because of itshistory of environmental violations. The company has paidfines and related settlements exceeding $50 million -- foractions such as unplugging pollution monitoring devices anddisposing of poisonous material by mixing it with oil.   Some critics charge the company with a cavalier attitudetoward such fines, which are small compared to its hugeprofits and, anyway, raise the stakes for competitors. Thefines are also minor compared with the cost of closing downsome of the company's sites.   In 1983, for example, Waste Management was caught inlarge-scale violations at two sites, but the penalties provedto be minor. Instead of destroying material laden withcancer-causing PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) as it wassupposed to, a company operation in Vickery, Ohio, dilutedthe material with oil. It then sold six million gallons of itas fuel and to coat roads. At about the same time in Emelle,Ala., where Waste Management operates the nation's biggesthazardous-waste dump, it had been caught illegally storing2.8 million gallons of PCB liquids.   The company faced not only financial penalties but, moreominously, the possible loss of operating permits at the twosites. To negotiate with the U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency and states, Waste Management retained a former EPAgeneral counsel, Joan Z. Bernstein. The combined $39.5million in fines and related settlements ultimately paid mayseem large: a $600,000 fine at Emelle; $12.5 million in finesat Vickery; $11.4 million to settle a shareholder lawsuit fornot promptly disclosing the trouble; and $15 million tosettle a suit by neighbors at Vickery who contended thattheir health and property values were threatened.   But in fact, Mrs. Bernstein, who is now Waste Management'svice president of environmental policy and ethical standards,had saved it money and helped ensure its future. Just toclose down the two sites, under current regulations, wouldhave cost the company $42.4 million, it recently told Alabamaofficials. And that doesn't count the huge value of theoperations as measured by their ability to generate profits.With its permit intact, the Emelle operation alone isprobably worth well over $200 million. A company officialtold the Birmingham News in 1989 that the Emelle dump'spretax profit that year would be $19 million to $31 million,on revenue of $125 million. (Waste Management won't commentbut doesn't dispute the figures.)   As unpleasant as the business might seem, companyexecutives appear to love it. They talk about garbageincessantly, even over meals. Once a year, they hop ongarbage trucks to &quot;throw some loads.&quot; Mr. Buntrock seesnothing but opportunity: a series of &quot;waste streams&quot; to be&quot;managed.&quot;   In the 1970s, before getting a dump permit became sodifficult, Mr. Buntrock astutely loaded up on capacity bybuying dumps from smaller firms and opening new ones. Today,the company has 126 garbage dumps -- many of them huge.Securities analysts estimate that these dumps already areworth at least $1 billion more than they cost.   Waste Management's dumps have a clay or synthetic liner --or both -- to keep contaminated water from seeping out. Theyhave ground-water monitoring systems in case the liner leaks.They have methane collection systems, because rotting trashproduces gas. And they are covered each night with dirt tokeep down the bugs, rats and odors. A first-class dump costsclose to $500,000 an acre to build.   To win dump permits, Waste Management wears down localopponents in long, costly legal battles. Although the localgroups are often well-organized and sometimes guided bynational environmental groups, the company persists. It givesway on small points, haggles back and forth and lobbiesresidents with reassuring brochures -- printed on recycledpaper.   It carefully sanitizes its image, referring to itself asan &quot;environmental-services concern,&quot; to garbage dumps as&quot;sanitary landfills&quot; and to hazardous-waste sites as&quot;residual management units.&quot; Mr. Buntrock dislikes referencesto the company as a trash hauler or dump operator -- its mainbusinesses.   In Naperville, Ill., where it eventually won an extensionof up to 20 years on the life of a 234-acre dump, the companyhand-delivered about 3,000 promotional packages -- explaininghow carefully it handles and buries garbage -- to residentswithin a two-mile radius. When opposition remained strong, itwent to a countywide lobbying effort using its hundreds ofemployees who live in DuPage County. They stressed thefast-growing area's need for dump space and the lack ofalternatives. That helped split a county commission vote,with officials representing the dump's immediate neighborsopposed but a larger group favoring the extension.   When Waste Management does suffer a setback, it quicklyoffers Plan B. In Lake County, Ill., residents -- many ofwhom remembered a 1986 conviction of a Waste Managementofficial, John Horak, for bribing the mayor of nearby FoxLake -- beat back a $90 million dump-and-incinerator proposedby the company. So, Waste Management came back with a planfor a composting facility on the 165-acre site and got itapproved.   The company also tries to mollify opponents. When the oddsseemed stacked against it getting approval to build a $50million incinerator at a hazardous-waste dump near KettlemanCity, Calif., Waste Management made more than 100concessions, including giving $1 for each ton of incineratedwaste to a county &quot;greening&quot; fund, $5 a ton to acommunity-development fund and 50 trees a year to the area.It also put as many as five attorneys at a time on the case,which required a 1,000-page environmental-impact statementand lasted three years.   The project was eventually approved even though thecompany had already been fined $2.1 million for expanding atthe site without government clearance and not properlymonitoring ground water. Moreover, the dump was hit by alandslide. A 35-by-14-foot wall of toxic dirt, 55-gallondrums and other waste collapsed -- half a million cubic yardsin all. At least one layer of the dump liner was torn.   With the approval, which came in January, Waste Managementwill be able to handle one-quarter of California'shazardous-waste incineration needs, at prices as high as$1,000 a ton. Opponents sued in February to block the permitin a state court, charging, among other things, that locatingthe incinerator in the largely Latino area was discriminatoryand would violate citizens' civil rights.   Yet as adept as the company is at getting its way, itsassurances about environmental safety don't always hold up.Its hazardous-waste incinerator on Chicago's South Side, forexample, is one of only a handful of U.S. sites with a permitto burn PCBs. When the company acquired it in 1984, theincinerator had handled mostly local hazardous waste. Butsoon it was taking in trucks and rail cars loaded with PCBsfrom all over the Eastern half of the country -- charging$1,000 to $3,000 a ton -- and burning them round the clock.   A former employee at the site, Jack F. Tursman, alleges ina suit in a state court in Chicago that the incinerator wasregularly overstuffed, resulting in release of poisonoussmoke, and that spills of PCBs went unreported. He also saysthe pollution-monitoring equipment was at times unplugged.Mr. Tursman was fired in December 1987 for, the company says,mishandling a spill. (He denied it and sued for wrongfuldismissal, seeking $21,500 in compensatory and $500,000 inpunitive damages.)   After Mr. Tursman's allegations began to surface, Johan E.Bayer, who was then Chemical Waste's director ofenvironmental operations, visited the EPA's Chicago PCBchief, John Connell, in March 1988. Mr. Bayer told him aboutthe alleged overstuffing and unplugging. Mr. Bayer also saidthat the company was investigating and that he himself hadtaken over the site from its managers, who were fired.   Mr. Connell says he was reassured by Mr. Bayer's visit. &quot;Ithought it was very significant that they were taking {anenvironmental officer} and putting him into an operatingposition. We were impressed, satisfied, that they were takingthese steps.&quot;   The EPA subpoenaed the incinerator's records, charged thecompany with failure to monitor emissions and otherviolations, and fined it a record $3,750,000. WasteManagement &quot;wrote the check out without blinking an eye,&quot; theEPA official says. But Mr. Connell never talked to Mr.Tursman or anyone who worked at the incinerator to determinehow the violations occurred. &quot;We let the records speak forthemselves,&quot; he says. (At least one EPA criminal investigatordid question an electrician who works at the site, though thecompany says it hasn't seen any signs of a criminalinvestigation since summer 1989. The EPA won't comment.)   Waste Management did make changes. It hired a new generalmanager at the site, spent millions of dollars on newequipment, increased the staff 45% and shut down for a fullmonth to retrain everyone. That done, the new generalmanager, Kurt Frey, pronounced the place as safe as can be.&quot;If we're ever in doubt, we shut it off,&quot; he said in aninterview last Jan. 31. Two weeks later, a little pastmidnight, an explosion rocked the site, and for two minutessent a cloud of pollutants into the air. No one was injured.   It turned out that a 16-gallon drum of combustibletetrazole had been incinerated without first being tested tomake sure it had been diluted enough to prevent an explosion.EPA and Illinois officials ordered the incinerator shut down,saying that the site's screening of waste was inadequate andthat the incinerator could have been structurally damaged.Waste Management says it believes that the incinerator isready to be fired up again and expects it to reopen soon.</TEXT></DOC>