<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900706-0065</DOCNO><DOCID>900706-0065.</DOCID><HL>   Off the Hook:   Hughes Aircraft Chief   Is Implicated Belatedly   In Defense-Secret Case   ---   Statute of Limitations Makes   His Prosecution Unlikely,   But Civil Suit Is Possible   ---   A Subpoena Misses the Mark   ----   By Andy Pasztor and Rick Wartzman   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GM GMH</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Federal criminal investigators haveidentified the biggest fish so far in their inquiry into adefense-industry ring that illicitly obtained and swappedPentagon planning secrets -- and he is likely to get away.   Malcolm R. Currie, the high-profile chairman of HughesAircraft Co. -- a General Motors Corp. subsidiary and thenation's fifth-largest defense contractor -- received some ofthe same classified information that landed lower-levelindustry officials in jail for ferreting it out of theDefense Department, federal court records show.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Currie may have done more than just read excerpts frominternal Pentagon papers passed along to him by underlings.According to testimony by several former Hughes employees anddocuments filed in federal court in Alexandria, Va., Mr.Currie approved a system to funnel hundreds of pages ofPentagon documents into Hughes while circumventing thecompany's normal security procedures. The allegations weremade in open court last month but haven't been reported untilnow.   Yet the criminal investigation of Mr. Currie, which hasbeen under way for several months, according to severallaw-enforcement officials, seems unlikely to lead to anindictment. Mr. Currie currently isn't a target of the grandjury investigating the scandal. But investigators arecontemplating filing some sort of civil action againstseveral companies and individuals, including Mr. Currie.   Prosecutors may be frustrated in pursuing a criminal caseagainst Mr. Currie because of timing. The five-year statuteof limitations covering the company's document-gatheringactivities expired three months ago. Also, the JusticeDepartment complicated matters in March, when -- believing ithad wrapped up its case against Hughes by getting a guiltyplea and $3.6 million in penalties from the company -- itsaid it wouldn't seek criminal charges against seniormanagement. The internal Hughes memoranda most damaging toMr. Currie didn't surface until later, investigators say.Finally, the investigation has been slowed by the refusal ofseven former and current Hughes officials to cooperate unlessimmunized from prosecution.   Michael Costello, the lead Pentagon investigator on thedocuments case, declines to discuss the allegations againstMr. Currie. But speaking generally about top defense-industryexecutives, he says, &quot;The ones that got away, got away by theskin of their teeth.&quot;   Mr. Currie, through a Hughes spokesman, declined to beinterviewed for this article. General Motors also declined tocomment.   One of the most sweeping white-collar inquiries in years,involving several major defense contractors and billions ofdollars in weapons contracts, the government's data-swappingcase thus far has netted only lower-level figures. Sixmarketing managers from five companies have been found guiltyof improperly distributing sensitive Pentagon planningreports.   By obtaining bootlegged copies of internal Pentagonspending plans, Hughes and other contractors were able tomore effectively target their marketing and research efforts,according to investigators. That gave the contractors an edgeover less-knowledgeable competitors, and an advantage innegotiations with the Pentagon.   The six convicted managers maintained that theiractivities had been sanctioned by top officials at theircompanies. Yet at least in public the managers gave littlespecific evidence of that approval. Memos sent to Mr. Currieoffer the first solid corroboration that the informationgleaned from the Pentagon documents actually found its way tothe highest levels of defense corporations.   For instance, a 13-page analysis of advancedattack-weapons programs prepared by a Hughes employee inMarch 1983 and sent directly to Mr. Currie began by saying,&quot;What I have reviewed are the following data: . . . POM84-May 1982.&quot; POMs, or Program Objective Memoranda, aredocuments intended only for a few dozen senior DefenseDepartment officials; Mr. Currie, a former chief of Pentagonresearch, had served at a level at which such documents werecustomarily circulated. Their cover sheets carry the notice:&quot;Disclosure restricted.&quot;   &quot;I made sure that Mal Currie knew what I was doing,&quot;former Hughes budget analyst Frank Caso, who prepared that13-page analysis, testified at his federal court trial inAlexandria last month. &quot;He thoroughly supported it, endorsedit. In his very nice charming way, he put his arm around meand said, `I've known you a long time, Frank. I'm lookingforward to working with you a long time.'&quot; Mr. Caso wasconvicted of trafficking in classified government documentsand is awaiting sentencing.   A Hughes spokesman said that Mr. Currie &quot;did not have anyknowledge of the conduct for which Mr. Caso was convicted.&quot;Because Mr. Caso is still to be sentenced, the spokesmansaid, it would be inappropriate to say anything else aboutthe matter.   The revelations in the Caso trial threaten Mr. Currie'sreputation as one of the defense establishment's leadinglights. When he took over as chairman of Hughes, he seemedthe perfect choice to right a large and troubledorganization. He brought with him a Ph.D. in engineering,experience in Washington, and a candid style seldom seenamong top defense-industry executives. His predecessor hadleft under the cloud of an unrelated criminal investigation.   Comfortable in the spotlight, the dapper, silver-hairedMr. Currie became an Iacocca-like spokesman for Hughes in thecompany's first national ad campaign. In a two-page spread inthe June 4 issue of Time magazine, Mr. Currie discoursed onthe &quot;perfect partnership&quot; between General Motors'smanufacturing experience and Hughes's technical expertise.   Out of the public eye, Mr. Currie had problems -- thoughthey were unrecognized at the time. In 1977 he had becomechief of Hughes's missile division, which, among otherthings, builds armaments for jet fighters and anti-tankweapons. Between then and the spring of 1983, when he movedon to a higher post at Hughes headquarters, he received atleast four memos from Mr. Caso or his associates thatreferred by name to classified Pentagon documents thatcontractors weren't supposed to see. Among the documentscited in the memos are some that Mr. Caso was convicted forhandling.   One memo about the outlook for defense spending, forexample, referred in its first paragraph to the Pentagon's&quot;Consolidated Guidance,&quot; a blueprint for long-term spending.Such documents typically carry the warning &quot;Not Releasable toContractors-Consultants.&quot;   Other top company officials received Hughes memos stamped&quot;Marketing Sensitive&quot; that quoted from restricted Pentagondocuments. These executives include D. Kenneth Richardson,the current president of Hughes, and Ted Wong, now the headof the missile group. Mr. Wong declined to comment. Hisattorney said, &quot;I don't know what he knew.&quot; Mr. Richardson istraveling in Europe and couldn't be reached for comment. AHughes spokesman said he didn't believe Mr. Richardson had anattorney. The government has indicated that based on currentevidence, it doesn't intend to seek criminal charges againsteither man.   Mr. Currie was interviewed once by Defense Departmentinvestigators earlier this year, after the Hughes pleaagreement was filed, law-enforcement officials say. Theydidn't put him under oath; officials decline to discuss why.Mr. Currie said then that he wasn't aware of anyimproprieties at Hughes.   On March 9, when Hughes pleaded guilty in the documentscase, Mr. Currie issued a letter to company employees thatstated: &quot;The acquisition and possession of such documents waswrong and cannot be justified. . . .We have all learned fromthis incident, and we should all renew our personalcommitment to the standards of business conduct and integritywe have set for ourselves.&quot;   Mr. Caso's lawyers wanted Mr. Currie to testify at lastmonth's trial, but Mr. Currie's attorney refused to accept asubpoena on behalf of his client. By the time a new subpoenawas issued, Mr. Currie had left on a previously scheduledtrip to Brazil. &quot;He would have been an essential witness,&quot;says Marcus Topel, an attorney for Mr. Caso. Seven othercurrent and former Hughes officials declined to testify,invoking a Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.   Prosecutors already have demonstrated thatdocument-swapping became almost commonplace among defensecontractors in the early 1980s. Employees of roughly a dozencontractors obtained the papers and traded them as routinelyas business cards. Some of the documents that Mr. Casoillicitly brought into Hughes bore distinctive markingsshowing they came from Boeing Co. Richard Lee Fowler, aformer Boeing analyst described by prosecutors as the kingpinof the information-gathering ring, and the subject of apage-one article in The Wall Street Journal on Jan. 15, is injail for his role in the scheme.   The ring of document-swappers, which prosecutors dubbed&quot;the Clique,&quot; went to great lengths to hide its tracks.According to testimony at Mr. Caso's trial, officials at onecompany went so far as to install wheels under the giantcabinets in which they stored their bootlegged documents.Whenever Pentagon security inspectors showed up, theofficials rolled the cabinets to the roof of their officebuilding.   At Hughes, the government alleged that Mr. Caso and someof his cohorts logged in unauthorized documents under phonytitles, used special courier passes to avoid inspection bysecurity guards, and slipped some of the material intopersonal desk drawers not subject to Defense Departmentsearches.   There is no suggestion that Mr. Currie participateddirectly in the Clique by obtaining documents from Pentagonofficials or by making clandestine trades with othercontractors.   Yet company employees testified that he was aware thatPentagon secrets were being brought into the company. Theemployees said they took his response to mean at least tacitapproval. &quot;The man {Mr. Currie} was a former assistantsecretary of defense. If he didn't know the rules . . . whowas I to know?&quot; Sharyn Pinkstaff, Mr. Caso's formerassistant, testified. Ms. Pinkstaff, who has been grantedimmunity from prosecution and who appeared at the trial as agovernment witness, still works for Hughes. She declined tobe interviewed.   She also testified that she used to deliver some of theunauthorized documents themselves -- not just memos aboutthem -- to high-ranking Hughes executives, including Mr.Currie.   And she went on to make more serious allegations about thechairman. All defense companies with security clearances arerequired to maintain a system to safeguard, track and certifythe disposal of the classified information they receive.Pentagon agents routinely inspect contractors' compliancewith the regulations for those security systems. Ms.Pinkstaff testified that after Mr. Caso received a writtenreprimand from Hughes security personnel in 1978 for a sloppyaccounting of the classified documents in his possession, hetold her he personally appealed to Mr. Currie to authorize anew document-identification system that would avoid suchhassles. Both Ms. Pinkstaff and Mr. Caso said from thewitness stand that Mr. Currie did just that.   Under this new system, government exhibits in the Casotrial indicate, Mr. Caso could bring any papers he wishedinto the Hughes classified document network without companysecurity officers scrutinizing their contents. Keeping theillicitly obtained documents in the security system --sometimes under obscure labels -- could give them theappearance of legitimacy and make it easier to move themaround within the company. Material brought in by otherHughes employees was examined more closely, investigatorssay. Eventually the security requirements for Mr. Caso wereloosened even more, allowing him to log in documents merelyby making a phone call to a Hughes clerk.   Jim Calder, who was security chief at the missile divisionin the late 1970s, made a note to his file after a meetingwith Mr. Caso and Mr. Caso's boss, Eugene Babb, to discussthe new arrangement.   In the note, filed in federal court, Mr. Calder wrote:&quot;Caso and Babb described their meeting with M.R. Currie . . .in which Currie was made aware of both the current andprevious system that Caso has maintained for sensitiveinformation gathering. Both stated that Currie supports thecontinuation of information gathering. Allegedly, Currie toldCaso to be extremely careful in his involvement with thismatter.&quot; Mr. Babb, who has retired from Hughes, declinescomment. So do Mr. Calder and his attorneys.   In an earlier memo to his files, Mr. Calder emphasized theimportance Hughes placed on Mr. Caso's information-gathering.&quot;Caso may not be the only person in the company doing what heconsiders to be important for our business,&quot; the memo said,&quot;but he is the only one I know of with an identifiablecharter.&quot;   In the mid-1980s, Pentagon investigators had begun tostumble across classified documents in odd places. Pokingaround in contractors' files, they soon realized the extentto which the government had lost control of its secrets.Following a trail of copied documents, they discovered theClique.   A couple of years later, as the grand jury inquiry swunginto full gear, Hughes launched its own internalinvestigation. At least six officials were forced out of thecompany, law-enforcement officials say. Hughes, eager tocontinue doing business with the government, eventuallyturned over to the Justice Department a huge volume ofinternal documents, including the memos to Mr. Currie thatlaid out the Pentagon secrets.   But investigators received Mr. Calder's memos from hisattorneys only about three months ago. It is those memos thatare most damaging to Mr. Currie.   Yet investigators think the people behind the Cliqueprobably will remain beyond their reach. &quot;There's no doubt inour mind that senior people in these corporations wereinvolved,&quot; Mr. Costello says. &quot;They had knowledge of theactivities and shared in the wealth of the information. Itgoes way up the corporate chain.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>