<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910307-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>910307-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   FDIC Still Seeks Restitution From Renda   ----   By Ann Hagedorn and Thomas F. O'Boyle   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   GE LABOR XON MHS I.BNL</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)PETROLEUM (PET)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES (SCR)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Convicted bank swindler Mario Renda has been released fromprison but, to the embarrassment of the government, he hasn'tcompleted paying either his criminal or civil restitution.   Mr. Renda, a former New York deposit broker, ended hisprison term still owing the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. asizable chunk of the $9.9 million he's obligated to pay theagency to compensate the victims of his crimes. Moreover, inan unusual twist, the FDIC is also holding the bag for the$4,250,000 Mr. Renda agreed to pay the Justice Department aspart of his plea bargain. Under the terms of a 1989settlement, the FDIC guaranteed payment of the amount becauseit wanted to maintain sole control over Mr. Renda's assets.It wasn't immediately clear whether the FDIC would have toprovide the restitution money itself if it fails to collectit from Mr. Renda.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Renda, once one of the biggest brokers of certificatesof deposit in the U.S., was convicted in 1987 of defrauding abank in Florida of more than $11 million. The same year hepleaded guilty to defrauding two banks in Kansas. And in NewYork, he pleaded guilty to charges of racketeering and taxevasion in what was then the largest criminal pension-fundscheme ever prosecuted.   Throughout Mr. Renda's prison term, the FDIC tried tocollect the money it was owed, according to an individualknowledgeable about the case. But it ran into unexpecteddifficulties: Releases for property liens and payments ofback taxes, which Mr. Renda was supposed to sign, weresometimes returned to the FDIC unsigned or simply unopened,according to the individual. Some of his real estate assetsalso turned out to be less valuable than expected becausethey were already encumbered by liens and other holds on thetitles and because the real estate market was weak.   An FDIC spokesman said the agency is concerned that theJustice Department didn't inform the FDIC about Mr. Renda'srelease, which was earlier than expected due to hiscooperation in various investigations. The FDIC wanted someadvance notice in order to change their strategy forrepayment of the debts, said the spokesman.   &quot;It's a lot easier to do this with him in prison becausehe was in a fixed position. Now, with him on the streetsagain, it'll be more difficult to get him to sign,&quot; thespokesman said.   The spokesman said the exact amount of the deficitcouldn't yet be established. The FDIC, he said, is currentlyliquidating certain assets such as Mr. Renda's jet, a Swissbank account and even his Oriental rugs. Mr. Renda couldn'tbe reached for comment.   In the case to which Mr. Renda pleaded guilty, theBrooklyn Organized Crime Strike Force claimed Mr. Renda andhis partner had brokered the investment of more than $100million from the benefit plans of a Teamsters local and alocal of the Sheet Metal Workers union. Prosecutors said atthe time that the $14 million in commission payments the twomen allegedly collected contributed to the demise of suchinstitutions as Old Court Savings andamp; Loan Association, aBaltimore-based thrift that collapsed in May 1985, touchingoff a Maryland banking crisis.   In his plea bargain with the Brooklyn prosecutors, Mr.Renda agreed to testify against his partner in thepension-fund scam and to pay the $4,250,000 in restitution incash before sentencing. Then, right before sentencing, theFDIC proposed a settlement under which it would do all thecollecting in the Renda case.   Mr. Renda, who faced 25 years in prison, was given areduced sentence of four years. And because he continued tocooperate with the government's savings and loaninvestigation, he was released early.   --   FOOD POISONING allegedly due to a defective refrigeratoris focus of suit.   The plaintiffs, the Ganser family of Lafayette, Ind.,accused General Electric Co. of &quot;willful, wanton, recklessand grossly negligent&quot; behavior in the manufacture of arefrigerator that allegedly caused their food poisoning dueto insufficient refrigeration. GE denies the allegation.   Four members of the Ganser family were hospitalized fornausea and vomiting in March 1989, 17 months after purchasinga new GE refrigerator. The complaint alleges that the father,Daniel Ganser, contracted a heart infection from the foodpoisoning and later had a stroke. Mr. Ganser has sufferedpermanent damage from the stroke and had to undergo thereplacement of two heart valves.   The complaint, filed in Tippecanoe County superior court,also contends that GE was &quot;negligent in its design andtesting&quot; of the refrigerator and GE failed to notify or warnthe Gansers that it was defective.   Damages in the lawsuit weren't specified, in accordancewith Indiana law; however, Indianapolis attorney Scott A.Weathers put the potential value of the compensatory andpunitive damages of his clients at more than $5 million.   The suit is believed to be the first filed against GE overthe refrigerator, introduced in 1986. The refrigerator, whichwas the subject of a front-page Wall Street Journal articlelast May, used a newly designed compressor that failed,ultimately causing the shutdown of cold air circulation. GEvoluntarily replaced more than one million of the defectivecompressors and took a $450 million pretax charge in 1988 tocover its expenses.   A GE spokesman said &quot;food poisoning has not beenassociated with compressor failure,&quot; adding that the companyintends to vigorously defend itself in the lawsuit. He saidthat &quot;such a mechanical failure in the refrigerator would beobvious to a consumer before any food could spoil.&quot;   GE is conducting its own internal inquiry into thecompressor project, according to people who have beeninterviewed in connection with that inquiry. The spokesmanwould neither confirm nor deny the investigation, saying GE&quot;preferred not to discuss other aspects of the compressorcase.&quot;   ---   NATIVE ALASKANS challenge proposed settlement of ExxonValdez claims.   Five village groups sued in Washington, D.C., federalcourt seeking to prevent state and federal officials fromcompleting an estimated $1.2 billion settlement of claimsfrom the March 1989 spill.   The court action comes amid heightened speculation thatsuch a settlement is imminent. Alaska officials indicatedlast week that a settlement might be reached this month, andsome attorneys close to the litigation indicated that aresolution might even come this week. Judge Stanley Sporkinset a hearing for next Monday on a request by the nativegroups for a temporary restraining order, but late yesterdaythere was a push for an earlier hearing.   &quot;There seems to be some effort by the government not towait 'til Monday&quot; before signing an agreement, according toMichael Hausfeld, a Washington, D.C., attorney for the nativegroups. &quot;It looks like they are trying to sign this thing assoon as they can.&quot;   The groups asserted in court papers that state and federalofficials were illegally attempting to settle certain naturalresources claims from the spill to which the villagers wereentitled by federal statute. They claim that any suchsettlement would also likely eviscerate their previouslyfiled private civil suits, without giving them any say overhow the settlement funds would be disbursed.   The groups asked for an order barring the government fromcompleting any settlement without their participation. Theyalso asked for unimpeded access to state and federalscientific studies of the spill's impact that officialspreviously indicated might not be freely available to privatelitigants.   The native groups previously filed suit against ExxonCorp. and others, claiming hundreds of millions of dollars ofdamages caused their subsistence lifestyles by the spill.Those claims were recently jeopardized by an Anchoragefederal judge in a decision that greatly narrowed the kindsof plaintiffs who had standing to sue over the spill.   Alaska state officials weren't immediately available forcomment.   ---   MARRIOTT SETTLES sex-discrimination suit over promotionpractices.   Marriott Corp., the Bethesda, Md., hotel chain, reached a$3 million settlement in a class-action suit chargingdiscrimination against female employees.   In the settlement, which was reached Friday but notpublicly announced until Tuesday by attorneys for theplaintiffs, the company agreed to adopt specific goals forpromoting women to managerial positions in its food andbeverage division. The company also agreed to place $3million into a settlement fund and to abide by a 3 1/2-yearconsent decree implementing a &quot;dramatic revision&quot; of itspromotion system, the plaintiff attorneys said.   A Marriott spokesman said the company reached a settlementto avoid lengthy litigation without admitting any wrongdoing.He added that Marriott has &quot;a longstanding track record andreputation of fair treatment of all employees,&quot; but that thecase still &quot;is unfortunate blemish on that record.&quot;   The suit was filed against the hotel chain in May 1988 onbehalf of two female employees of Marriott's Chicago DowntownHotel. The women have since been promoted to food andbeverage directors, Marriott's highest management positionsin that division, the class-action attorneys said.   The class action included 3,000 women and alleged thatMarriott, with 220,000 employees, used &quot;promotion practices&quot;that systematically excluded women managers as a class in thefood and beverage division.   A spokeswoman for the American Hotel and MotelAssociation, with 10,000 members, said the organization wasunaware of any other such lawsuits against major hotelchains. She declined to comment specifically on the Marriottcase.   ---   ITALIAN BANK SCANDAL defendant gets court-appointedlawyer.   A federal magistrate in Atlanta appointed a publicdefender for Christopher P. Drogoul, the former first vicepresident and branch manager of the Atlanta office of BancaNazionale del Lavoro. The magistrate accepted the contentionthat the former bank executive, who is accused of extending$4 billion in unauthorized credits to Iraq, is now indigent.   Theodore Lackland, a partner at the Atlanta law firm ofArnall Golden andamp; Gregory, had represented Mr. Drogoulthroughout an 18-month federal investigation of BNL inAtlanta. A spokeswoman for the law firm said its relationshipwith Mr. Drogoul was severed before his arrest, but shewouldn't comment on why.   After the indictment and arrest, Mr. Drogoul appeared incourt without representation and said he was indigent andwould need counsel. His purported financial difficultiesappear to stem in part from the government's efforts torequire Mr. Drogoul to forfeit his suburban Atlanta residenceand the contents of his bank account.   Eugene Medori, attorney for a co-defendant, says thefederal public defender will try to do a good job but faces aformidable challenge. &quot;This case is going to be socomplicated and involved and will take so long . . . They'regoing to have a whole roomful of documents,&quot; he said.   ---   MILKEN SENTENCE REVIEW: Attorneys for Michael Milken won'tpresent documents supporting their request for a reducedsentence until after Sept. 1, to give prosecutors more timeto evaluate Mr. Milken's level of cooperation in thegovernment's continuing investigation of abuses on WallStreet. U.S. Judge Kimba Wood last November sentenced Mr.Milken to 10 years in prison for six felony counts related tosecurities transactions. Earlier this week, Mr. Milken'sattorneys withdrew their appeal of the sentence and said theyinstead would ask Judge Wood to consider a reduction. In aletter to Judge Wood, Mr. Milken's attorney, Arthur Liman,said that waiting until Sept. 1 &quot;would allow the governmentto proceed further with its interviews of Mr. Milken andevaluate them more fully.&quot; Mr. Milken began serving hissentence Sunday.</TEXT></DOC>