<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900521-0109</DOCNO><DOCID>900521-0109.</DOCID><HL>   Stalled Revolution:   Romanian Elections   Portend More Strife,   Even Before the Count   ---   Old Ceausescu Hand Iliescu   Is Favored, but the Nation   Is Backward and Divided   ---   A Very Cold Business Climate   ----   By Philip Revzin   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   BUCHAREST -- In the political euphoria that sweptCommunists out of power across Eastern Europe last year,Romania played its full part. Dictator Nicolae Ceausescu wasdeposed and executed; closed borders were opened; andrepressed spirits soared.   But not for long. Even as Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Polandand East Germany have moved rapidly toward democracy,Romania's revolution stalled. And five months after Mr.Ceausescu's fall, no elected, legitimate non-Communistgovernment has assumed power.</LP><TEXT>   Yesterday's election, the first multiparty voting here in53 years, still might not put such a government in power.When results are officially declared later this week, thewinners are expected to be the interim president, IonIliescu, and his National Salvation Front. He held anoverwhelming majority of the vote in exit polls last night.But political opponents are alleging fraud. And militantstudents are pledging to continue their protests against whatthey say is a Communist government in disguise.   Romania's revolution, bloodier than those of itsneighbors, has proved the least revolutionary in its effects,and the most likely to provoke further violence. During therecent campaign, opposition politicians were threatened andbeaten. The almost daily street demonstrations often turnedviolent. The joy of December vanished quickly.   To be free finally to speak about problems is not to solvethem. And Romanians have learned that the heritage of 45years of eccentric, dictatorial rule is a nation withoutmodern technology, no longer able to produce food inabundance, a nation lacking a management class and apolitical structure that might be the basis for progress.Optimists among Romanian politicians say it will take fiveyears to recover; pessimists say 10 years or longer.   &quot;We're talking about the difference between the MiddleAges and the Space Age,&quot; says Mihai Coman, the new dean ofRomania's first journalism school.   Of all the emerging Eastern European countries, the roadback will be the longest and most perilous here, the chancesof slipping again into dictatorship or chaos the highest. AndRomania is least likely to get support from the West.   Eastern Europe is way behind the West. Romania is waybehind the rest of Eastern Europe. Poland already has anelected non-Communist government and a tough, market-basedausterity program. East Germany is being taken in hand by thestrong West German economy. Czechoslovakia is matchingpolitical reform with economic restructuring. Hungary, whichlike East Germany has now held elections, began setting upfree market structures, including a stock market, years ago.In Budapest, where youths wearing Levi's jeans made inHungary crowd a downtown McDonald's, dozens of joint-venturecontracts are being signed each week. Bucharest has noLevi's, no Big Macs and, so far, no deals.   Apart from countless visits by French government ministersand welcome French humanitarian aid, the West has yet tooffer Romania much help. The U.S., for instance, doesn'tintend to grant trade concessions until a democraticallyelected government is well-established.   Heavily favored to win the election is the NationalSalvation Front, a ragbag including former communists whoserved under the late Mr. Ceausescu, army officers who forcedMr. Ceausescu to flee and then killed him, and a fewsometimes -- disillusioned intellectuals. The main oppositionLiberal and Peasants parties, groups revived after 45 yearsin the political wilderness, complain that they haven't hadthe time or means to organize an effective campaign againstthe Front, which among other things dominated televisioncoverage and supplied most of the election officials. The 70or so smaller parties that have cropped up faced similarproblems. Not even a substantial Front victory at the pollswill silence those who believe the election was essentiallyunfair.   Romania's one advantage -- its lack of foreign debt --will mean little until a stable political and economicstructure is in place to encourage foreign investment. Banksaren't lending yet. &quot;There's more difference today betweenRomania and Hungary than there is between Hungary and WestGermany,&quot; says Gilles Courregelongue, France's consul generalin Bucharest. &quot;Romania may have no debt, but it has no money,either.&quot;   Mr. Ceausescu's 24-year rule became more and more a matterof megalomaniacal whim. Much of the $11 billion he borrowedwent to build huge oil refineries that operate at a third ofcapacity. Most of what Romanians produced was exported to payoff the debt, and there wasn't much to export. Each year Mr.Ceausescu announced a record grain harvest, but shops had nobread. The claims weren't true. The official figure for 1989was 60 million metric tons; the reality was only 16.9million. Shoe factories had plenty of local leather, but noimported glue, and soles fell off in the rain. Mr. Ceausescuboasted that Romania was a modern country, even as its1930s-vintage telephone system operated just 38 lines to theU.S.   &quot;The only thing we had in abundance,&quot; says economistDaniel Daianu, &quot;was lies.&quot;   The provisional government hasn't improved things much.The death penalty was abolished, then restored. The Communistparty was banned. Both these issues were to be decided byreferendums, but that idea was dropped. Workers were giventhree Saturdays off per month, in addition to Sundays off.When production lagged, it became just two free Saturdays.The craziest old laws have been abolished, including the onerequiring all typewriters to be registered with the secretpolice so as to discourage anonymous political dissent. Butthe old regime's basic structure -- and the bureaucrats whorun it -- remain in place.   Politics resumed with a bang after Mr. Ceausescu'sexecution on Christmas Day. Demonstrations became a dailyritual. And a sort of political catharsis took place on Feb.18, when about 200 people demonstrating in front of the seatof the provisional government (the former Foreign Ministry),rushed past guards, ransacked offices, and briefly heldcaptive the deputy prime minister. Subsequent demonstrationshave also turned ugly.   Serban Papacostea, director of the Nicolae Iorga Instituteof History, watches the demonstrations from a ringside seat,in his office across the square from the Foreign Ministry. Hesays demonstrators are mainly peaceful anti-Communistsoutraged that much of the National Salvation Frontleadership, including the interim president, Mr. Iliescu, hadbeen Communist Party officials under Mr. Ceausescu. &quot;We'vegotten rid of only a part of the carcass of this importedCommunist monster,&quot; Mr. Papacostea says. &quot;We're now in arevolutionary pause. The people are catching their breath.&quot;   Getting rid of part of the carcass has, nevertheless, beenbracing for Romanians, even if the halting efforts of theinterim government suggest how far Romania has to go. Historystudent Ovioleu Cristeo recently went to the American Librarynextdoor to the U.S. Embassy to borrow Paul Kennedy's &quot;Riseand Fall of the Great Powers.&quot; In the past, security policehanging around outside recorded names, threatening visitors,so few dared to enter.   Mr. Cristeo's professor, Stefan Andreescu, now freelyspeaks English or French to visitors and on the telephone.Under the Ceausescu regime, contacts with foreigners werediscouraged.   A thriving flea market for handicrafts now coexists withpolitical orators, who have a lively soapbox in theUniversity subway station. The station had been closelywatched by security police. Competition from a new, privatetaxi service has spurred state-owned taxis to respond toradio calls for the first time, customers say. And there areso many new newspapers -- more than two dozen at last count-- that Romania is running out of newsprint.   Charles Hocker, a Romanian of German extraction, seesanother sign of change. An architect, Mr. Hocker will spendthe next two hours standing in line to buy meat at a butchershop near the university. &quot;There's a big difference frombefore,&quot; he says. &quot;Now, at the end of the {wait} there'smeat.&quot; And at a subsidized price of about 25 cents a pound,pork and beef are affordable.   Foreign businessmen are exhibiting the first signs ofinterest in Romania, apparently a rich market because peopleneed so many things. The power breakfast has arrived.Businessmen collect at the Intercontinental Hotel. By 7:30a.m., the breakfast room is full, and men in suits areshouting into both of the two telephones. &quot;The answer is no,&quot;shouts a British voice. &quot;When will the contract be ready?&quot;shouts a French voice.   What are they all doing here? &quot;I really don't know,&quot; saysFred Aeberhard, a Swiss animal-feed salesman, who has beenmaking the lonely trip to Romania for 15 years. &quot;Peopleshould come here to make contacts, or renew old ones,&quot; hesays. &quot;It's too early to do any real deals.&quot; That's largelybecause the game is too new. It has just become legal forindividuals to start their own businesses. Also just passed:a relatively liberal joint-venture law, allowing up to 100%foreign ownership with government approval.   Foreign companies might want to start with Romania'scomputer industry, one of the most vivid examples of what'swrong here, and how tough Romania's problems will be to fix.   Romania's lone computer maker, ICE-Felix Data ProcessingSystems, began with great fanfare in 1972, at a time when Mr.Ceausescu admired France and its technology. The plant wasmodeled on a French state-owned factory in Toulouse, and forits first five years it manufactured, under license, midsizedcomputers and components. The factory turned out its firstall-Romanian computers in 1977, and was the leading computersupplier to the East bloc for the next few years, a sort ofRomanian IBM.   Then, in 1980, Mr. Ceausescu decided to start paying backthe debt he had built up. He also turned against computers,deciding that they were going to give Romania a capitalisttaint. The company got no more money to import raw materialsor technology. Its foreign licenses expired. The plant was insuspended animation for the next 10 years.   Today, the factory is still churning out 1980s era,second-generation computers. They are big, slow andexpensive. A minicomputer with 250,000 bytes of memory sellsfor about $30,000, perhaps 30 times what a better machinemight cost in the West. The Romanian computers are assembledby hand by hundreds of women who solder imported Russianmicrochips onto thick printed circuit boards. They work in ahuge, dusty, badly lit room. A ginger-colored cat licks itspaws under one assembly desk. Low tech doesn't requiresuper-cleanliness. Technical manager Traian Mihu says heneeds $10 million just to begin to improve his computers. Hedoesn't have it. People from U.S. and European computercompanies have stopped by, he says, but no agreements onjoint ventures or technology transfer have been signed.   Mr. Mihu's woes stymie Constantin Donciu, chairman of thecomputer graphics department at Bucharest Polytechnic. He ison the cutting edge of Romanian high technology. Here, in thecomputer graphics department, are trained the technicians whowill do competitive battle for Romania in world markets.   The one-room department houses six clunky, 12-year-olddisplay terminals, whose metal casings have been removed tokeep them from overheating. They are connected to afiling-cabinet-size, nine-year-old computer with 256,000bytes of memory (less than most lap-tops) and two agingprinters, one of which often doesn't work. All the equipmentsays &quot;Made in Romania&quot; on it. Textbooks date from 1976.   &quot;We're at least 15 years behind,&quot; says Mr. Donciu, pattinga terminal. &quot;Since the revolution we can all speak frankly.Frankly, this equipment is terrible.&quot;   The only machines his department can get are fromICE-Felix, when it can afford them; it can't pay $30,000 forICE's outmoded new minicomputer. Mr. Donciu gets no technicaljournals and last saw a borrowed computer magazine a yearago. The Polytechnic's main computer room houses athird-generation French mainframe that uses punch cards.Students wait six days for their programs to be run.Upstairs, behind locked glass doors sits another relic, anancient IBM 1130 computer that sometimes works.   Mr. Donciu looks through the doors. &quot;It's like seeing anexhibit in a museum,&quot; he says. &quot;That's exactly where itshould be.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>