<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910612-0152</DOCNO><DOCID>910612-0152.</DOCID><HL>   Boom Time:   Thailand's Economy   Surges, and Country   Is Feeling the Strain   ---   Foreign Money Fuels Growth   In Land Rich in Resources,   Short on Infrastructure   ---   An Affinity for Americans   ----   By Urban C. Lehner   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)INDONESIA (IO)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)PHILIPPINES (RP)THAILAND (TH)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   BANGKOK, Thailand -- The Sogo department store that openedhere in December 1984 was top of the line for Bangkok then.Everything about it reeked of opulence, from its imposingwhite Corinthian facade to its European boutique brands.   But last December the Japanese owners opened a gleamingnew store next door that is even more lavishly decorated andboasts even pricier and trendier European brand names. &quot;Thisis the way the market is going,&quot; says Hiroshi Higuchi, Sogo'smanaging director here, motioning to the fancy merchandise ashe rides up one of the new store's escalators.</LP><TEXT>   Retailers have to be ready to move upmarket quickly herethese days, for this is a country on the make. Buoyed byseveral years of double-digit economic growth, Thailand isemerging as one of the newest &quot;newly industrializing&quot;countries, following in the footsteps of such Asian successstories as South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore.Though economic growth is expected to slow this year to amere 8.5%, Thais are looking to the future with confidence.   &quot;Our time has come,&quot; says Nongnuch Supavimolpan, a Bangkokoffice worker in her mid-20s.   But Thailand's boom differs from the usual East Asianpattern in important respects. Xenophobic Japan and SouthKorea were willing to accept a bumpier takeoff to avoidforeign domination of their economies. Thailand, whoselocation at a crossroads between India and China gives it along history of dealing with foreigners, welcomed investmentfrom abroad and owes much of its phenomenal growth to theJapanese. Pressed by a domestic labor shortage, and squeezedby a strong currency that makes exports from Japan expensive,Japanese companies have lately been opening new factories inThailand at the rate of one every three days.   The concentration of so much growth in such a short timealso sets Thailand's development apart. Wages are rising sofast the country is starting to worry about lower-wagecompetitors waiting in the wings, like Indonesia and thePhilippines. To stay ahead, some Thai companies are goingoverseas themselves. Charoen Pokphand Group, a Thaiconglomerate, has invested $500 million in 17 joint venturesin China, where it runs feed mills, makes motorcycles andbrews beer.   Thailand also has more going for it than many of itsresource-poor Asian neighbors. Its population of 55 million,while less than half Japan's, is larger than South Korea's,Hong Kong's and Singapore's combined. Its exotic temples,tropical beaches and anything-goes nightlife helped rake in$5 billion last year from tourism. And Thailand can exportmore than just the typical developing-country fare oftextiles, toys and TV sets. Long a world player in rice, tin,rubber and tapioca, Thailand now is becoming a majorcompetitor in jewelry and gemstones and in processed foodproducts like frozen prawns and canned tuna.   Aware of the strength of diversity, Thai bureaucrats saythey will put as much emphasis on making agricultureefficient as on manufacturing. They also say they will movefaster than other newly industrializing countries to promotedomestic demand and to tackle social and environmentalproblems. &quot;I don't think everybody needs to be anotherJapan,&quot; says Kosit Panpiemras, a top economic planner. &quot;Wecan find our place.&quot;   Other developing countries are starting to noticeThailand's success. The Thai government has sent advisers toLaos and Vietnam to help plan their economic strategies. Somedevelopment experts think Thailand could become a model forpoorer countries farther away as well.   For American and other foreign companies, the boom meansopportunity. Thailand has a $40 billion program of buildingroads, ports, telephone networks and sewage systems. Forordinary Thais, the explosive growth means rapidly risingliving standards and incomes ($1,548 per capita last year, up50% in three years). But it also means pollution, socialunrest and traffic jams so hideous that some executives haveinstalled fax machines in their cars so they can keep workingwhen traffic immobilizes them.   Chicken farmer Jaran Chareonphon exemplifies the benefitsof rapid growth. In just over a decade of work, Mr. Jaranpaid off the debts on his 30 acres in Sri Racha, southeast ofBangkok, and built a concrete house. The 46-year-old farmerowns a refrigerator, a television set, a motorcycle and apickup truck, and sends his son and daughter to privateschools. Fifteen years ago, he rented his land and had &quot;nohope at all&quot; that his children would be able to get moreeducation than his four years.   &quot;Development is good,&quot; Mr. Jaran declares. &quot;We are proudof our country's development.&quot;   Chien Mingsuk, a 68-year-old fisherman, sees a differentside of the boom. To be sure, prosperity of a sort has cometo his village on the shore of Songkla Lake, 800 miles southof Bangkok. There is electricity now, and a road. Hisramshackle wooden house still has a dirt floor, but it alsohas a fan and a rice cooker.   But Mr. Chien, sitting bare-chested on his flimsy porch inthe midday sun, would give up the fan and the road to getback what his village used to have: fertile rice fields and alake filled with fish.   It started 10 years ago when the prawn farms came.Taiwanese and local investors bought land to dig ponds. &quot;Isold one piece of land, and I'm sorry I did,&quot; Mr. Chien says,as a litter of piglets scurry underfoot and his relatives nodknowingly. The land today is worth seven times what he soldit for -- but his remaining few acres are now useless forgrowing rice. Water from the prawn ponds, tainted with saltand chemicals, has seeped into the fields, Mr. Chien says.Worse, the same chemicals are killing fish in the lake.   &quot;It's only a small group of people in the city&quot; who arebenefiting from economic growth, Mr. Chien says. &quot;Not us.&quot;   Even for city dwellers, the benefits are mixed. NimitNontapunthawat, senior vice president of Bangkok Bank Ltd.,bought a house in suburban Bangkok 12 years ago for theequivalent of $34,000. Now it is worth $200,000. But thissame economic boom has overloaded Bangkok's phone system anddrawn out Mr. Nimit's 12-mile commute to an hour and 15minutes. &quot;We are reaching the point where we have to solvethings quickly,&quot; he says. &quot;People will not be able to standit.&quot;   Rush-hour traffic in Bangkok has become the stuff oflegend. Some parents rouse their children at 5:30 a.m.,deposit them in the car in their pajamas so they can continueto sleep and then feed them breakfast when they finallyarrive at school. A foreign visitor recalls being picked upby local residents who had invited him to their house fordinner. After an hour of sitting gridlocked in the hoteldriveway, guest and hosts abandoned the car and went insidefor dinner.   But apart from traffic, most everything else in Thailandis moving frenetically. Car sales jumped almost 50% lastyear, and air conditioning is spreading so fast in thistropical country that stores are beginning to sell woolsuits. In 1981, Thais bought only 200,000 flush toilets; lastyear, they bought 1.4 million. This year, Thailand isimporting five million tons of cement because domesticproduction couldn't expand fast enough, says Paron Israsena,president of Siam Cement Co. &quot;We have the raw material andthe know-how, but we didn't expect the demand,&quot; he says. &quot;Allof a sudden it went up 20%, and 20% and 20%. It keeps ongoing.&quot;   Of course, there are some things that Thais wish weren'tincreasing. Demand for prostitution is soaring, spurred bysex tourism from abroad and the growing number of rural Thaimen coming to work in Bangkok. Supply is rising, too, becausesome women from the countryside see prostitution as a way tohelp their families. But the supply hasn't kept pace withdemand, and international gangs make big money snaring girlsfrom southern China and Burma and selling them into brothels.By one estimate, as many as 20% of Thailand's 800,000prostitutes now are foreign.   Until recently, Miss Lee, a 20-year-old from a village inChina, was one of them. She says she was tricked across theborder by a man she befriended in China, and spent severalweeks essentially imprisoned in a Thai brothel before it wasraided by police. A children's shelter cares for her whileshe waits to be processed back to China. &quot;Anything is betterthan having to sell your body,&quot; she says wearily.   When police recently raided another brothel, they found 15of the prostitutes were Burmese. Two of them were 12 yearsold. All 15 were found to be infected with the AIDS virus.Many of them even now don't understand what AIDS is.   AIDS isn't the only ill effect rapid growth has brought toThailand. Fumes from factories and automobiles and untreatedsewage and industrial wastes foul the air and rivers.Industrial accidents and chemical fires occur frequently. Andthanks to American and Japanese influence, a throwawayconsumer culture is developing. Sanitsuda Ekachai, a localreporter, was chagrined recently to discover that her motherhad begun buying Japanese-style disposable chopsticks.   Education poses another challenge. As long as low wagesare a big draw for foreign investors, the average Thai'sseven years of education is sufficient. But bidding wars aredriving up the cost of labor; an engineer who was paid theequivalent of $800 a month until recently may now get $2,000.The government, eager to have workers move up the value-addedladder, is expected soon to make nine years of educationmandatory.   Corruption in government has also long been a problemhere. In February, when the administration was overthrown ina bloodless military coup, the U.S. protested by cutting offits remaining foreign aid to Thailand. But many Thais werepleased when they saw the new cabinet lineup, and the newprime minister, Anand Panyarachun, has promised to hold newelections no later than next April.   Even before the coup, some U.S. Congressmen were askingwhy a country that is moving rapidly into the big leaguesshould be receiving U.S. aid at all? U.S. foreign-aidofficials decided to view Thailand as part of a new aidexperiment, in which aid would be given to solve&quot;development&quot; problems in ways that promote U.S. economicinterests.   Thus, before the coup, the U.S. was starting to direct its$16 million in annual economic aid to projects that helpedset up local master's-degree programs in connection withAmerican universities or paid for American engineers to flyto Thailand to bid on local pollution-control projects.   Admittedly, U.S. officials can't help but wonder how muchtheir $16 million matters, considering that Japan is sendingThailand $550 million or more a year in aid in the form oflow-cost loans. Similarly, American businessmen in Thailandare sometimes awed by the tidal wave of Japanese directinvestment. In 1989, by one estimate, the Thais approved$3.62 billion in Japanese investment. The U.S. total thatyear was only $565 million.   But Herbert Cochran, counselor for commercial affairs atthe U.S. Embassy in Bangkok, says there are still lots ofopportunities for American companies in Thailand. The Thaisare eager to balance Japan's influence with investment fromother countries. And, despite a simmering trade dispute overthe protection of U.S. patents and copyrights in Thailand,American investment is particularly welcome here. Many ofThailand's elite were educated in the U.S. and feelcomfortable with the American style of doing business.   Vichet Bunthuwong, who went to high school in Washingtonstate, illustrates the point. &quot;I'm a finance guy,&quot; says Mr.Vichet, looking yuppie-ish in his braided leather suspenders.This is a man who plays the finance game with an Americanflair. As an executive of Unicord Co., a Thai tuna canner, herecently helped renegotiate the debt Unicord took on when itacquired Bumble Bee, the U.S. tuna company.   &quot;You had to have a lot of guts to take Bumble Bee,&quot; Mr.Vichet says earnestly. Then he shrugs: &quot;No guts, no glory.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>