<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911114-0086</DOCNO><DOCID>911114-0086.</DOCID><HL>   Counterpoint:   Our Accreditors Do Not Practice Thought-Control   ----   By Patricia A. McGuire</HL><DATE>11/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><NS>EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)</NS><GV>EDUCATION DEPARTMENT (EDN)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   With &quot;America 2000,&quot; President Bush has made education thecenterpiece of his domestic agenda. Curious, then, that heand Secretary of Education Lamar Alexander have focusedcriticism on the Middle States Association, a group ofeducators that actually could be allies in achieving Mr.Bush's goals. For more than 75 years, the association hasbeen doing exactly what the president seems to want: ensuringquality and accountability in education at all levels. The509 member institutions of the Middle States Commission onHigher Education -- including such diverse institutions asthe City University of New York, Princeton, Yeshiva, the U.S.Naval Academy, Bryn Mawr and Trinity -- have establishedprinciples of excellence used to evaluate their own and oneanother's performance in regard to accreditation.   How is it that something as academically sound asaccreditation has generated so much political hostility thateven the usually reasonable Wall Street Journal implied thatMiddle States was worse than Joe McCarthy? (&quot;TheAccreditation Wars,&quot; editorial page, April 23, 1991.)</LP><TEXT>   It's because &quot;diversity&quot; has become an explosive politicalepithet. Because Middle States' accreditation principlesinclude references to the way campuses manage racial andcultural diversity, Mr. Alexander deferred a decision tore-recognize the Commission on Higher Education as anofficial accrediting body.   The negative interpretations of Middle States is at bestpuzzling. After all, it did not invent diversity. For almost40 years, since Brown v. Board of Education, equalopportunity has been the defining philosophy for education inthe U.S. Diversity in education, as elsewhere, is theheritage of our law and public policy of equal opportunity;it is also the result of massive demographic shifts,including rapidly changing economic conditions affecting bothstudents and educational institutions.   By saying Middle States dictates diversity, Mr. Alexanderattributes a power to it that is not borne out in the record.If its accreditors were truly the Inquisitors of PoliticalCorrectness, then the president of a college such as Trinitywould hardly be called, as I have been, to membership on theCommission on Higher Education.   Trinity is a Catholic college, and proud of it. We are acollege for women, and steadfast in our commitment.&quot;Thought-control sentinels and assorted ideologues,&quot; as theJournal called Middle States accreditors, would surely beaghast at a college and a president who see no inherentconflict in pledging fidelity to the best values of Motherand Mother Church. Indeed, a Catholic women's college todayis not an oxymoron as some outsiders might allege, but acompletely integrated educational commitment we try to liveeach day. Fidelity to mission is a bedrock of excellence,according to Middle States principles that encourageTrinity's difference in the educational marketplace.   So, too, the principles of diversity support YeshivaUniversity's fidelity to orthodox Judaism, the U.S. NavalAcademy's commitment to military life, and LincolnUniversity's to the education of African-Americans. With alldue respect to Mr. Alexander's congressional testimony, inwhich he suggested Middle States was threatening tohomogenize all institutions by dictating a particular kind ofdiversity, the reality is that Middle States principles makediversity among different types of schools possible.   But because Trinity, like other special-mission colleges,operates in a pluralistic real world, demographic diversityamong our students is a reality: 33% of our students areminority, including 28% African-American; and theirsocio-economic backgrounds, religion, academic abilities,nationalities and ages (more than half are over age 23) arediverse.   No one from Middle States, no political ideologues orthought-control sentinels, told us to create such a studentbody. Quite on our own we chose our students as a matter ofmission, demographics and, frankly, economic necessity. Likeall women's colleges, Trinity was challenged in the past twodecades to find a meaningful way to maintain our single-sexcommitment while remaining economically viable. Consistentwith both our mission to women and our mission as a Catholiccollege devoted to service in the community, we created ourAdult Studies programs to provide opportunities for women inthe Washington area in more flexible time formats.   Trinity's story is not unique. With traditionalenrollments shrinking significantly, many campuses arediversifying their populations. Women, minorities,international students, older students have all become key toenrollment salvation. Thus, diversity is not a result ofideology or coercion; it's an economic and demographicnecessity as much as it is a choice of mission.   Enter the Middle States accreditors. Their so-called&quot;diversity principles&quot; do not dictate admissions, nor do theysuggest, imply or in any way hint at racial or other quotasin hiring. Rather, the principles pose an ethical question:having chosen to admit these or any particular students, howwell are you educating them?   Such was the case at Baruch College, where the originalissue was not &quot;diversity&quot; at all, but massive attrition amongminority students. The fact that Baruch is regarded,according to the Wall Street Journal, as &quot;among the nation'sfinest business colleges&quot; could not offset the fact thatblack and Hispanic students were dropping out at a rate fourtimes that of white students. Baruch itself originallyidentified this problem in its own selfstudy, and indicatedthe need for a retention program. Middle States helped Baruchdevelop ways to address the problem, and Baruch wasreaccredited in due course.   Diversity is no more a single criterion for judgingacademic quality than the number of books in the library. Buttaken as a whole, the way in which a college or universitymanages the diversity of its students is a legitimateindicator of the quality of academic and co-curricular lifefor all students.   The Middle States 509 colleges and universities arerigorous in their view of what constitutes excellence.Accrediting principles include curricula that rest uponeducation in the arts and sciences, student outcomesassessment, and institutional planning &quot;aimed at intensifyingeffectiveness in higher education&quot; -- a goal that should maketuition-payers happy. Undergirding these principles is aprofound respect for an institution's mission and integrity.   Some critics suggest states or the federal governmentshould do the accrediting. Nothing could be moreill-conceived. To suggest that government should set thestandards in higher education abrogates the intellectualfreedom necessary to sustain a free society. And in terms ofexcellence itself, one is hard pressed to imagine how anygovernment agency could possibly substitute for the rigorouspeer scrutiny and accountability of voluntary accreditation.   President Bush is right to focus on education in hisdomestic agenda. However, his focus must also acknowledge thereality that diversity in education is the mirror of thenation we are, and the platform for the society we are tobecome.   ---   Ms. McGuire is president of Trinity College, Washington,and member of the Commission on Higher Education.</TEXT></DOC>