<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911107-0032</DOCNO><DOCID>911107-0032.</DOCID><HL>   The Coming Golden Age of Capitalism   ----   By David D. Hale</HL><DATE>11/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>AFRICA (AF)CHINA (CH)CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)INDIA (II)ITALY (ITA)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The world economy is entering one of its most dramaticperiods of change since the early 20th century. Since 1945,the global market economy has effectively included only about800 million people living in 25 industrial countries, andanother 400 million living in a dozen or so less developedsatellite economies with large export sectors. About 80% ofmankind has been living under regimes that were eithercommunist (the Soviet Union, China, Eastern Europe),authoritarian (Africa, the Arab world) or mercantilist (LatinAmerica, South Asia).   During the next 10 years, this 80% of mankind, about 4billion people, will be re-entering the world marketplace forgoods and capital to a far greater extent than at any timesince 1914. In fact, by the year 2014, the forces of globaleconomic integration may have produced a world similar to theone that might have emerged in the middle of the 20th centuryhad the First World War not shattered the 19th-century globaltrade and investment boom.</LP><TEXT>   The newly marketizing economies could greatly increase thepotential world supply of agricultural commodities,industrial raw materials and low-value-added manufacturedgoods. Before 1914, for example, Russia was the world'slargest exporter of petroleum and the bread-basket ofGermany. Today, its agricultural productivity is less thanone-third of America's.   Similar potential -- both agricultural and industrial --exists in Eastern Europe, China and Latin America. Even Indiacould emerge as a far larger factor in world goods markets ifit shifts from protectionism toward export-oriented policies.In the 1980s, India's 850 million people exported less thanHong Kong's 6 million.   As in the 19th century, a large rise in output from newregions of production will help restrain inflation and boostliving standards of consumers in countries that import suchgoods. It could also, however, intensify political pressurefor protection by existing producers. In the 1880s and 1890s,a boom in agricultural production knocked farm prices down.In reaction, France and Germany imposed tariffs on grain, andAmerica's farmers supported a political movement, thePopulists, that attempted to raise agricultural prices bysevering the dollar's link to gold.   In the late 20th century, it is not just farmers who arethreatened, but also industrial workers. Farmers could sufferfrom declining commodity prices as world agricultural outputrises. The wages of less-skilled industrial workers could bedepressed by a surge of low-cost manufactured imports. Iffarmers and unskilled industrial workers are not to becomeeven more vociferous opponents of free trade than theyalready are, governments in the old industrial countries willhave to develop remedial programs for them.   Another set of political problems could be produced by theintense competition for savings in the world financialmarkets of the 1990s, as the newly marketizing economiescreate stock and bond markets, privatize companies, gainrenewed access to bank lending, and make themselves moreattractive to foreign direct investment. Unless there is arise in the global savings rate, this burst of new investmentopportunities could cause world real interest rates to rise.   There are now more than 30 stock markets in the developingworld with an aggregate capitalization of more than $500billion. While two-thirds of market capitalization isconcentrated in East Asia, there has been a dramatic rise ofinvestor interest during the past 12 months in the stockmarkets of Latin America and South Asia. The capitalizationof the Mexican stock market has mushroomed from $20 billionin 1989 to more than $80 billion.   The creation of viable capital markets in the developingcountries will vastly enhance their ability to attractexternal saving during the 1990s. Not only will they be lessdependent upon bank lending; they will also be able to tapinto the huge savings pools controlled by pension funds andinsurance companies in North America, Europe and Japan. Thoseinstitutions invest primarily in securitized instruments(bonds and equities) and thus could not invest in mostdeveloping countries until very recently.   The first effects of the liberal economic revolution onthe world capital markets have been felt through the boom inGerman public spending to rebuild the former East Germany. Inthe 18 months since the fall of the Berlin Wall, Germany'spublic deficit soared to nearly 200 billion marks from 20billion marks, and German bond yields rose from 7% to 9%. Bythe mid-1990s, the new capital demands of Latin America, EastAsia, China and the old Soviet bloc are likely to be equal toat least one or two additional East Germanies. Whether thesecapital demands push interest rates sharply higher willdepend upon the saving behavior of both the old industrialcountries as well as the newly marketizing economies.   During the 1980s, the national saving rates of the leadingindustrial nations averaged only 20.4% compared to 23% in thelate 1970s and 24% during the six years before the 1973 oilshock. If its saving rate were still 24%, the industrialworld would have an additional $400 billion of capitalavailable for investment.   The decline in the saving rate of the industrial countriesstemmed from a sharp rise in government deficits (dis-saving)and a small decline in private saving rates. The biggestdis-savers were Japan, where the private saving rate fellfrom 30.3% of gross national product in the 1960s to 26.3%;France, where the government surplus fell from 4.8% of GNP to1.4%; Germany, where the government saving rate dropped from5.3% of GNP to 1.9%; and Italy, where the government deficitgrew from 1.2% of GNP to 6.4%. The U.S. also contributed tothis trend through its expanded government deficit, but thenet swing in U.S. national saving was smaller than elsewherebecause the U.S. entered the 1980s with the lowest savingrate in the industrial world.   Europe and Japan had high saving rates before the 1980sbecause their governments had introduced strongly pro-savingtax and financial regulatory policies after 1945 in order tofinance postwar reconstruction. The U.S. did not feelcompelled to introduce such policies and thus neverexperienced the surge in saving rates that occurred in theother industrial countries during the 1950s. The U.S. savingrate of 19% was one of the highest in the world before 1940,but the same rate ranked low after the war because of thesharp rise in other countries' saving rates. In Japan, thesavings rate rose from an average of 12.9% between 1887 and1936 to nearly 30% in the 1950s and 1960s. In Germany, thesavings rate rose from 18% during the period 18511928 tonearly 24% after the war.   In the developing world, Latin America and Africa savingrates have averaged less than 20% because of inflation ratesand tax policies that destroyed the value of financialassets. The Asian countries, by contrast, have saving ratesclose to 30% and have been able to finance their developmentdomestically.   In the 1990s, market-oriented economic policies shouldboost saving rates in the developing countries but theirinvestment opportunities should exceed their resources.During the next 25 years, for example, 95% of the growth inthe world labor supply will occur in the developingcountries, while the labor forces of Europe and Japan areprojected to shrink.   Many Western politicians would prefer to ignore thereintegration problems of the old command economies. But theglobal economy has become too interdependent for suchcomplacency. On the first day of the attempted coup againstthe Gorbachev government in the Soviet Union, the drop invalues on world stock markets were greater than the totaldollar value of the Soviet Union's gross national product.The losses caused by Iraq's attack on Kuwait exceed Iraq'snational output even more radically.   There may be even more belligerent economic pygmies in the1990s. Imagine, for example, the potential political risksthat could be created by an independent Ukraine with nuclearweapons if it is denied access to the European agriculturalmarket. The recent German announcement that it would supportcuts in European farm subsidies suggests that Bonnunderstands the risks posed by economic chaos in EasternEurope, but France continues to waffle over liberalization ofthe European agricultural market.   It may be impractical to convene a new summit conferencecomparable to Bretton Woods and Versailles, but there shouldbe no doubt that the challenge facing the major industrialnations today is as great as it was in 1945 and 1918. Thespread of liberal economic ideas to the third world hascreated the preconditions for a new golden age of capitalism-- one potentially greater even than that of the 19thcentury.   But the creation of a benign international order will nothappen automatically. It will require both the old industrialcountries and the developing countries to pursue policies ofaltruistic self-interest by opening their markets andbolstering their saving rates. Otherwise, they will lose theopportunities for economic specialization and expandedinvestment created by the rebirth of a truly global marketeconomy for the first time since 1914.   ---   Mr. Hale is chief economist of Kemper Financial Cos. inChicago.</TEXT></DOC>