<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911010-0017</DOCNO><DOCID>911010-0017.</DOCID><HL>   Divisive Populist:   A Serbian Nationalist   Stirs Ethnic Passions   That Split Yugoslavia   ---   Republic President Milosevic   Pushes for Greater Serbia   At the Croats' Expense   ---   Will Yeltsin Follow His Path?   ----   By Roger Thurow   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   BELGRADE, Yugoslavia -- In the autumn of 1986, whenYugoslavia's nationalist passions were still caged in byCommunist rule, a group of Belgrade intellectuals penned ananguished memo on the diminished role of the Serbian nation.They trashed the late Marshal Tito, who parceled out piecesof Serbian territory to other republics, and they assailedthe constitution, which reduced Serbian control over two ofits provinces. Serbia, they argued, must once again standtall.   With the speed of peasants scrambling for potatoes, theCommunist establishment rushed to condemn the memo as anationalist threat to socialist brotherhood. Only one manheld his tongue. Slobodan Milosevic, the new chief of theSerbian Communist Party, was silent.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;In silence, he spoke,&quot; Kosta Mihailovic, one of thememo's authors, remembers reverently. &quot;Everyone with an openmind knew the memo was true. And, in his silence, peopleheard that Slobodan Milosevic knew, too.&quot;   Without saying a word, Europe's firstCommunist-turned-nationalist demagogue was on his way.Beginning in April 1987, Mr. Milosevic turned theintellectuals' anguish into a populist political platform.With a series of mesmerizing rallies, he awakened theemotions of Yugoslavia's largest republic and ignited rivalethnic passions in the others. &quot;Slobo] Slobo]&quot; chanted theSerbs. He purged the republic's Communist Party and ascendedto the Serbian presidency. Serbs plastered his face on coffeemugs and calendars.   Today, Mr. Milosevic is rarely seen in public; he is toobusy talking with generals. His ambition to shape a GreaterSerbia has clashed violently with Croatia's grab forindependence. In recent days, the fighting led to attacks onthe office of the Croatian president and other places inCroatia's capital, Zagreb. At least 1,000 people have died.Scores of villages are smoldering ghost towns.   Again, the intellectuals wail. &quot;War,&quot; moans Mr.Mihailovic. &quot;We Serbs never wanted this.&quot;   The rise of Mr. Milosevic and the fall of Yugoslavia hasplunged this country on Europe's southern flank back in time:Serbs fear that an independent Croatia will repeat themurderous acts of the fascist Croatian state in World War II;Croats compare Mr. Milosevic's reach for theSerbian-populated regions of Croatia to Hitler's land grabsin the late 1930s.   But the carnage here has also projected Europe into thefuture, providing an ugly scenario of what can happen whenthe collapse of communism gives way to long-repressednationalist emotions. In Czechoslovakia, the democraticcommunion of the &quot;Velvet Revolution&quot; is under pressure fromseparatist passions pulling the Czechs from the Slovaks. Inthe Soviet Union, as statues of Lenin fall, competing ethnictensions rise. From Yugoslavia comes this cautionaryconundrum:   If Mr. Milosevic, out on the populist stump, was once aSerbian Boris Yeltsin, could Mr. Yeltsin, with a furtherunraveling of the Soviet Union, become a Russian Milosevic?   Although there are significant differences between the twomen and their countries, both have similarly moved toresurrect the power of their republics, the largest in eachcountry, from the graves of Communist systems. Mr. Milosevic,Serbs and Croats say, has just had more time to incite, andconfront, rival nationalists.   &quot;The soul of their power is in the Serbian people and theRussian people. They know the center is weak,&quot; says MiloradPupovac, a Serb who teaches philosophy at the University ofZagreb. &quot;This kind of ethnic populism can be very dangerous,as we have seen here. Remember, Milosevic, too, was verypopular at the start.&quot;   From the beginning, Mr. Milosevic set out to right thewrongs he perceived had been done to Serbia by Tito, whomasterminded the Yugoslav federation by playing each republicagainst the others. Mr. Milosevic cleared Serbia's walls ofTito's ubiquitous portraits, leaving behind conspicuousrectangular shapes where the paint isn't so faded. Then hedetermined to redraw Tito's Yugoslavia, reshaping thecountry's internal borders to bring all Serb-inhabited areasunder his protection. If doing it would take force, he toldpeople around him, so be it.   Today, his lieutenants, their arms full of musty old maps,argue that Serbia is seeking only to correct the injusticesof the Communists' social engineering. Historical forces,they insist, can't be denied in Yugoslavia, or elsewhere inEastern Europe.   &quot;You will see what will happen in the Soviet Union,&quot; warnsBudimir Kosutic, Serbia's deputy prime minister, who studiedlaw with Mr. Milosevic in the 1960s. &quot;All those nations inthe Soviet federation lost their histories after theBolshevik revolution. Now, it is impossible to say that theymust all continue to exist as they have, in their presentborders. Sooner or later, there will be trouble.&quot;   He uncurls a 19th century map and draws another parallel.&quot;It is impossible for Serbs to live in an independentCroatia,&quot; he says, tracing the borders of the old Serbiankingdom to show how they extend into present-day Croatia. &quot;Soalso will it be impossible for a Russian to live in anindependent Azerbaijan. You will see.&quot;   Historically, the Serbs may have a point for revising theCommunist-drawn borders. But all logic has been trampled bythe civil war and the heavy-handed tactics of Mr. Milosevic.Although he now claims to be a social democrat -- admirersand critics alike call him an ideological clotheshorse,wearing whatever is in fashion in order to keep power -- hisstyle is often a throwback to the hard-line communism of the1960s, when he was a staunch party activist at the Universityof Belgrade. (His wife, Mirjana, a sociology professor, isapparently still a Communist true believer; last month, shehelped found the League of Communists Movement forYugoslavia.)   Mr. Milosevic tolerates a few independent radio stationsand newspapers but seeks to control the major television andpress outlets. He raises the standard of human rights toprotest the treatment of Serbs in Croatia but summarilyrepresses the activities of Albanians in Serbia. He promisesthat no one will ever beat down his Serbs but, in March,turned his own police on Serbs demonstrating against hisgovernment. He suffers a minority opposition in parliamentbut views dissension within his administration as weakness.   &quot;I never saw hatred in his eyes, as long as I wasn't adanger to him,&quot; says Ivica Racan, the former leader of theCroatian Communist Party. The two men remained friends whileMr. Racan began rallying Communist opposition to Mr.Milosevic's nationalist rumblings. But when he and otherCroatian and Slovene leaders walked out of a party congressin January 1990, in effect killing the old Yugoslavia, Mr.Milosevic erupted. He insisted the congress, and the country,go on without them.   &quot;Milosevic is a man fixed on his mission, which is theultimate solution of the Serbian national problem -- allSerbs in one state -- and securing himself a place in historyas the man who solved this problem,&quot; Mr. Racan says. &quot;Heclearly distinguishes between the people who can help him andthose who stand in his way.&quot;   The Serbia of Mr. Milosevic is a proud yet paranoid andself-pitying place. Government offices are awash withprejudice. That Serbia is often singled out by the West forfueling Yugoslavia's disintegration is alternately blamed onthe pope (most Serbs are Eastern Orthodox Christians), theFreemasons, the Central Intelligence Agency and Germanimperialism. Serbs feel jilted by former partners; theyfought alongside the allies in both world wars.   In an independent Croatia they see the reincarnation ofthe Croatian Nazi puppet state that killed thousands ofSerbs. One government minister says the Serbs are like theJews. Another says they are like the blacks of South Africa.Always the victim, one hears over and over again in Belgrade,never the aggressor.   &quot;I can't understand. We were the victim of fascism, wewere the victim of communism, now we are the victim ofdemocracy,&quot; says Mr. Kosutic, the Serbian deputy primeminister. &quot;Everyone wants to destroy us. Is it because we'reOrthodox?&quot;   As international criticism and local dissent over hismoves increases, Mr. Milosevic has become as reclusive as agovernment leader could be. In contrast to his populistcampaigning in 1987 and 1988, he now avoids public platforms.He rarely gives interviews -- he declined one for thisarticle -- and seldom travels outside Yugoslavia. The Serbianinformation ministry doesn't even have a biography of him,&quot;at least not one that is of much help,&quot; one official says.Until recently, Serbia's publicists didn't even know his dateof birth.   August 1941 is all they knew for certain until, on Aug.30, they awoke to hear a spoof birthday celebration onBelgrade 92, one of the independent radio stations. Thestation manager discovered the date by calling the wife ofIvan Stambolic, the former Serbian Communist leader whocarried Mr. Milosevic up the party ladder only to be toppledby his ambitious protege.   &quot;We invited our listeners to call and give our president apresent in words,&quot; says one of the broadcasters,tongue-in-cheek. There were 60 calls in an hour, many likethat of the man who offered to give Mr. Milosevic a vacationin the Crimea, where Mikhail Gorbachev was when the Moscowcoup-plotters struck. Mr. Milosevic wasn't amused; one of hisdeputies later accused Belgrade's independent media of being&quot;unpatriotic.&quot;   All of this contrasts sharply with the jovial face theWest saw when Mr. Milosevic, who speaks fluent English, wasthe director of Belgrade Bank in the early 1980s. Then, hefrequently traveled to the U.S. and Western Europe andenjoyed dining with capitalists.   &quot;He himself helped me to find office space in Belgrade,&quot;says Brian Simblist, Bankers Trust's man in Yugoslaviabetween 1980 and 1982. &quot;He was a charming guy, very pleasant.I didn't think he was that powerful at the time. I wassurprised to see him rise as a politician.&quot;   So, apparently, was Mr. Milosevic himself. Associates sayhe was amazed to discover the power of his words when hefinally did speak out, following his silence on theintellectuals' memo, in April 1987.   He had traveled south from Belgrade to Kosovo, a region ofSerbia where the population is largely ethnic Albanian, toexplore Serbian complaints about mistreatment by Communistauthorities. When anxious Serbs surged forward to listen,they were beaten back by police. &quot;Stop,&quot; Mr. Milosevicshouted to the police. And to the Serbs, he cried, &quot;No onewill ever beat you again.&quot;   All night and into the next morning, Mr. Milosevicencouraged the Serbs in Kosovo to do something that wouldhave landed them in jail under Tito. They aired their ethnicgrievances, describing beatings, rape and discrimination bythe Albanians. All the while he took notes and forced theother Communist leaders to do so, too. As word spread,thousands of Serbs crammed into the meeting hall. Mr.Milosevic had found his populist voice.   &quot;I could hardly breathe, not only because it was crowdedbut because of what we heard,&quot; says Zeljko Simic, a Milosevicadviser who was with him that night. &quot;For the first time, thepeople were allowed to say everything about their problems.And Mr. Milosevic was the first one who made it clear, whoannounced it, that the situation of the Serbs wasunbearable.&quot;   His support swelled, from the pot-holed streets up to thewell-appointed offices of the intellectuals. &quot;Milosevic saidsentences which the Serbian people wanted to hear butcouldn't hear,&quot; Mr. Kosutic says. &quot;He said Serbs must beequal to all other people. They were simple sentences.&quot;   He moved quickly to put his rhetoric into action. Heengineered a change in the constitution, re-establishingSerbian central control over the provinces of Vojvodina andKosovo, which Tito had made autonomous. He even drafted plansfor a new economic order, which, with the introduction offree-market principles, was designed to give Serbia'sindustry and agriculture a leading role.   But his populist touch gradually became an autocrat'sstranglehold. Mr. Milosevic turned the tables on theAlbanians in Kosovo, repressing them as they had allegedlyrepressed the Serbs. The economy became a tool of hisnationalist hegemony, with blockades and boycotts frustratingthe flow of goods in Yugoslavia. He blocked a Croat fromtaking his turn at the head of the country's rotatingpresidency.   Fearing Serbian tyranny, the new nationalist governmentsin Slovenia and Croatia accelerated moves to secede fromYugoslavia. This, in turn, fueled Mr. Milosevic's zeal toredraw borders to keep all Serbs united. Croatianindependence threatened to take large areas populated bySerbs out of Yugoslavia. And when the Croatian government,flying a flag similar to the one of World War II, demandedloyalty from its 600,000 Serbian citizens and moved toreplace Serb police and bureaucrats with Croats, Mr.Milosevic had his reason to fight.   Serbs in Croatia, he told European Community peacebrokers, were &quot;forced to organize and defend themselves inorder to prevent the repetition of genocide performed by aformer independent state of Croatia&quot; during World War II.   &quot;The Croatian government played into Milosevic's hands,&quot;says Milan Skoric, a Serb who wants to continue living inCroatia, as his family has for generations. &quot;The memories ofWorld War II are impressed in the minds of all Serbs. This isMilosevic's capital. It's all he needs for a call to arms.&quot;   he Serbian government in Belgrade began sending money andarms to Serb militias throughout Croatia, and, with theassistance of the Serb-dominated army, they now occupy aboutone-third of Croatian territory. EC-brokered cease-fires comeand go. Instead of diminishing, the fighting intensifies.&quot;The military success of this nationalist policy feeds itsown ambitions,&quot; says Mr. Racan, the former Croatian Communistboss.   Though Mr. Milosevic may be close to realizing hisambitions, some Serbs are already wondering what will becomeof Greater Serbia. The republic is courting internationalisolation; in the West, Mr. Milosevic has all the credibilityof Saddam Hussein. Inflation is spiraling out of control asthe government prints money to finance the army. The fightinghas stopped the flow of oil from terminals in Croatia.Motorists wait in line for six hours to buy gasoline. Theygrumble, but not loudly.   For the moment, there is a crusade to be fought.   &quot;The mark against Milosevic is that he used to be aCommunist. Everyone hates the Communists,&quot; says Dragan Simce,who left his job in the Croatian port of Dubrovnik to be homefor the war. Now he drives a taxi, which, right now, is stilla four-hour wait from the gas pumps. &quot;But there is somethingyou must say for Milosevic,&quot; he adds. &quot;No. 1, above all,Milosevic is a Serb.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>