<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910301-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>910301-0089.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Iraq Moves Toward Accepting Bush Terms   As Allies Start Work on Details of the Peace   ---   Baghdad Military Aides Set   To Meet With Officials   Of U.S.-Led Coalition   ----   By Robert S. Greenberger and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Iraq moved toward accepting President Bush'sterms for ending the Persian Gulf war, as the U.S. and itsallies began hammering out details of the peace they seek toimpose on Baghdad.   Mr. Bush had announced that Iraq had agreed to send itsmilitary commanders to meet with the U.S.-led coalition todiscuss terms of a permanent cease-fire, including the returnof prisoners of war and the release of Kuwaitis beingdetained by Iraq. Mr. Bush said, &quot;We will promptly go back tothem with the arrangements.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Details about the location and the participants of theimpending session could be announced as early as today,according to the Pentagon.   Mr. Bush, at a photo-taking session yesterday in the WhiteHouse rose garden with Kuwait's ambassador to the U.S., said,&quot;We expect a prompt repatriation&quot; of American prisoners ofwar. Their return, he added, was &quot;foremost in my heart.&quot; TheU.S. military lists nine Americans as Iraqi POWs and says 34others are missing.   On the day after President Bush announced the suspensionof offensive military operations, U.S. officials beganwithholding the harsh rhetoric that was aimed at SaddamHussein during the war. Instead, officials spent much oftheir time consulting allies and rushing to complete a UnitedNations Security Council resolution, which they hope to offertoday, that would deal with political questions such as thereturn of Kuwaitis and others who have been displaced by war.The resolution also would reaffirm the 12 U.N. resolutionsconcerning Iraq.   State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said theproposed resolution also may demand that Baghdad rescind alaw passed after last August's invasion declaring Kuwait the19th province of Iraq. She added that the U.S. also wants theresolution to include the demand for the immediate return ofKuwait's assets, ranging from airplanes to incubators, and toinstruct the U.N. to make efforts, consistent with thesanctions, to provide humanitarian assistance to the Iraqipeople.   A U.S. official also said the administration intends tomaintain economic sanctions on Iraq. The official added thatthe proposed resolution won't include language about a U.N.peacekeeping force, which the U.S. believes can be dealt withlater, nor include a formal cease-fire. &quot;A lot of things needto be done prior to that,&quot; the official said.   The Bush administration yesterday underscored itsdetermination to prevent Iraq from rebuilding its army toagain pose an offensive threat to neighboring states. &quot;Wehave always said that if Saddam Hussein remains in power,it's the view of the United States government that an armsembargo must continue,&quot; said Ms. Tutwiler.   There also were increasing signs that the administration,working with congressional leaders, hopes to push SaddamHussein out of power partly by making it clear that a newgovernment would get significantly easier settlement terms.Rep. Les Aspin (D., Wis.), chairman of the House ArmedServices Committee, told reporters that he is urging theWhite House to make postwar terms on Saddam Hussein muchtougher than on an Iraqi government without him.   Some members of Congress want the U.S. to bar Westerncompanies from helping reconstruct Iraq unless a newgovernment is installed there. Other lawmakers, includingRep. Aspin, contend that U.S. troops should continueoccupying some 90,000 square miles of southern Iraq as a wayof wringing concessions from Baghdad and perhaps topple theSaddam regime altogether, though the White House isn't likelyto go along.   Meanwhile, the U.S. ambassador to Kuwait was in SaudiaArabia preparing to move to the embassy in Kuwait City today.   A senior U.S. official suggested there may be no need forwar-crimes trials of many Iraqi military commanders, as thereis no evidence that chemical weapons were used during thewar. But the official left open the possibility of suchtrials for Saddam Hussein, his clique and other officersaccused of committing atrocities in Kuwait.   As the massive cleanup effort in Kuwait City began, thecountry's leaders ordered imposition of martial law for threemonths. At the same time, U.S. soldiers in Kuwait beganinterviewing Iraqi soldiers to try to identify thoseresponsible for alleged atrocities.   In Washington, President Bush began a round ofconsultations with coalition partners to gather ideas on suchpostwar issues as economic cooperation, arms control,regional security and the thorny Israeli-Palestinian dispute.The State Department announced that Secretary of State JamesBaker will travel next week to Saudi Arabia, Syria, Egypt,Israel, Turkey and the Soviet Union to hold similardiscussions.   On the military front, allied officers reported only a fewminor violations of the cease-fire. U.S. helicopterscontinued dropping leaflets and using loudspeakers to informremnants of the Iraqi army that the fighting was over.   Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater predicted a&quot;steady withdrawal&quot; of American troops, but agreed withPentagon officials who cautioned that the initial troopmovements out of the Gulf will be small and it's likely totake months before the bulk of the 500,000-plus U.S. forceleaves the region.   Underscoring the extent of destruction of what had beenone of the world's five biggest armies, U.S. officers saidthat a total of 42 Iraqi divisions had been destroyed,severely damaged or captured.   That left only one or two operational Iraqi divisions inthe Kuwaiti theater, which includes Kuwait and southern Iraq.U.S. troops systematically worked to destroy tanks, bunkersand mines left behind by the retreating Iraqis.   Military and congressional estimates pegged the totalnumber of Iraqi casualties from the war as high as 100,000.U.S. estimates of Iraqi prisoners climbed past 80,000, whilesome British estimates were as high as 175,000.   The ill-prepared, disorganized Iraqi army that emergedduring the 100-hour ground war bore little resemblance to themenacing descriptions used by U.S. officials throughout thenerve-wracking months of preparation for the war. Forinstance, despite months of apprehension about possible Iraqiuse of chemical weapons, Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, chief ofoperations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters thatU.S. forces hadn't found any stockpiles of chemical weaponsbehind Iraqi lines.   Other Pentagon officials have told lawmakers in the pastfew days that many Iraqi division commanders were givenrelatively small amounts of such weapons and had theauthority to use them in battle.   But they said none of the rounds were fired because ofweather conditions, the fast-paced U.S. assault and thedestruction of Iraqi artillery in air raids.   Gen. Kelly said that only two of the Army's M-1A1 tankswere damaged in the climactic tank battles that shatteredSaddam Hussein's elite Republican Guard, and none wasdestroyed. The U.S. operation to breach Iraq's much-fearedmine fields, barbed wire and other front-line defensesresulted in the destruction of just two Marine Corps M-60tanks.   Another intriguing -- and potentially significant --fallout from the war were various reports of Jordanianweapons and ammunition found in Iraqi bunkers. Some of themateriel &quot;was stamped with Jordanian markings&quot; and bore datesindicating it was shipped in January, Rear Adm. MikeMcConnell, director of intelligence for the Joint Chiefs,told reporters. The Pentagon and the State Department areinvestigating the issue.   As allied forces set up defensive positions, there alsowere widespread reports of bedraggled Iraqi soldierssurrendering to journalists -- and in one case even yelling&quot;Schwarzkopf, Schwarzkopf&quot; as they gave themselves up to theallies.   Weeks of intense allied bombing before the ground assaulteffectively destroyed Iraq's ability to gather battlefieldintelligence. U.S. officials said that Saddam Hussein triedbut failed to obtain satellite reconnaissance pictures fromthe Soviet Union and several other countries with traditionalmilitary and political ties to Iraq.   During the height of the ground war, Gen. Kelly said, someIraqi tanks still hadn't been taken off trailers used totransport them to the battlefield.</TEXT></DOC>