<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900926-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>900926-0080.</DOCID><HL>   Creaking Empire:   Giant Trammell Crow   Finds Texas Slump   Was Only Round One   ---   Developer's Size and Diversity   Can't Stave Off Hardships   Of U.S. Real Estate Woes   ---   Trying to Combat Rumors   ----   By Christi Harlan   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><LP>   DALLAS -- Trammell Crow Co. should thank Donald Trump.   With all the attention focused on the flashy New Yorker'srecent financial troubles, the Crow company has been able toduck the limelight while it restructures and refinances itswounded real estate empire. &quot;The Crow deals will make DonaldTrump's look like a walk in the woods,&quot; says a former Crowpartner, referring to the size of the company and thecomplexity of the restructuring.</LP><TEXT>   The Crow retrenchment has occupied some of the country'sbiggest lenders for almost 18 months as the recession incommercial real estate has spread beyond the company's homebase of Texas to a great many markets in the U.S.   Meanwhile, as the company's massive development machinehas slowed to a crawl, Crow has staked its future on propertysales and management of other people's properties,historically second- and third-string lines of business.   Through all this, Crow's management and front-linepartners are stoic and, occasionally, even enthusiastic aboutthe changes the company is confronting. Loan workouts, forinstance, aren't the most pleasant of business activities,but Crow takes pride in the orderliness of negotiations withits lenders, in contrast to the panicky, 11th-hour effortsthat have characterized some other developers' refinancings.   As for the shift away from speculative development, theparty line, as reiterated by managing partner Joel Peterson,is this: &quot;We want to be a full-service real estate company.&quot;   The change of life isn't unique, of course. Other bignational developers and their lenders have had to switchgears as rents and property values have declined and capitalsources have all but dried up. Crow has seen its topTexas-based competitors, Lincoln Property Co. and VantageCo., slide from national prominence while paring staffs andoperations to a fraction of what they were in the early1980s.   But Trammell Crow's fortunes or misfortunes are moreclosely watched than those of most developers. It survivedthe Texas real estate massacre because it's huge and diverse,so its problems now show how bad things have gottennationwide.   The company's 170 partners hold $10.5 billion in assetsspread through a nationwide maze of more than 3,000independent partnerships. Those partnerships have beenresponsible for the development of about 8,000 individualprojects, from office towers to warehouses.   It's no wonder that Crow's woes affect lenders and realestate markets across the nation. In mid-March, the companyand its lenders got an inkling of what a Crow collapse wouldmean as rumors spread that the developer was about to defaulton billions of dollars in loans.   In a twinkling, the stocks of Crow lenders nose-dived.NCNB Corp., frightened by the heavy trading in its stock,took the unusual step of revealing to securities analysts theamount of its loans to Trammell Crow ($56 million at thetime) to prove its exposure was limited. Suddenly, peoplestarted to think the unthinkable: Could Crow collapse?   The rumors about massive defaults proved unfounded and,thanks to its complex partnership structure and sheer size,collapse isn't likely. But aftershocks from that episodestill reverberate through the company.   With 15% to 20% of its 8,000 projects in financialtrouble, according to a person familiar with the company'soperations, Crow lenders, both domestic and foreign, havebeen pressing questions about the viability of the company.Shaken by the experience, the usually-secretive Croworganization is discussing its problems more openly and hasretained, for the first time, an outside public relationscounsel to get its story out.   At one time, it was a grand story. Trammell Crow, a Dallasnative and accountant, founded the company 42 years ago onthe belief that he could create a national powerhouse in whathad traditionally been a regional business.   From his first warehouse development in Dallas's TrinityRiver bottoms, Mr. Crow's vision of real estate grew toinclude huge trade markets for the apparel, furniture andcomputer industries, posh high-rise office towers,first-class hotels, homes, apartments and retaildevelopments. (The trade markets and hotels are parts of aseparate business run by the Crow family. Trammell CrowResidential, comprising the home and apartment interests, isa distinct entity headquartered in Atlanta.)   To build this far-flung empire, Mr. Crow lured waves ofaggressive young Turks from the most prestigious businessschools, and gave them the same perks he and all other Crowpartners enjoyed: an $18,000 base salary and a spartancubicle. But, filled with promises of autonomy and equity inthe projects they created, they became to the developmentworld what investment bankers were to Wall Street during thetakeover craze -- cocky gunslingers eager to make big deals.   And, oh, did they make deals. For more than a decade,starting in the late 1970s, Crow led all commercialdevelopers in the dollar value of annual new construction,according to a survey by Building Design andamp; Constructionmagazine. The company colors -- two shades of blue -- couldbe found in every major city in the country.   Crow employees saw themselves as an elite, the proteges ofthe master builder. They took pride in the company's unusualculture, with its egalitarian management structure and thelow base salaries intended to motivate creative development.   Now, top Crow officials say the compensation structureworked too well. &quot;Not only was it a little low,&quot; saysmanaging partner Peterson, &quot;it encouraged only one kind ofactivity.&quot; That was development.   &quot;You had to keep developing,&quot; says one young ex-partner.&quot;It forced new partners to make some incorrect businessdecisions.&quot;   Particularly in the Southwest, Crow's gung-ho developers-- and a host of others -- didn't know when to stop building.When oil prices nose-dived in the mid-1980s, followed by the1986 tax reform that wiped out most tax breaks for realestate investments, the overbuilt Houston market tanked.   Partners there quickly ran through the division's cashreserves; eventually, Crow's 10 top partners were forced tobail out the Houston group, dipping into their own pools ofprofit.   As more and more Southwestern reserve pools were depleted,Crow's top managers were confronted with a tough choice: Raidreserves in other geographical divisions or force propertysales in healthy markets. Selling properties was anathema toa company that, with few exceptions, still adhered to Mr.Crow's philosophy: &quot;The one who sells is wrong.&quot;   And when the reserve pools were first established in 1978,partners had been promised that one division's funds wouldn'tbe tapped for losses in another. With minimum reserve levelsrising steadily to cover mounting losses, partners' profitswere already dwindling. A raid on other divisions' reservescould have spawned a mutiny.   A mutiny was brewing anyway, as Crow's spooked seniorpartners decided to centralize decision-making, hoping thatwould prevent overbuilding from spreading beyond theSouthwest. That prompted an exodus of dozens of key regionalpartners, who saw the plan as a short-sighted overreaction towhat was then a Texas problem. Among them were rising starssuch as Allen Hamilton in Chicago, Don Childress in Atlantaand Ned Spieker in California, each of whom now heads his ownreal estate company.   But many partners, particularly the younger ones, foundthemselves trapped. To finance development of their projects,they'd borrowed from other Crow partners and the reservepools via a kind of internal chit system. As the projects'health worsened, the partners dipped deeper into thereserves.   Young partners were unable to leave without paying off thebalance of their debts to the reserve pools or having thedebts forgiven, an alternative that carried the threat of amassive tax hit in addition to saddling remaining partnerswith more debt.   &quot;It was the Hotel California syndrome,&quot; says one formerpartner, citing the lyrics of the rock song: &quot;You can checkout any time you like, but you can never leave.&quot;   By the time Crow applied the development brakes, however,the damage from overbuilding had been done. In Minneapolis,for example, Crow built the first Class-A office tower in thecity's southwestern suburbs. But the company, and otherdevelopers, continued building; now, about 25% of suburbanMinneapolis office space is empty.   As a result, Crow has defaulted on about $150 million inloans for its Minneapolis projects from Teachers Insurance andamp;Annuity Association of America. To clear up those loans, Crowis handing Teachers the keys to two of its Minneapolis officebuildings and selling the lender a third.   The negotiations with Teachers follow by just a few monthsthe completion of Crow's most ambitious refinancing effort todate -- a $456 million deal with Equitable Real EstateInvestment Management Inc., a unit of Equitable LifeAssurance Society and a Crow lender since the 1950s.   Equitable played an important role in the company'slargest previous refinancing effort, back in 1977. Then, in anow-legendary showdown with lenders, Mr. Crow offered thelenders an unappealing choice: Accept loan terms dictated byhim or walk away with the keys and the deeds to theproperties they financed and manage the vast portfoliothemselves.   The lenders acquiesced, winning only a concession that Mr.Crow, then 63 years old, relinquish control of the company toJ. McDonald (Don) Williams, a lawyer handling loan workoutsfor the company. Eight years later, chief financial officerMr. Peterson was also named a managing partner. Mr. Crowcontinues to manage his own investments, and maintains a busywork schedule, but is no longer involved in day-to-daymanagement.   For this round of loan workouts, Crow was seeking $600million to cure its biggest headache: the company's decimatedSouthwest properties.   By early 1989, when the talks began, Crow's Southwestregion had bottomed out with a negative cash flow of $48.5million. Much of the damage had been done by the collapse ofDallas's two largest bank holding companies, emptying much ofthe three million square feet of office space in threehigh-rise towers built by Crow in downtown Dallas between1982 and 1986. &quot;Enough space came back on the market to filltwo high-rises,&quot; says Crow partner Barry Henry. &quot;It was thesingle most critical thing that affected downtown Dallas.&quot;   The Equitable money was earmarked to pay off loans fromabout 30 Southwest lenders and bring other loans current.While the talks were under way, Crow's 10 senior partnersponied up even more of their own profits to keep the loans onthe Southwest properties current. In 1989 alone, according toMr. Williams, the 10 senior partners kicked in $57 million,for a total of $200 million since late 1985.   By the time the Equitable deal was sealed this spring, thesize of the refinancing had been scaled back to $456 million,reflecting the sales of some properties and improvedconditions at others. The bulk of the cash was used to payoff loans on about 90 properties, which were then pledged ascollateral for the new debt. About $90 million was used topay down debt on another 60 Crow properties.   In mid-April, the company's 10 senior partners voted toforgive about $175 million in internal debt racked up byabout 30 junior partners in the Southwest. As many as 25 morepartners will be offered the bailout this year. In return,the young partners are giving up their cherished equity inthe projects they developed.   Now, remaining partners' earnings are no longer tied tothe profitability of their projects: most are drawingmarket-rate salaries. &quot;We don't want them to have theincentive to go out and build,&quot; says Mr. Williams.   Finding new incentives is going to be tough. Some formerdevelopers are being asked to manage properties for fees, anactivity with far less profit potential than building themfor a piece of the action.   Others are being asked to channel their naturalcompetitiveness into landing build-to-suit projects on behalfof single tenants; still others are scouting real estateacquisitions for the Crow company's joint-venture partners.Crow's top executives insist they've been in these businessesall along and are simply shifting emphasis to meet customerneeds.   Crow is doing that by tapping some of its mostenthusiastic young partners to lead new divisions in thecompany, including once-unheard-of departments such as landsales and corporate services, through which Crow iscontracting to take over some or all of the duties ofnational companies' in-house real estate departments. Thefirst contracts in the pipeline are with Deerfield,Ill.-based Baxter International Inc. and McKesson Corp., SanFrancisco.   Not everyone is sticking around. Leasing agents and moresenior marketing principals have departed, and headhuntersspecializing in real estate placements report receivingrecord numbers of Trammell Crow resumes during the past ninemonths -- including those of partners.   Others didn't leave voluntarily. During the past 18months, the company has closed or consolidated 28 of its 90offices and cut 8% to 10% of its 3,300 employees.   The company is counting on property management to generateas much as half of its fee income, which last year totaledalmost $140 million. But that field is crowded with long-timeproperty-management firms competing against newcomers,including former developers like Crow, displaced thriftexecutives and even lenders.   There's an unmistakable sense of loss as Crow's topofficials discuss the changes, and their impact on Crowpartners. &quot;It's not the same world they signed up for, butit's the world we've got,&quot; Mr. Williams says. &quot;There's been asea change in our business. This is not a get-rich-quickindustry any more. That's over. I'm sorry. I wish there werea lot of development opportunities. This is now aprofessional, nickel-and-dime, grind-it-out, customer-servicebusiness.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>