<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920123-0104</DOCNO><DOCID>920123-0104.</DOCID><HL>   Divided House:   Conflict in Algeria   Over Islamic Militancy   Pits Father Against Son   ---   The Older Generation Prefers   A Secular Way, the Young   A New Fundamentalism   ---   Most Algerians Are Under 30   ----   By Peter Waldman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/23/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><RE>ALGERIA (AE)AFRICA (AF)EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   ALGIERS, Algeria -- The day after Islamic fundamentalistswon a sweeping victory in this nation's first free electionslast month, Mohammed Henne got ready to head for the hills.He booked a flight to France for his wife and children. Hewarned relatives in a mountaintop village east of here toexpect a guest. And he hunted down his army boots in theattic, placing them by the door.   Had the fundamentalists formally taken power, says Dr.Henne, a 44-year-old chief of oncology at a large hospitalhere, &quot;we'd have gone to the mountains to fight.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   For the Hennes, it would have been a war of kin. Like manyAlgerian families, the Hennes are divided along generationallines over Algeria's future: He and his older relativesremember the nation's revolution 30 years ago and arecommitted to maintaining a secular republic. Some of hisyounger relatives, however, want a Muslim state; one30-year-old cousin was even elected to parliament as anIslamic candidate in December's election.   The second phase of those elections -- to fill remainingseats in parliament -- was scheduled for Jan. 16. But abloodless military coup last week abruptly ended the process,leaving many Algerians fearing their nation is sliding towardfull-scale generational revolt. The young -- the backbone offundamentalist support -- are ganging up on their elders.   &quot;The worst part of all this is the divided families,&quot; saysHassan Bendif, a prominent Algerian publisher. &quot;The Islamicmovement is taking our children.&quot;   One day last year, Mr. Bendif's nine-year-old daughtercame home from school and demanded that her mother startwearing a veil to avoid going to hell, as her teacher hadwarned. Infuriated, Mr. Bendif ordered the child's teacher tostop preaching in the classroom. But he doubts his visit hadmuch effect.   &quot;My kids don't understand why my wife and I don't prayfive times a day as they do in school,&quot; Mr. Bendif says inParisian French. &quot;I try to explain that my relationship withGod is private. It's a daily pedagogical struggle.&quot;   Since the military-backed junta assumed power last weekafter the army forced incumbent President Chadli Bendjedid toresign, hundreds of Muslim activists have been arrested, andtroops have scrapped with angry mobs in the streets.Yesterday, the ruling junta, which viewed President Bendjedidas too accommodating to the fundamentalists, took itsstrongest measures yet: It banned all public assembly aroundthe nation's mosques, the hearths of the Islamic movement.And the regime arrested Abdelkader Hachani, the 35-year-oldleader of the Islamic Salvation Front, Algeria's main Muslimparty.   Mr. Hachani, a petrochemical engineer who is considered amoderate within the fundamentalist camp, comes from a dividedfamily himself. His father, Brahim, was a founder of FrenchAlgeria's first revolutionary party in the 1930s, and was thecountry's first minister of veterans' affairs afterindependence. Abdelkader was born while Brahim was on the runfrom the French in the mountains of southeast Algeria, butlater Brahim brought the boy to school in Algiers. Father andson have seen little of each other since Abdelkader leftAlgiers in 1977. Last week, however, Brahim met withAbdelkader at the behest of some government friends to advisethe Islamic leader to keep things cool.   &quot;He was a boy of two beds,&quot; Brahim Hachani says, inexplaining that his son must have received his religiousviews from his mother in the countryside. &quot;For me, religionis something above politics. It's not something that peopleshould exploit for their own purposes.&quot;   One of Abdelkader's brothers, Samir, remembers the Islamicleader as a &quot;dull&quot; child, not particularly interested inreligion. He was a fair student, a decent midfielder insoccer, and could defend himself ably in a fight.   &quot;I remember he used to tell me about one girlfriend hehad,&quot; recalls Samir, 33, who earned a degree in libraryscience from the University of Southern California. &quot;But Ithink he was just bragging. You have to know how to speak towomen,&quot; he continues, sipping Algerian wine. &quot;I love womenand somehow I have a way with them, thank God. My brotherwants to put women in a cage -- and he ain't going to do it]&quot;   But fundamentalists such as Abdelkader Hachani say theKoran, Islam's holy scripture, holds the answer to Algeria'sproblems. Before the Islamic front closed its storefrontoffice here last week, young men piled into the party'smeeting room each afternoon to discuss Algeria's road to&quot;modernization under Islam.&quot; Enthusiasm ran high.   &quot;What has the government ever done for this country?&quot;asked one young militant. &quot;When we have a Muslim country,there won't be poor people. Everybody will work. A man won'tbe able to take your wife, just because he's rich.&quot;   So far, the U.S. has been low key about what is happeninghere. The State Department expressed concern when the Jan. 16elections were canceled, but didn't take a position on thelegality of the military coup. Only 200 U.S. citizens live inAlgeria, and U.S. investments here, mostly in oil and gasexploration, are small.   Algeria's hasty retreat from a nascent democracy hasclearly torn this North African nation further apart. Sincewinning the eight-year revolt against France in 1962,Algeria's 28 million people have struggled to reconcile theirFrench and republican traditions -- fashioned over 130 yearsof colonial rule -- with their Arab, Muslim and North Africanroots. The long-running cultural feud, ranging from languageconflicts in the schools to whether a state that technicallyforbids alcohol should own wineries, has caused deep rifts inAlgerian society, especially between those educated beforeindependence and those raised after.   Revolution and youth often go hand in hand, but today'sAlgeria is an extreme case. More than a million people diedin the country's war for independence, and nearly a millionmore Algerians have emigrated to France over the years. Thoselosses, combined with a very high population growth rate ofaround 3% a year, have produced a nation in which three ofevery four Algerians are under 30.   Their schools, in stark contrast to the French-stylelycees attended by many Algerian parents, emphasize Arabicand Islam now, though French is still widely taught. Andwhile Algeria's revolutionary war and its early days ofstatehood were the formative experiences for most people over40, younger Algerians don't identify with the nationalistcause nearly so much. To many Algerians under 30, therepublic stands for rampant poverty, 30% unemployment and aone-party regime notorious for corruption.   &quot;I promise to pursue every last option with you to solvethe problems of our youth,&quot; vowed Mohammed Boudiaf, head ofAlgeria's new ruling junta, upon returning from 28 years inexile last week. &quot;The young will be our first priority.&quot;   But it may be too late. In Algiers's famous Casbah, athicket of crumbling colonial buildings cut by narrowpathways, tales of alienation and strife abound. Onepsychiatrist tells of sending his son off to Paris, hoping toput some distance between the boy and his fundamentalistfriends. After a few months, though, the son set off forAfghanistan to join the &quot;mujahedeen&quot;.   A cheesemaker describes a friend's ordeal with a son whodecided to quit work to campaign for the Islamic SalvationFront. The father stopped talking to his son and forbade hiswife from feeding the boy. &quot;He told his wife, `I don't knowhim,'&quot; the cheesemaker says.   Bassam Flece, a Casbah family doctor, says he had toprescribe sedatives to one patient after the man's sonthreatened to tear up his father's membership card inAlgeria's former ruling party, the National Liberation Front,or NLF. The party has special meaning to many olderAlgerians, especially war veterans, because it led thenation's fight for independence and ruled until last week'scoup.   In a small electronics shop near the Casbah's oldestmosque, a 60-year-old war veteran named Ali whispers, so hisfamily won't hear him. He and his six children are no longerof the same religion, he confides. They are supporters of theIslamic front and &quot;want to destroy the state.&quot;   But when Ahmed, Ali's 27-year-old son-in-law, bounds intothe room from praying at the mosque, Ali has a sudden changeof heart. &quot;The men who took over the government after therevolution weren't true revolutionaries,&quot; he says, as Ahmednods approvingly. &quot;The revolution was hijacked byopportunists.&quot;   Parents wonder where Algeria went wrong. Some say the riseof fundamentalism resulted from the oil bust that destroyedthe country's economy in the past decade, and with it, youngpeople's hopes. While poverty and unemployment surged,government officials and their friends continued to liveconspicuously well, cruising in luxury cars between seasideoffices and their villas along the tops of Algiers's hills.In last year's parliamentary campaign, the fundamentalistswere the only candidates to attack the ruling party forcorruption and arrogance.   Many people also blame the schools for Algeria's problems.In the rush to &quot;Arabize&quot; Algerian society after independence,says Mr. Boudiaf, the publisher, the government importedhundreds of teachers from Egypt, because Algeria'sintelligentsia spoke mostly French. Egyptian President GamalAbdel Nasser used the occasion to export members of Egypt'sMuslim Brotherhood, his own fundamentalist enemies, Mr.Boudiaf says. That's how Algeria's schools became bastions ofreligious fundamentalism, the publisher argues.   &quot;Until the mid-1980s, you could have rational discussionsabout almost anything in class, without students becomingindignant,&quot; says Zoubida Haddab, a professor of philosophyand political science at Algiers University. &quot;Now, it'simpossible to pose certain problems. They just can't reflecton life outside their religion.&quot;   Last week's coup was a culmination of Algeria'sgenerational battle. The military's supporters amongAlgeria's Frenchspeaking elite argue that the coup was ajustifiable breach of democracy to rescue democracy, that therepublic had to be safeguarded from the youthful zealots benton destroying it.   &quot;We rose in 1962 to liberate the country,&quot; says MohammedToumi, a cardiologist and ruling-party candidate in therecent elections, &quot;and today we rise for the second time tosave it.&quot;   But the battle isn't over. &quot;The people won't accept thedestruction of the Islamic front,&quot; says one unemployedreligious militant. &quot;Some day, there will be civil war.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>