<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910117-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>910117-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   In Parting: Disasters I Feared Are Coming Horribly True   ----   By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DATE>01/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   At times of war aliens are often expelled, and so it istoday. This is the last time I shall be appearing under theViewpoint rubric, the editor having decided that just over adecade's worth of regular appearances is enough and it's timeto whistle up fresh recruits to bear the standard ofheterodoxy. My Viewpoint colleagues Hodding Carter andMichael Gartner also will be bidding you adieu.   It's an appropriate moment to part. Everything The WallStreet Journal editorially applauds is now coming tofruition; everything in this nation's political life I opposecrowds forward in the pell-mell rush to disaster.</LP><TEXT>   In the war that has just begun, the fighting and killingand dying on the Western side will be done to adisproportionate degree by people pressed into the militaryby economic hardship, using weapons badly made bymanufacturers colluding with the Defense Department in thepadded invoice and the faked test.   That they will be fighting, killing and dying will be theconsequence of cowardly political leadership stretching backover years. The hateful figure of Saddam Hussein emerged asone of hope for many Arabs in part because the failure of theU.S. to address in any determined way the legitimateaspirations of Palestinians.   In the weeks since Iraq's seizure of Kuwait this failurehas been expressed in the refusal of the U.S. to countenancethe possibility of &quot;linkage&quot; of Iraqi withdrawal to a Mideastconference under the sponsorship of the U.N. As an Oxfordprofessor remarked in a letter to a British newspaper, &quot;It issurely one of the greatest triumphs of recent propaganda thatthe idea of a U.N.-sponsored regional conference on theMiddle East agreed to before the outbreak of war can bepresented as a `concession' to Saddam Hussein. There isnothing morally reprehensive about doing under constraintwhat you ought to do anyway.&quot;   The U.S. could have trumped Saddam Hussein and convened aconference. It has had no intention of so doing and thusstands convicted in the Arab world of holding to a doublestandard on illegal seizure of territory. &quot;When we talked tothem about Palestine,&quot; said Saddam over the weekend, &quot;itseemed as if we were talking about a dreamlike issue and ashadow which people only scarcely remember.&quot; Opportunisticthough they may be, such words strike home, particularly toArabs.   The Kuwait crisis is linked permanently to crisis in theregion. One can't be solved without the other, and if theyare not settled together Iraq's defeat will mean nothing. AsKing Hussein of Jordan said, &quot;You may win one battle, but youwill lose the entire Arab world.&quot; But the U.S. is going towar partly in order not to have a conference, in order not totalk about Palestinians.   The Gulf is at war not because of strength andpurposefulness of leadership, but because of feebleness,timidity and miscalculation. The correct strategy in responseto Saddam's invasion of Kuwait was indeed economic sanctions,doubly formidable because those usually most determined tosabotage sanctions -- the U.S. and U.K. -- were foremost inpressing them.   Perhaps there was always calculation in the president'sshifting and shifty rhetoric, first pledging &quot;whollydefensive&quot; troops and then, bolstered by Margaret Thatcher'smartial posturing, secretly planning in those last Octoberdays the great escalation.The policy of resolve, of nocompromise, of increasing deployments, of January deadlineswas, remember, intended to ensure peace. The policy wasfaulty and the end-war-disastrous.   What favor is the president doing the constituent membersof his putative &quot;new world order&quot; (as I recall, originally aNazi phrase)?   For the Gulf region, war will be a physical and economiccatastrophe, as it will for the Third World, particularlyAfrica, where the average national economy is getting poorerfor the twelfth successive year and where some countries facefamine of unparalleled severity. For Eastern Europe, alreadyreeling under higher oil prices, war will be another savageblow to hopes of progress, and for the First World economies,already in recession, the shock may be far greater thansupposed.   Who will profit from war, aside from arms makers and oilfirms? The Saudi princes and millionaires will be gratifiedas they urge on their protectors from their hotel suites inthe western desert, their numbers swollen by colleaguesprudently leaving Dhahran and their Asian workers, who cannotflee because their passports were confiscated. Saddam himselfplainly believes that war and its chaos will leave a MiddleEast advantageously in upheaval.   And clearly George Bush believes that war -- so often thelast refuge of a scoundrel -- is preferable to the hardshipsand uncertainties of peace and that arduous diplomacy sodifferent from posturing and arbitrary deadlines. There hasalways been a streak of impulsive petulance in the presidentand now it seems that this streak is about to be expressed inblood. It would have been better to leave this recourse inthe hands of the tyrant in Baghdad.   It was pointed out in the debate last weekend in Congressthat just two members had children serving in the Gulf. Nomore striking index of class and economic inequality inAmerica today can be conceived of. As the Republicangovernment prepared to send its citizens into battle, theCensus Bureau confirmed that in the 1980s the rich got richerand the rest got by.   A decade ago, when I was first offered this soapbox onthese pages, the campaign promises and illusions of the earlyReagan years were still blazing freshly forth in theeditorial columns opposite. The actual consequences nowsurround us: expiring bubbles of speculative debt, a fragilebanking system, vast social inequalities.   The fallout from the collapsing credit structure and achain of large-scale bankruptcies will be the lead forgovernment to step in with inflationary and interventionistpolicies that the free marketeers, The Wall Street Journalamong them, denounced with such fury in the 1970s: thelow-inflation economies that were meant to have been theproudest achievement of the Reagan-Thatcher years are nowexpiring.   The past year has seen, in these pages and in kindredtemples of worship, an almost mystical exaltation of the freemarket in its hour of victory. The actual nature of this&quot;victory&quot; for the Third World does not need laboring, and inEastern Europe it is being spelled out in the disillusion ofeconomic strategists as they stop dreaming of the status ofSweden or Austria and start studying the statistics ofMexico. The graves of the old economic and political ordersin Eastern Europe have been deservedly dug, but by no meanshas the free market been proved the long-term victor.   Just as the follies and failings of politics in the Arabworld can be summed up in the pathology of Saddam, so too arethe political blindness and evasions of the last decade heresummed up in the steps that have led America and its alliesto war. The first shot fired was the symbol and the epitaphof that blindness and that age.   ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation and theAnderson Valley (Calif.) Advertiser.</TEXT></DOC>