<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910205-0098</DOCNO><DOCID>910205-0098.</DOCID><HL>   White House   Alters Plan   On Bank Laws   ----   By Kenneth H. Bacon   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/05/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><IN>BANKS (BNK)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration plans to askCongress to redesign bank regulation so that the comptrollerof the currency supervises national banks and thrifts, whilethe Federal Reserve regulates some 8,500 state banks.   The controversial proposal would remove the nation'slargest bank holding companies from Fed control, while givingthe central bank authority over a much larger cross-sectionof the banking industry than it currently regulates.</LP><TEXT>   The change may please many banks. &quot;The Comptroller hasbeen the preferred regulator for a lot of banks&quot; because ithas been more willing than the Fed to allow banks to expandservices into new areas, said David Danovitch, a bankinglawyer at Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue.   Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady decided over the weekendon the two-regulator plan, rejecting a more radical,one-regulator plan that the Fed opposed.   In addition, as the Treasury rushed to complete work on abank industry-restructuring proposal it plans to releasetoday, Mr. Brady modified a decision to limit the scope ofdeposit insurance for banks and savings-and-loans. Althoughthe Treasury still advocates a plan to limit each person to atotal of $100,000 of deposit insurance on checking andsavings accounts and $100,000 on retirement accounts, Mr.Brady decided to phase in the limit in two steps.   The first step would scale back coverage at eachinstitution to $100,000 per person for regular accounts,including certificates of deposit, and $100,000 forretirement accounts. But a person could have a regular and aretirement account, each insured up to $100,000, in anunlimited number of institutions. This change, which wouldforce large savers to spread their money over several banks,would be phased in over two years.   The next step would be to move to a flat insurance limitof $100,000 for checking and savings accounts and $100,000for retirement accounts systemwide, no matter how many bankaccounts a person held.   The second step wouldn't be taken until the FederalDeposit Insurance Corp. studied the impact of the change.This may mean the second step never will be proposed toCongress. Last week, the FDIC told the Treasury that itopposed such a systemwide limitation and said it might costas much as $1 billion over five years to put the strict limitinto place.   The administration, as well as many in Congress, believethat the current deposit-insurance system has made it easyfor shaky banks and thrifts to attract large amounts of moneyfor risky investments, leaving the FDIC with the bill forinstitutions that fail. By limiting the scope of the depositinsurance, the Treasury hopes to reduce the potential drainon the deposit insurance fund.   Along with restructuring deposit insurance and regulation,the Treasury study will propose changes designed to allowbanks to operate nationwide branch networks, combine withsecurities and insurance firms, and own or be owned bycommercial and industrial corporations. Most of the changeswould be phased in over several years to give the financialsystem time to adjust.   Banks would be allowed to combine with these othercompanies within a new framework of financial-servicesholding companies. The regulatory reorganization proposalsare important because they will determine which agencyregulates the holding companies. Under the plan, theregulator of the biggest bank in the holding company willregulate the relationships between the bank and the holdingcompany, although securities firms and other nonbank entitieswill continue to be supervised by their current regulators,such as the Securities and Exchange Commission.   The regulatory proposals also are bureaucraticallyimportant because they will help determine the degree ofsupport that such influential officials as Fed Chairman AlanGreenspan and FDIC Chairman William Seidman can give theplan.   The plan would consolidate four major financial regulatoryagencies into two. The Office of Thrift Supervision, whichregulates about 2,000 savings and loans, would become part ofthe Office the Comptroller of the Currency, a Treasurydepartment agency that regulates 4,200 nationally charteredbanks. The Fed, which already regulates 1,047 state banksthat are member of the Federal Reserve System, would takeover regulation of 7,500 state nonmember banks from the FDIC.Stripped of its regulatory powers, the FDIC would continue tomanage the bank and thrift deposit-insurance funds.   Under the plan, the Fed would regulate banks that accountfor about 40% of the nation's banking assets, including suchlarge state-chartered banks as Morgan Guaranty Trust, BankersTrust, Manufacturers Hanover Trust, Chemical Bank, FirstInterstate Bank and Crestar Bank. However, it would losecontrol of the holding companies that include the nation'slargest banks -- Citibank, Bank of America and ChaseManhattan Bank. The Fed hasn't yet taken a position onwhether it supports this part of the proposal.   At one point, the Treasury planned to give the Fedregulatory control over the nation's 35 to 50 largest banks-- those with the greatest influence on monetary andinternational policy -- and put all other banks and thriftsunder a new regulator. Then the Treasury streamlined thestructure further by proposing to put all banks under oneregulator, but the Fed opposed this plan last week,administration officials said. Then Mr. Brady came up withthe two-regulator system that the Treasury intends topropose.   One problem the Treasury plan won't attempt to solve ishow to recapitalize the dwindling bank deposit-insurancefund. The federal budget released yesterday said the fundneeds $25 billion over the next five years. Banks havepromised to come up with the money, but can't agree on how toraise it. Yesterday, a banking industry official said theindustry is badly split between big banks that generate largevolumes of deposits through foreign branches and the vastmajority of banks that don't raise money abroad.   Currently, payments to the Bank Insurance Fund come frompremiums on domestic deposits only, which sharply reduces thepayments by Citibank, Morgan Guaranty and several others thatraise 40% to 80% of their deposits abroad. But small bankersare beginning to talk about raising money through a specialassessment on assets, which would sharply raise payments bymany of the nation's largest banks.   Banking industry leaders will meet in Washington Thursdayto try to resolve their differences.</TEXT></DOC>