<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910522-0021</DOCNO><DOCID>910522-0021.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Unsecured Creditors Given Right   To Collect Debts Ahead of a Bank   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   MTOR TAXES WNEWS</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><RE>FLORIDA (FL)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)</RE><LP>   A federal bankruptcy judge granted unsecured creditors theright to collect their debts ahead of a bank that lent moneyto a buy-out group to finance a highly leveraged transactionthat failed.   The decision, which could prove perilous for banks,reverses the usual priority between banks and unsecuredcreditors in a bankruptcy case on the theory that the lendershould have known that the deal would fail when it advancedthe funds.</LP><TEXT>   The ruling strikes a blow at the notion, widespread in thebanking community, that a secured lender is protected fromhuge losses even if the transaction it finances later fails.Banks made billions of dollars in loans for highly leveragedtransactions in the 1980s to help finance buy-outs andcorporate restructurings.   While the decision in the Boston case isn't binding onother courts, bankruptcy lawyers said it will be cited inother cases and is among the first to set out what penaltiesmight apply under so-called fraudulent-conveyance laws. Theissue of responsibility for failed buy-outs also has beenraised in pending cases involving Revco D.S. Inc. andWieboldt Stores Inc., among other companies.   In the Boston case, Meritor Savings Bank of Philadelphiaprovided more than $8 million in loans to finance the 1987leveraged buy-out of O'Day Corp., a Fall River, Mass.,manufacturer of fiberglass sailboats. O'Day was a subsidiaryof Lear Siegler Inc. Less than two years later, the unsecuredcreditors forced the company into involuntary bankruptcy.   U.S. Bankruptcy Judge James N. Gabriel of Boston ruledthat the bank loans constituted a fraudulent conveyancebecause Meritor had reason to know that the transaction wouldleave the company insolvent. He issued his opinion after aweeklong bench trial. Meritor's appeal is pending.   &quot;This decision gives bankruptcy trustees a very powerfultool to generate a substantial recovery for unsecuredcreditors,&quot; said Daniel Lyne, a Boston lawyer representingthe bankruptcy trustee, who brought the case against MeritorSavings after the bank sought to foreclose on the company'sassets. The unsecured creditors hold more than $4 million indebt.   In the ruling, Judge Gabriel found that O'Day was leftwith only $1,300 in cash after paying all fees and costsassociated with the buy-out. He said Meritor knew that thefinancial projections for O'Day's performance after thebuy-out were inaccurate and that the transaction would fail.   While ruling that the bank didn't intend to defraud thecreditors, Judge Gabriel nonetheless wrote that the bank &quot;setout on a course to improve its own position to the seriousdetriment of the unsecured creditors&quot; after the company raninto financial difficulties. Judge Gabriel did allow the bankto retain its security interest in real estate to pay down$1,380,000 that was lent to O'Day after the buy-out.   For Meritor, the decision &quot;probably wipes out their claim.There's never enough money to pay everyone and Meritor is atthe back of the line now,&quot; said Joel Wolosky, a New Yorkbankruptcy lawyer not involved in the case.   Robert Kargen, a Blue Bell, Pa., lawyer representingMeritor, said that the judge erred in his decision. But headded that the decision is sure to make already-jittery bankseven more reluctant to lend in highly leveraged deals. &quot;Bankswho thought they would not be touched because they aresecured creditors should be aware of the risks,&quot; said Mr.Kargen.   ---   ATTORNEY DISCIPLINE should be handled by courts, notlawyers, report says.   An American Bar Association commission recommended takingprimary responsibility for disciplining lawyers away fromlawyers' associations and placing it under the supervision ofthe highest court in each state.   The commission also proposed making public all complaintsand proceedings against lawyers and providing clients whocomplain with immunity from legal reprisals by the attorneys.   The recommendations, from the ABA's Commission onEvaluation of Disciplinary Enforcement, strikes at one of themost common complaints against the legal profession -- thatit is regulated solely by lawyers.   State bar associations control investigations of attorneymisconduct complaints in most states. In almost every statethe complaints are kept secret, and in all states onlyviolations of professional ethics codes are consideredsufficiently important to warrant serious sanctions.   As a result, some jurisdictions dismiss 90% of thecomplaints they receive against lawyers, leaving the publicwith no remedy for legitimate -- though relatively minor --grievances, such as negligence, fee-gouging, slow performanceor incompetence, the report says. &quot;Neither the profession northe judiciary can permit this situation to continue,&quot; thereport warns.   Advocates of stricter regulation of lawyers welcomed thefindings, particularly because the nation's largest lawyers'association had commissioned the report. But some criticizedthe proposed remedies, noting that court supervision ofdiscipline still places legally trained individuals -- judges-- in charge of the process. &quot;The fox {is} still guarding thechicken coup,&quot; complained Kay Ostberg, acting director of theclient advocacy group HALT, based in Washington, D.C.   Many of the commission's findings echo complaints thatHALT has been voicing for several years, but Ms. Ostberg saidlawyers should be regulated by state agencies similar tothose that regulate other professionals, such as bankers anddoctors.   The commission's report will be presented to the ABA'sHouse of Delegates in February for a vote on whether to adoptits recommendations and submit them to state and federalcourts for consideration. As a practical matter, many of theproposed changes would require state legislative approval,and in some instances, constitutional amendments thatprobably would face strong opposition from lawyer groups.   The commission drew its findings from a two-year surveythat involved several public hearings and testimony fromhundreds of complainants, consumer organizations, judges andbar association representatives.   ---   SALES TAX ON NEWSPAPERS' purchases struck down inMassachusetts.   In a unanimous opinion, the Supreme Judicial Court,Massachusetts' highest court, ruled that a tax that singledout the purchase of equipment used in newspaper production isan unjustified burden on freedom of the press protected bythe First Amendment.   The law, which went into effect in September, requirednewspapers to pay a 5% sales tax on printing presses, fueland other production parts and equipment but exemptednon-newspaper manufacturers from taxation. Under an advisoryopinion handed down by the state's Revenue Department,newsprint and ink also were exempted.   In July, the Boston Globe newspaper challenged the law,arguing that the tax unfairly discriminated against thenewspaper industry. It cited a recent U.S. Supreme Courtdecision that struck down a similar law in Minnesota. But theMassachusetts attorney general's office argued that thestate's compelling need for revenue justified the tax and wasconsistent with the Supreme Court's ruling.   The Massachusetts high court ruled, however, that&quot;subjecting newspaper publishing to a different form of taxfrom that applied to all other manufacturing enterprises isnot a solution which is narrowly tailored to the problem ofraising a certain amount of tax revenue.&quot;   ---   DISBARRED LAWYER ordered to pay $18.1 million in thriftcase.   The judgment covers repayment of loans made to ex-lawyerLawrence Vineyard, whose short-lived career as a thrift ownerled to his conviction in two criminal cases. But Mr.Vineyard's lawyer says Mr. Vineyard hasn't any cash and fewassets with which to pay off the judgment.   Mr. Vineyard left the Dallas-based law firm of Jenkens andamp;Gilchrist in the early 1980s to acquire the now-defunct KeySavings andamp; Loan Association of Englewood, Colo. He wasconvicted in 1987 of fraud charges related to the purchase ofthe thrift.   In a separate case, Mr. Vineyard pleaded guilty last yearto misusing part of $17 million in loans he obtained from thedefunct Vernon Savings andamp; Loan Association.   In connection with his guilty plea, Mr. Vineyard agreed topay the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. for the Vernon loans,and that agreement was the basis for the $18.1 millionjudgment entered last week. Currently, Mr. Vineyard isserving a 10-year sentence in federal prison, but he could beeligible for parole as early as 1993.   ---   MIAMI BLOCKED from trying to evict controversial Cubanmuseum.   Federal Judge James Lawrence King enjoined the city ofMiami from evicting the Cuban Museum of Arts and Culture fromits city-owned building. &quot;The city . . . appears to havefallen victim to the local community's intolerance for thosewho choose to provide a forum for controversial artists,&quot;Judgne King's decision said.   The judge's ruling appears to end the three-year saga ofthe museum, which had been embroiled in a controversy sinceApril 1988 when it exhibited and then sold at a fund-raisingauction a handful of paintings by artists still living inCuba. Many local Cuban-Americans objected to the sale, andsoon thereafter the city audited the museum three times andsought ways to evict the management of the museum.   &quot;It is ironic that the curtailment and punishment ofexpression in this case is the result of actions taken bythose who claim to so loathe the governmental intoleranceexisting in a Communist Cuba,&quot; the judge's order said.   ---   FOUR WEBSTER andamp; SHEFFIELD partners join Stroock andamp; Stroock.   Stroock andamp; Stroock andamp; Lavan, a 340-lawyer firm based in NewYork, announced that four Webster andamp; Sheffield lawyers havejoined the firm as partners, along with five associatelawyers. Webster andamp; Sheffield has said the firm will ceaseoperation by June 1.   Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander andamp; Ferdon, another New Yorklaw firm, has said another 23 Webster andamp; Sheffield lawyerswill join it by May 31.</TEXT></DOC>