<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900806-0015</DOCNO><DOCID>900806-0015.</DOCID><HL>   The Mideast Conflict -- On the Brink:   Iraqi Invasion Boosts   Chances of Recession   In the U.S. This Year   ---   Oil-Price Rise Comes on Top   Of Higher Jobless Figure   And Other Poor Statistics   ---   Greenspan's Messy Dilemma   ----   By Alan Murray and David Wessel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST TAXES</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)PETROLEUM (PET)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><LP>   Americans may have Saddam Hussein to thank for theRecession of 1990.   Friday's bleak report that the unemployment rate rosesharply to 5.5% suggests that even before Iraq's invasion ofoil-rich Kuwait last week, America's wheezing economy hadground to a virtual halt. Since the invasion, oil prices havejumped about $5 a barrel, and many economists now see thechances of a recession raised from a possibility to aprobability.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I'm the gloomiest I've been since 1979,&quot; says Allen Sinaiof the Boston Co.   After nearly eight years of a growing economy, theconfident consumers of the Reagan years have turned cautiousand are slowing their purchases. The credit boom of the 1980shas given way to the credit squeeze of 1990. The auto andhousing industries have long been weak. In the past 12months, the economy has grown barely 1%. Now, the surge inunemployment has followed a recent string of bad numbers,including a 1.5% drop in factory orders in June, and suggeststhat growth may have stopped altogether.   Add to that an increase in oil prices, and you have whatmany economists consider a sure recipe for recession.Moreover, a successful boycott of Iraqi oil would drive oilprices into the stratosphere and practically guarantee arecession in the U.S.   The Bush administration tried to put the best face on theunemployment numbers, brushing away talk of recession. Butprivately, one administration economist acknowledged that theWhite House, after stripping away special factors, judgedFriday's labor report the worst since the end of the 1982recession. The administration's top economic policy makers --Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Budget Director RichardDarman and Economist Michael Boskin -- were known to beincreasingly concerned. In private, they were described asmore and more frustrated with the Federal Reserve, which mayhold the best hope for keeping the economy afloat.   Faced with a weakening economy, the central bank is likelyto move as early as this week to cut interest rates. FedChairman Alan Greenspan is worried by the employment numbersand fears that the credit problems may be biting too deep.   But any such move will probably be modest, perhaps cuttingthe key federal funds interest rate by a quarter percentagepoint -- much less, in any case, than the administration ishoping for. The gap between what the White House wants andwhat the Fed is willing to provide is wide -- andadministration officials say it grew even wider after theIraqi invasion.   The oil-price rise that it unleashed is a double-edgedsword for the U.S. economy, simultaneously reducing growthand raising inflation. So, for Mr. Greenspan, the invasionposes a painful dilemma.   If he tries to cushion the economy by flooding it withmoney and lowering rates, he might avoid a recession for awhile. But that would risk aggravating inflation; that's whathappened in the oil-shocked 1970s, when the U.S. suffereddouble-digit price increases. Mr. Greenspan was in governmentat that time, serving as an economic adviser to PresidentFord, and he is determined not to wade through that swampagain.   But if Mr. Greenspan tries to press the anti-inflationfight as his No. 1 priority, he may have to tolerate arecession. That's always an unappealing prospect, butespecially so right now. The Fed is clearly worried that arecession, by dragging down additional thrift institutions,could make the savings-and-loan crisis even more appallingthan it already is. Even worse, a recession might underminesubstantial numbers of weak banks. Moreover, Mr. Greenspanwould be taking a hard line in an election year, to thepredictable outrage of an administration clearly allergic totight credit.   The Iraqi invasion also throws a huge new obstacle in thebudget talks currently under way between the administrationand Congress. Negotiators had privately been counting on anew energy tax as a big money-raiser in the effort to bringdown the deficit. But with gasoline prices already projectedto increase at least 10 cents a gallon, the politicalappetite for a tax that would push that further is certain tofade.   There is likely to be &quot;less interest among summiteers inenergy taxes, gasoline taxes or, for that matter, excisetaxes, that would increase the rate of inflation,&quot; saysRobert Reischauer, the director of the Congressional BudgetOffice. To the contrary, Republican Sen. Pete Domenici of NewMexico says several of his Senate colleagues have even begunto inquire about enacting costly new tax breaks to encouragedomestic oil production.   Cutting defense spending also may be more difficult in thewake of the Iraqi invasion, negotiators say. And talk ofrecession is certain to raise fears that a budget pact willmake the nation's economic problems even worse in the shortterm. &quot;With the economy in a state of slow growth, people getworried that any adjustment will tip us over,&quot; says Rep. BillFrenzel, a Minnesota Republican. &quot;The momentum is in thehands of the big spenders.&quot;   Budget negotiators still hope they can cut adeficit-reduction deal after returning from their Augustvacations. Senate Budget Committee Chairman Jim Sasser ofTennessee reasons that economic problems may even be a spurto action.   But if there is a deal, it now seems likely to be moremodest than that originally envisioned by the budgetsummiteers. Administration officials have even discussed thepossibility of a package that makes only shallow cuts in thedeficit in the first year but promises bigger cuts later --after the economy has recovered. &quot;The real question,&quot; saidHouse Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta of California,&quot;is whether the agreement will be as bold as any of us wouldlike.&quot;   Whether the economy will fall into recession is still farfrom certain. Although the latest figures show widespreadweakness, a continued pickup in American exports,particularly to Europe, promises some help to the economy.And Mr. Boskin, the chairman of the president's Council ofEconomic Advisers, continues to predict that &quot;the economywill pick up in coming months.&quot;   Others are less certain. &quot;The chances of a recession haverisen,&quot; says Victor Zarnowitz, an economist at the Universityof Chicago. &quot;Maybe they aren't higher than 50%, but they arevery close to that.&quot;   If the economy does turn down, most analysts expect therecession to be relatively mild. Although the economy isawash in excessive debt, it isn't suffering from the highinflation rates and other excesses that made the slumps ofthe 1970s and 1980s so painful. &quot;If we have a recession, itwill probably feel like recessions of the 1950s and 1960s,&quot;says Harvard economist Lawrence Summers.   Unemployment is also likely to remain well below itsdouble-digit rates of 1982. With fewer teen-agers and womenentering the work force these days, finding jobs for thosewho want them is simpler.   But even without 1982-style joblessness, the bite of arecession would nevertheless be felt -- and indeed already isbeing felt in some areas. Falling home prices in New England,for instance, are making many people feel substantially lessprosperous. Bernice Cramer bought a home for $437,000 inNewton, Mass., in June 1988 and has watched its valuenosedive. She figures it is now worth $50,000 to $75,000 lessthan when she bought it.   &quot;I love my house, I'm glad I bought it, but I threw away alot of money,&quot; Ms. Cramer says. As a result, the businessconsultant and her family are having to be more cautious intheir spending. &quot;We get along with one car, instead of buyinga second one.&quot;   Although New England may be the worst hit, other areas ofthe country are experiencing a housing-led recession as well.Robert Gordon, a professor of economics at NorthwesternUniversity, says the prosperous North Shore of Chicago isalso seeing a dearth of real-estate sales. And declines inhousing prices are spilling over into other sectors of theeconomy as house-poor consumers trim purchases.   &quot;Rising housing prices and rising housing equity givepeople a kind of financial flexibility and an air of optimismthat has positive effects&quot; throughout the economy, saysThomas Juster, a consumer-behavior specialist at theUniversity of Michigan. &quot;But in these weaker housing markets,where the house is worth less than people paid for it,&quot; theopposite is true, and spending declines. Mr. Juster adds thata fall in real-estate values is far more damaging to consumerspending than, say, a fall in stock prices because fewAmericans own substantial amounts of stock.   A recession would also be unusually mild formanufacturers. In the past, goods producers have taken thebiggest hit when the economy turns down, while service firmshave been less badly battered. This time, however, manymanufacturers are getting a boost from healthy exports.   Bankruptcies are likely to be common in a recession of1990, if it occurs. The debt craze of the 1980s left manycompanies with more debt than they can possibly service in asluggish economy. Some have already started to default;others are sure to as the economy slows.   But Harvard's Prof. Summers argues that debt-drivenbankruptcies may not hurt the economy as much as previousbusiness shake-ups. In 1982, he notes, companies were goingbelly up because their products or services had suddenlybecome uncompetitive in the world market. In 1990, however,many of the debt-burdened companies would remain profitableif it weren't for their debt. Those companies may simply besold off to new owners, causing losses for the banks andjunk-bond holders who lent them money but without causing biglayoffs.   Even if the economy steers clear of a recession, theimmediate future is hardly bright, however. Economic growthis likely to remain what it has been for the past year:sluggish.   &quot;The long-term growth rate is very important,&quot; Mr.Zarnowitz says. In the '50s and '60s, he notes, recessionswere frequent, but growth was stronger between recessions.Now, the economy seems to have settled into a long,slow-growth expansion, averaging only 1.2% growth over thepast year. &quot;It's not clear to me this isn't worse,&quot; he says.</TEXT></DOC>