<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920207-0197</DOCNO><DOCID>920207-0197.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- On Sports:   Who'll We Root Against Now?   ----   By Frederick C. Klein</HL><DATE>02/07/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><LP>   Albertville, France --  Every fourth winter the five-ringOlympic symbol shows its real muscle. The youth of the world-- or at least the youth of the portion of the world with therequisite frosty clime -- converge on a mountainous regionsuch as this to slide around on the ice or snow at dangerousspeeds. And the rest of the world -- especially the TV-crazyU.S. public -- tunes in, even though we normally wouldn'tcross the street -- especially an icy street -- to watch thesports involved.   Listen in at Water Cooler USA any day for the next twoweeks and the chitchat will go something like this:</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Ol' so-and-so really luged great last night, didn't he?&quot;Or, &quot;How'd you like the triple Lutz that little gal wearingthe feathers pulled off?&quot;   The 16th Winter Olympics begin here tomorrow, so you hadbetter learn to talk the talk. The basic numbers are that2,300 athletes will be on hand from 60-odd nations, to bewatched at one time or another by as many as a milliontourist-spectators and reported on by the 7,000 or sojournalists who have been granted one sort of credential oranother. The last figure suggests a rather frighteningreporter-to-athlete ratio of 3 to 1. But that's my problem,not yours.   This will be the first Olympiad of the New World Order,and we Yanks may have to change some deep-set rootingpatterns. As you may have read, the two Germanys now are oneand the Soviet Union now is many, to be replaced on theathletic fields by individual teams from the former Balticrepublics and a team from the Commonwealth of IndependentStates, consisting of most of the rest. Can an Olympics befun without an East Germany or U.S.S.R. to boo? We shall findout.   (If nothing else, the political realignments will greatlyaffect the national medal count. At the last Winter Games, in1988 at Calgary, athletes from the Soviet Union won 11 of the46 gold medals awarded, and the East Germans won nine. Only17 nations won medals of any sort in that one, which showsyou how small the Winter Olympic club really is.)   Also new will be several events added to a calendar thatneeded padding to fill the 16 days required to have threeweekends to sell to television. They include women'sbiathlon, freestyle skiing, packstyle speed skating and speedskiing.   A few words about speed skiing are in order, if onlybecause it seems to open new vistas in high-speed craziness.Competitors, wearing rubber suits and shoulder-coveringhelmets right out of the movie &quot;The Rocketeer,&quot; zoom down along, straight incline but are timed only when going througha pre-marked, 100-meter stretch midway down the course. Theycan fly through that zone at speeds of better than 130 milesper hour. The word &quot;fly&quot; is meant to be taken literally,because when going at full blast they aren't really skiingbut hydroplaning on a layer of air about half an inch abovethe snow. The rubber suits, I guess, are so they'll bouncesome if they crash.   What speed skiing will have in common with most otherracing events here is that contestants will performindividually against the clock, rather than directly againstone another. (Exceptions are pack skating and a fewcross-country skiing relays.) Add the sports in which winnersare determined by panels of judges applying standards bestknown to themselves, and you have a less-than-satisfyingspectatorial experience. But that's the Winter Games, take'em or leave 'em.   The Games will take place over a 650-square-mile area ofFrance's Savoie region, of which Albertville, a smallishindustrial town, is only the nominal center. This willrequire busing participants and spectators over hundreds ofmiles of winding Alpine roads, which, combined with thesecurity precautions that have become an Olympic staple,raise the prospect of transit snafus.   The weather, too, is a possible messerupper; a blizzard inthe area in December resulted in avalanches that killed twopeople and stranded thousands. Snowfall has been scarcer inthe more-recent weeks of a generally mild winter, but itsnowed again this week and snow cover is said to be more thanadequate on the ski runs. You'll recall that at Calgary theproblem wasn't too much snow but too little, along with60degree temperatures and high winds that buffeted skijumpers and blew dirt onto bobsled and luge courses.   Other things to worry about include Albertville taxidrivers, who are upset about restrictions on their movementsduring the Games; road-maintenance workers, who have used theoccasion to threaten to strike for higher wages; and dancersin the opening and closing ceremonies, who are unhappy withtheir pay and living conditions. The taxi men tied up trafficon Saturday by double-parking their vehicles along mainroads. &quot;Zut alors]&quot;   Chances are, though, that the Games will come off prettymuch as scheduled, and that U.S. athletes will fare betterthan they did at Calgary. They won but two gold medals there,and six all told, prompting Robert Helmick, the U.S. OlympicCommittee president, to appoint George Steinbrenner, of NewYork Yankee fame, to conduct an inquest into What Went Wrong.   Helmick has since been replaced, after revelations that heused his Olympic post to enrich his law practice, andSteinbrenner got the boot from baseball for paying a gamblerto supply dirt on a former player with whom he was feuding.Steinbrenner's report, however, resulted in USOC funds beingspread among more athletes, and winter-sport participantshave benefited.   Whatever, the U.S. appears to have strong medal contendersin speed skating (Bonnie Blair, Dan Jansen and Eric Flaim),figure skating (Kristi Yamaguchi, Tonya Harding, NancyKerrigan and Christopher Bowman), freestyle skiing (DonnaWeinbrecht) and luge (Duncan Kennedy, Cammy Myler and BonnieWarner), and outside hopes in Alpine skiing. A.J. Kitt, adownhill skier, has been the pre-Olympic cover boy of manyU.S. sports magazines, but I think that's mostly because ofhis cute Spiderman ski suit.   As an extra added attraction, Herschel Walker will push abobsled, and there'll be almost-nightly figure skating on TV.Get a hanky ready to weep with the winners in that one. Maybeone to cry with the girl winners, too.</TEXT></DOC>