<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910508-0106</DOCNO><DOCID>910508-0106.</DOCID><HL>   `Temporary' Camps? Ask Indochina's Refugees   ----   By Barry Wain</HL><DATE>05/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><GV>INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)MALAYSIA (MY)SINGAPORE (SN)THAILAND (TH)</RE><LP>   As allied troops set up a string of camps for Kurdishrefugees in northern Iraq, the West would be wise to preparefor a lasting humanitarian commitment to them.   The camps are meant to be temporary, to provide immediateshelter and security for many of the two million Iraqi Kurdswho fled to Turkey and Iran after their abortive revoltagainst Saddam Hussein's government in the wake of the Gulfwar. The American, British, French and Dutch forces creatingthe safe havens and erecting the tents are supposed to handover authority before long to a United Nations contingentalready in the area.</LP><TEXT>   But experience with the post-1975 Indochina exodus showsthat temporary camps have a way of becoming permanent,especially when the underlying causes that give rise to theflight of people aren't addressed. Hong Kong and SoutheastAsia today are littered with refugee settlements that havebecome home for hundreds of thousands of displacedVietnamese, Cambodians and Laotians. Camps that long ago werehammered together in haste -- and hope -- are now fixtures,little more than slums and prisons. And there's no end insight to the agony of the refugees.   The immediate reason for the upheaval in Indochina was, ofcourse, the communist victories in all three countries afterlong years of war involving the major powers. Pol Pot's KhmerRouge were particularly vicious, unleashing a bloodbath thattook as many as two million Cambodian lives in 44 months. Butsubsequent developments, including Vietnam's invasion ofCambodia and China's retaliatory strike into Vietnam, set thescene for enduring conflict and struggle.   Vietnam's decade-long occupation of Cambodia earned itinternational condemnation and a U.S.-led economic embargothat has cost Vietnam Western aid and multilateraldevelopment funds, leaving the country one of the world'spoorest. Although Vietnamese troops now have withdrawn fromCambodia, the civil war continues there, and Washingtonmaintains its embargo against Hanoi. Relations between Chinaand Vietnam also remain strained.   Against this background, boat people continued to fleeVietnam throughout the 1980s, washing up on shores all overthe region. Their plight, captured evocatively on TV, madethem perhaps the most popular and privileged of all fugitives-- initially, at least. While the persecuted in Africa,Central America and elsewhere in Asia were lucky to be giventemporary refuge in neighboring countries until they couldreturn home, all boat people automatically were accepted asrefugees with the prospect of resettlement in the West.   Their welcome, which rested on an unwritten compact thatcountries of first, or temporary, asylum would allow them toland only as long as the industrialized democracies acceptedthem for permanent settlement, was precarious at best.Whenever arrivals began outpacing departures and camppopulations swelled, first-asylum countries learned topressure the West by turning boats away, thus sentencing someof the refugees to death.   The Vietnamese fell further from favor when the outflowinevitably became selfsustaining and brought large numbers ofthose who appeared to be more economic immigrant thanpolitical refugee. After the U.S. and other resettlementcountries drew a distinction between &quot;genuine&quot; refugees andothers, it was only a matter of time before first-asylumcountries followed suit. Hong Kong introduced screening todetermine refugee status in mid-1988; Southeast Asia, earlythe following year.   Still, large numbers of Vietnamese continue to abandontheir homeland in boats, braving dangerous seas, horrificThai pirate attacks and the real possibility that Thailand,Malaysia and Singapore will push them back to sea. More than100,000 Vietnamese have found their way into camps sincescreening began, half of them in Hong Kong, which has thedistinction of never having turned a boat away. And theycontinue to arrive at the rate of 650 a month.   Eventually, about 80% of them -- 80,000 of the currentcamp population -- will be rejected and marked forrepatriation. Exactly how they'll be returned to Vietnam isthe subject of acrimonious international indecision. LastTuesday, on the 16th anniversary of the communist takeover ofSaigon, 29 nations meeting in Geneva once again avoided theissue. They set up a committee to study it.   As most of the boat people refuse to go home voluntarily,many involved nations favor forcing them, just as Hong Kongregularly returns illegal immigrants from China it catchestrying to sneak across the border every night. Ironically,the strongest opponents of the use of force are those oldadversaries in coercion and violence, the U.S. and Vietnam,which at last have found something to agree on.   While their fate is debated, the rejects in Hong Kong arelocked in overcrowded and squalid camps, where crime is rifeand violence is common. The familiar image of the boat peopleas a family splashing ashore from a capsized fishing vesselhas yielded to a sad-eyed child peering through a wire fencethat confines her. That look says it all: I'm not wanted.   Unlike the Vietnamese, the vast majority of Cambodians whoescaped to neighboring countries were never presumed to beformal refugees eligible for resettlement abroad. They weretreated as temporarily displaced persons waiting to go homewhen conditions returned to normal. Far from returning tonormal, conditions have, if anything, deteriorated asresistance forces challenged the Vietnam-backed government inPhnom Penh and the guerrilla war spread.   Today, more than 300,000 Cambodians squat in camps locatedalong a 465-mile arc of Thailand's eastern border, eachsettlement under the control of one of the three resistancefactions that form a loose and sometimes antagonisticcoalition.   The camps are primitive, with thatched huts and noelectricity, plumbing or running water. A U.N. agencydelivers rice rations, while a dozen voluntary organizationstry to help with everything from the preservation of cultureto education and the fitting of artificial limbs.   Adults, farmers before their exile, have lived in thecamps for up to 12 years. Their kids -- 100,000 of them havebeen born in the camps and know no other existence -- havenever seen a paddy field or water buffalo.   Reports from the border say that families live withviolence, insecurity and fear. They worry about lawlessnesswithin the camps and shelling from without. They also feelthreatened by possible forced recruitment into resistancearmies, including that of the mass-murdering Khmer Rouge. Inthe past couple of years, the Khmer Rouge have moved tens ofthousands of civilians from U.N.-assisted sites to locationsdeeper inside Cambodia beyond the reach of relief agencies.   The Cambodians are traumatized and suffer from physicaldisabilities; arms and legs are often blown off by minesplanted by all sides over the years. Some, especially youngwomen, attempt suicide, while the incidence of child abuseworsens. Particularly Site 2, the biggest of the borderencampments, is characterized by growing feelings of anxiety,hopelessness and depression, according to one visitor.   Pierre Ceyrac, a French Jesuit priest who had longexperience in the slums of Calcutta before going to work onthe Thai-Cambodian border, has said of the notorious Site 2:&quot;Psychologically, the refugees manage to hold up for two,three or even four years. But ultimately they reach abreaking point. It is all too much for them and many sufferfrom mental collapse.&quot;   Almost overlooked in this catalog of woe are about 60,000Laotians, mainly members of hill tribes, who live in camps innortheast Thailand. Predominantly Hmong, the hill tribespresent a different problem. For the most part these peopledon't want to go abroad and they don't want to go back toLaos -- not yet, anyway.   How much longer will the Indochinese be forced to rot intheir &quot;temporary&quot; camps? The only answer I can offer is torepeat what I wrote exactly a decade ago: &quot;Ultimately, asolution to the Indochina refugee problem rests on apolitical settlement of the various complex events that helpcreate it, especially a return to peace and stability inCambodia. Regrettably, prospects are remote. . . .&quot;   ---   Mr. Wain, editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal, is theauthor of &quot;The Refused,&quot; an account of the Indochina refugeeexodus (Simon andamp; Schuster, 1982).</TEXT></DOC>