<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910213-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>910213-0008.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Bakker's 45-Year Sentence Is Thrown Out   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal appeals court threw out Jim Bakker's 45-yearprison sentence, ruling that the trial judge had actedimproperly when he called televangelists &quot;moneygrubbingpreachers&quot; during sentencing proceedings.   The Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va.,upheld Mr. Bakker's convictions on charges of fleecingmillions from his television viewers, but the panel orderedthat Mr. Bakker be resentenced by another judge.</LP><TEXT>   The appeals court said that U.S. District Judge RobertPotter, who presided over the federal fraud and conspiracytrial against Mr. Bakker two years ago in Charlotte, N.C.,impermissibly allowed his own feelings about religion to showwhen sentencing Mr. Bakker in October 1989. The sentenceincluded a $500,000 fine, which was also thrown outyesterday.   During the sentencing, Judge Potter said of Mr. Bakker:&quot;He had no thought whatever about his victims. And those ofus who do have a religion are ridiculed as being saps (of)money-grubbing preachers or priests.&quot;   Judge Potter, called &quot;Maximum Bob&quot; by lawyers because ofthe severity of his prison sentences, should have keptreligion out of his statements, the three-member panel ruledunanimously. Courts, wrote Judge J. Harvey Wilkinson III,&quot;cannot sanction sentencing procedures that create theperception of the bench as a pulpit from which judgesannounce their personal sense of religiosity andsimultaneously punish defendants for offending it. . . .&quot;   The decision is unusual because it requires Mr. Bakker tobe resentenced and takes the case away from Judge Potter,according to Mr. Bakker's three appeal lawyers, Don Ervin andBrian Williams Wice, of Houston, and Alan B. Dershowitz, aHarvard law professor.   Mr. Dershowitz, best known for his successful appellatedefense of socialite Claus von Bulow, joined in the Bakkercase as an adviser and argued the sentencing aspect of theappeal. &quot;I argued and the court agreed that this wasbasically punishing Bakker for having a different religion,&quot;said Mr. Dershowitz.   The panel, however, rejected a key aspect of the argumentsthat could have bound Judge Potter's successor to a range ofprison sentences substantially shorter than the 45-year termMr. Bakker is serving. The three lawyers argued in courtpleadings that Mr. Bakker should have been imprisoned underfederal sentencing guidelines that went into effect Nov. 1,1987. Under the guidelines, Mr. Bakker's sentence would havefallen somewhere between five and 12 years, said Mr. Ervin.   The lawyers argued that Mr. Bakker's indictment chargedhim with fraud and conspiracy beginning in 1982 and extendinguntil the indictment was handed up in December 1988, wellafter the date the guidelines went into effect. Under thosecircumstances, Mr. Bakker's lawyers maintained, theconspiracy &quot;straddled&quot; the effective date of the guidelinesand entitled Mr. Bakker to be sentenced within them. But theappeal judges disagreed, saying the bulk of the evidence inthe five-week trial showed that almost all Mr. Bakker'scriminal conduct occurred before the guidelines went intoeffect.   Mr. Bakker resigned from his multimillion-dollartelevision ministry in March 1987 when his sexual dalliancewith former church secretary Jessica Hahn became public. Hewas later indicted for using his satellite TV empire to pitchhis viewers bogus lifetime annual vacations to Heritage USA,his sprawling 2,300-acre theme park resort in South Carolina.   Much of the $158 million Mr. Bakker raised was used to runthe ministry's daily operations, but Mr. Bakker also wasconvicted of diverting $3.7 million toward the purchase ofvacation homes, a fleet of Rolls-Royces and Mercedeses, furs,Rolex watches, face lifts for himself and his wife, and anair-conditioned doghouse for their pet.   Mr. Bakker's lawyers said he could not be reached forcomment. Judge Potter, recovering from heart bypass surgery,was unavailable for comment.   ---   LAWYER ADVERTISING may be restricted further in a numberof states.   Last month, Florida joined Iowa in banning the use ofdramatizations and client testimonials in broadcastadvertisements. State bar associations in 19 other states areconsidering similar restrictions.   The advertisments at issue feature celebrities and legalpitchmen, testimonials by satisfied clients, enactments ofclient misfortunes and music -- the kinds of marketingtechniques common when selling products and other services.Many bar associations say such ads are misleading and thatthey demean the profession and promote frivolous lawsuits.   Legal services groups and solo lawyers, however, contendthat the ads enable middle- and low-income clients to findaffordable and competent lawyers. They say well-establishedlawyers in specialties such as bankruptcy, personal injury,divorce and real estate want to restrict televisionadvertisements because the ads are wooing clients away fromthem. Some consumer groups agree.   &quot;We favor advertising on television because it has beenshown to lower prices by increasing competition,&quot; saysDeborah Chalfie, a spokeswoman for Halt, a legal consumeradvocacy group.   Lawyers' general right to advertise can no longer bequestioned legally. In 1977, the Supreme Court ruled thatattorneys were permitted to advertise the nature and pricesof their services as long as the information was not falseand misleading. But within those limits, a number of stateshave found some wiggle room.   In addition to banning dramatizations and testimonials,the Florida regulation requires lawyers to submit print andbroadcast ads for state approval, and some ads must carrydisclaimers. Under the regulations, lawyers who fail tocomply may have to forfeit their legal fees from clientsattracted by the advertisments.   The Arizona Supreme Court is currently considering aregulation that bans dramatizations in legal ads and requiresthat the ads convey information only -- as opposed to claimsregarding skills or success rates -- and to do so in adignified manner.   Neither the Florida nor Arizona regulations were promptedby consumer complaints. Geoffrey Hazard Jr., an ethicsspecialist at Yale law school, says such proposals insteadare related to recent hints by the Supreme Court that it willpermit various restrictions on lawyer advertising. TheSupreme Court recently refused to review a case challengingthe Iowa regulation. More generally, says Mr. Hazard, thecourt appears to be relaxing constitutional protections forcommercial speech.   Nonetheless, Bruce Rogow, a Florida attorney, says heplans to file a civil action in federal court challenging theFlorida regulations on First Amendment grounds. The Institutefor Access to Legal Services, a legal advertising group basedin Phoenix, is supplying Mr. Rogow with both financial andlegal assistance.   &quot;Once it happens to lawyers, it will happen to otherprofessions,&quot; says Martin Solomon, a spokesman for thePhoenix group. &quot;I think all business people should beconcerned.&quot;   ---   PARTNERSHIPS can't go to court without a lawyer, courtrules.   The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that apartnership, like a corporation, can't be represented incourt by a nonlawyer, even if the nonlawyer is one of thepartners.   Courts have previously held that nonlawyers can representthemselves but no one else. But judges have been divided overwhether that rule applies to partners and their partnerships.The decision this week was the first time that the U.S.appeals court in Manhattan has addressed the question. Thecourt's decisions are binding on federal courts in New York,Connecticut and Vermont.   In the case, Eagle Associates, formed to market the movie&quot;Gorky Park,&quot; wanted to be represented by one of its generalpartners in a dispute over a note issued by Bank of Montreal.Eagle argued that the partner didn't have to be a lawyerbecause, as a member of the partnership, he actually would berepresenting himself.   Rejecting Eagle's arguments, the appeals court noted thatprevious decisions have held that corporations can't berepresented by nonlawyers, no matter how closely thenonlawyer is associated with the company. &quot;We are unable toperceive a palpable difference between the situation where alayperson is representing others having an interest in acorporation and . . . where a layperson wishes to representother partners,&quot; the appeals panel said.   Jacob Laufer, an attorney for Eagle on appeal, said he wasreviewing the decision.   ---   TECHNOLOGY USE by law firms isn't likely to be curtailedbecause of the soft economy, a survey by Price Waterhousediscloses. Two-thirds of the firms surveyed said they wouldincrease per-lawyer spending on technology in 1991, both tomaintain and upgrade current systems and to introduce newones. In recent years, law firms have become increasinglydependent on computer systems to store and retrieve legaldocuments, perform legal research and aid in billing andadministration.</TEXT></DOC>