<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910213-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>910213-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Saving the Banks:   Treasury Bank Plan: Strangle the Weak   ----   By Peter J. Wallison</HL><DATE>02/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>BANKS (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   In its otherwise excellent proposal last week to reformthe American banking system, the Treasury Department chose tocontrol risky activities of bank managers by increasing theincentives of depositors to discipline their bankers. Bycurtailing the protection extended to depositors under theso-called &quot;too big to fail&quot; policy, and aggressively reducingthe number of insured accounts available to businesses andindividuals, Treasury is betting that depositors will reacteither by demanding higher interest rates from weak banks,thus reducing the banks' profitability until they alter theirbehavior, or by moving their funds from weaker to strongerbanks.   Unfortunately, there is good reason to doubt the soundnessof Treasury's proposed policy. Depositors, fearful of losingtheir funds, may withdraw them rapidly from riskier banks,causing a &quot;run.&quot; Those banks would then need to liquidateassets quickly, and generally at a loss, to meet the cashdemands of their customers. Strong as well as weak banks canbe driven into insolvency by a sudden loss of confidence bydepositors. The ever-present danger of runs createsinstability in the financial system, and may even limit thewillingness of banks to make loans that cannot be quicklyliquidated.</LP><TEXT>   It is by no means clear that uninsured depositors will actcoolly and rationally to select well-managed and sound banks.In the financial world of the 1990s, it seems more likelythat frightened and risk-averse depositors will move theirfunds from bank to bank -- spreading unnecessary lossesrandomly throughout the system -- or that depositors willsimply move their funds out of the system entirely.   A serious argument can be made that efficient and rationaldepositor discipline of bank managements is impossible. Bytheir nature, banks invest in assets that cannot be easilyvalued. Indeed, evaluating assets could be seen to be theprimary economic role of banks: Because lenders have no wayto evaluate the creditworthiness of certain borrowers,particularly individuals and privately held businesses, theylend their funds to a bank, which then assesses thecredit-worthiness of these potential users of credit.   If this view is correct, a bank's assets are by definitiondifficult for outsiders to evaluate, and yet the bank'shealth depends vitally on the financial health of itsborrowers. Treasury's approach, which requires depositors todiscipline banks, ignores the fact that depositors would beacting in an informational vacuum. Bank regulators themselves-- who presumably have the best information and expertiseavailable -- are often surprised by the speed with whichbanks move from apparent health to insolvency.   All this suggests that the most likely immediateconsequences of Treasury's deposit insurance proposals, ifthey are ultimately adopted by Congress, will be moreinstability in the banking industry. Uninsured depositors,unsure of the soundness of the institutions in which theirdeposits are held, will move them quickly at the first signof trouble. To counter this, banks may shorten the maturityof their portfolios -- that is, make fewer commercial loans-- and (if they can) increase their capital to serve as abuffer against losses and as a source of confidence todepositors.   These results will strengthen the industry, but at a cost.Assets of shorter maturity-investment securities, for example-- are less profitable than assets of longer maturity, suchas commercial loans. Shortening the overall maturity of aportfolio will reduce earnings, making it harder to increasecapital. Similarly, selling assets to increase capital willtend both to lengthen the overall maturity of a portfolio andto increase its riskiness -- because liquid assets are moreeasily sold than commercial loans.   Meanwhile, the nervousness of depositors will drive moreand more of them out of the banking system altogether.Technology has created a new place to store cash, the moneymarket mutual fund, from which most of the benefits of a bankaccount -- liquidity, access by check and a market rate ofreturn -- can be obtained with no up-front cost.   If the depositor chooses a fund that invests solely inU.S. government securities or their equivalents, there is nosubstantial risk to the investor -- and no maximum size forhis account. Large numbers of business enterprises alreadyuse these funds for cash management purposes, and althoughbanks have been imaginative in creating cash-managementfacilities that reproduce the advantages of these funds,their success has probably depended crucially on a belief byotherwise uninsured depositors that their funds wereultimately protected by the government's unspoken butfrequently invoked &quot;too big to fail&quot; policy. Since theTreasury proposal seeks to narrow the scope of that policy,Treasury's success is likely to portend a substantial outflowof funds from the banking system.   This is not necessarily bad. The banking industry todaysuffers from substantial overcapacity -- a conditionfrequently described by banking regulators as &quot;too much moneychasing too few good banking assets.&quot; This overcapacity mustbe wrung out of the system, and this cannot be done, simplyby encouraging mergers and consolidations. Mergers willcreate fewer and arguably more efficient, profitable anddiversified institutions, but they will not appreciablyreduce the amount banks can lend at current capital ratios.Reducing capacity will require that banks actually be closedand their assets sold off to balance sheets outside thebanking industry.   Treasury's proposal, by encouraging funds to leave thebanking system and increasing the cost to banks (through riskpremiums) of those that remain, will vastly accelerate thisprocess. In other words, it appears that Treasury's consciousor unconscious policy for reducing overcapacity in thebanking industry is to strangle the weak sisters. TheTreasury report does not, however, provide for the inevitableoutcome of this policy: an increased number of costly bankfailures.   That will be expensive, because the Bank Insurance Fund --the fund supported by bank deposit insurance premiums -- isnow at historic lows. As weaker institutions fail in thefuture's more competitive environment, the cost of theirfailure will be borne by the survivors. Without taxpayerintervention, these survivors will themselves be weakened bythe cost of bailing out the failures, leading to yet morefailures. The downward spiral thus created will reduce thebanking industry's overcapacity, but at considerable cost tothe economy and perhaps the taxpayers.   If we are indeed to prepare for a sharp reduction inovercapacity, and if it is to be done through a culling ofthe weak, 'twere best it were done quickly. History and whatlittle we know of human nature suggest that as weak bankmanagements struggle to survive they will reach for morerisky investments to pay for their more costly funds, obscurefrom examiners the dangerous condition of the enterprise,appeal to their elected representatives as needy constituentsand surrender only when all hope is gone. Similarly,regulators attuned to the necessities of congressionalrelations, and no more willing than other human beings to putother people out of work, will forebear until the deathrattle is clearly audible. The consequence will besignificantly increased costs.   What is absent from the Treasury report is any plan toaddress this outcome or any suggestion of a triage mechanism-- a way of separating, quickly, the healthy institutionswith prospects for survival from those that are unlikely tomake the grade. For the Sandamp;L industry, Congress prescribed aminimum capitalization as the entry fee to the future, andgave the struggling members of the industry some time toraise this stake. The same thing might be tried for thebanking industry, although the results in the thrift industrywere unsatisfactory.   A better way might be private insurance, in whichassociations or syndicates of banks would guarantee some orall the deposits in other banks. The premium for thiscoverage varies according to risk. If all large banks wererequired to obtain this coverage, and no large depositoryinstitution were permitted to operate without it, the marketwould determine whether a bank was strong enough to survivein the competitive environment of the future. If the privatemarket will not take the risk of guaranteeing a particularbank's survival, there is very little reason for thetaxpayers to do so.   Treasury chose not to go this way in its report, but thequestion remains,  if the U.S. banking system is to be culledof its weaker members through increased depositor discipline,how will the costs of this process to the banking industry --and the economy as a whole -- be minimized?   ---   Mr. Wallison, White House and Treasury counsel during theReagan administration, is an attorney in Washington.</TEXT></DOC>