<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900731-0108</DOCNO><DOCID>900731-0108.</DOCID><HL>   Right to Die: Living Wills Are Inadequate   ----   By Bernard D. Davis</HL><DATE>07/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   Fifteen years ago a group of faculty and students atHarvard Medical School tried to formulate a model &quot;livingwill,&quot; although we knew that it would not be legally binding;we could only hope that it might provide support forsympathetic physicians. The recent Supreme Court decision inthe Cruzan case, confirming the legal force of such adocument, is a real step forward.   Nevertheless, the decision was disappointing. The minority(four justices) felt that the court should provide leadershipin dealing with the agony and the bankruptcy that heroicmedical treatment of such hopeless cases is forcing onthousands of families. The majority (five justices), however,focused on the constitutional aspects of the case, and itupheld Missouri's right to require &quot;clear and convincing&quot;evidence that the patient would have wished life support tobe terminated. At the same time, these justices wereevidently not altogether happy with the consequence of theirdecision, for they expressed sympathy with the family'sposition, and they saw no constitutional barrier to futurestate laws that would accept less formal evidence thanMissouri now requires.</LP><TEXT>   Meanwhile, any who wish to avoid unwanted life supportwill have to express the preference in advance, though therequirement may be less formal in some states than in others.The safest solution is a living will. But this mechanism isunfortunately unlikely to be widely used outside a small,highly educated fraction of the population. Moreover, even inthis group young people are the least likely to take formalsteps in anticipation of possible major brain damage,although they are the ones most often involved in automobileaccidents. Even if we enlarge the coverage by moving towardaccepting less formal evidence, as the court expects, themajority of cases might still end up in the same situation asNancy Cruzan today.   We will therefore no doubt encounter increasing pressureto find a more general solution. I would suggest that thereis one. Since by now essentially everyone is aware of theproblem, it would not be difficult to get a meaningfulestimate, in a survey or a referendum, of public attitudestoward prolonged support of bodily life in clear cases ofirreversible loss of mental life. I suspect the fractionopposed to such support would be very large. If so,legislators and the courts would be justified inreconsidering the current assumption: that in the absence ofa prior expression of individual preference we must presumean interest of the individual, or the state, in continuinglife support, even with irreversible loss of consciousness.   As an alternative to this presumption, we might decidethat in such extreme cases evidence of a prior request shouldno longer be required for the termination of support. Themedical profession would then have the power, when the familyagrees, to remove such support. To ensure that this gravedecision be made responsibly we would need safeguards. Also,some people would no doubt wish, for religious reasons orfrom mistrust of medical predictions, to have their bodieskept alive as long as possible under any circumstances. Theirdesire should be respected. However, the burden ofdemonstrating a preference would now be shifted to thatgroup.   Permanent coma is one end of a wide range of impairmentsthat render people incompetent to express their wishes. Amongthe less extreme cases, in which the individual retains somedegree of consciousness, one would not presume, in theabsence of a prior statement, an individual preference fortermination. This decision would continue to depend on priorexpression of that preference, or on appointment of asurrogate to make the decision. But irreversible coma is soclearly definable, as a special class, that it could be givenspecial treatment without starting on a slippery legal slope.   This suggestion is not a radical response to a familiarproblem but a reasonable response to radical changes inmedical technology, and to growing public awareness of theproblems that these changes create. In an earlier time thelaw naturally had a strong presumption in favor of sustainingthe body as long as possible, built on the feeling that whilethere's life there's hope. Today, however, both aspects ofthe problem have changed a great deal: We not only havetechniques for keeping the unconscious body alive for yearsrather than days, but we also have much more reliabletechniques for assessing the extent and the irreversibilityof brain damage.   In addition, the issue is a substantial part of a broaderset of problems that are increasingly gaining publicattention. Among our medical expenditures (12% of the grossnational product) is a large fraction devoted to prolongedterminal care. The benefits are often exceedingly dubiouswhile the emotional and other costs are enormous -- and theproblem continues to grow. We will eventually have to come togrips with it. And with respect to the moral aspects ofdeciding how much, and by what mechanism, to limit medicalcare, irreversible coma may be the simplest case that we willhave to face.   When I attended medical school, in the 1930s, physiciansnot only had much less power than now to keep terminally illbodies alive, but they also were allowed much more discretionin the use of the powers that they had. The inevitability ofdeath was more readily accepted.   Today we see large changes -- not only in medicaltechnology, but also in social attitudes, as reflected in theestablishment of committees to govern the use of humansubjects in medical research. And just as these committeeshave been very effective, there is little reason to doubtthat placing decisions about the irreversible step ofterminating life support in the hands of such a committee,rather than in those of the individual physician, would leadto more reliable evaluation and greater public confidence.The alternative, to maintain a conservative attitude and denythe medical profession and the family all discretion in thismatter, harms the interests of all who are involved.   ---   Dr. Davis is a professor emeritus at Harvard MedicalSchool.</TEXT></DOC>