<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910212-0149</DOCNO><DOCID>910212-0149.</DOCID><HL>   Taking Advantage:   Some Pose as Members   Of Minority Groups   To Promote Careers   ---   San Francisco's Firefighters   Trade Misconduct Charges   Over Affirmative Action   ---   Capt. Peter Roybal's `Mission'   ----   By Charles McCoy   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><LP>   SAN FRANCISCO -- A three-alarm scandal is smoldering inthe San Francisco Fire Department, thanks to somethingfirefighter Peter Roybal overheard last summer in the men'sroom of a downtown Holiday Inn. &quot;It was my duty,&quot; he says,&quot;to sound the alarm.&quot;   He and other captains in the department were taking anexam that day to qualify for promotions. The gossip he heardduring a bathroom break caused Capt. Roybal, a U.S. citizenof Mexican ancestry, to open an investigation seeking toexpose firefighters who pose as members of minority groups sothey can take advantage of affirmative-action programs. Toremedy a history of discrimination in the city's firedepartment, preference is given in hiring and promotion tocertain Hispanics, blacks, Asians and women.</LP><TEXT>   So far, one of the men Capt. Roybal is after -- Capt.Thomas Santoro -- has officially been found by the city'sCivil Service Commission to be an Italian-Americanmasquerading as a Mexican-American. He disputes that ruling,but he may yet face criminal charges if a departmentinvestigation concludes that he fraudulently representedhimself as Hispanic to climb the career ladder. Capt. Roybalhas challenged fellow firefighters to prove their ethnicitybefore the commission, and he says he has a long list ofimpostors he intends to unmask.   To the dismay of even some of his sympathizers, he wants aseparate review board created to rule on who is entitled tobenefits based on minority status and who is not. To some,that smacks of the Inquisition, but Capt. Roybal is unfazed.&quot;I've been on a mission,&quot; he says.   Capt. Roybal's motives and tactics have been questioned,particularly since his own chances of advancement mightimprove if others are disqualified. (Nobody has yet beenpromoted on the basis of last summer's exam.) But his&quot;mission&quot; has definitely illuminated some waysaffirmativeaction programs can be abused.   Among the questions the firefighter's inquiry has raised:Is a Spanish-American entitled to benefits available toMexican-Americans? Is a man born in Macao in the Far East toa Portuguese family eligible for affirmative-action benefits?Is a subscription to a Spanish-language magazine strongevidence that a man is Hispanic? These are not hypotheticalquestions but pertain to actual cases here.   &quot;The situation borders on the absurd,&quot; says Viki Macklin,the fire department's human-resources manager, but, she adds,&quot;some of these issues are quite serious.&quot;   San Francisco isn't the first city in which people havepretended to be minority-group members in order to get ahead,or, for that matter, passed as white to avoid the racialdiscrimination suffered by blacks. In 1988, white,Irish-American twins were drummed out of the Boston FireDepartment after officials discovered they had representedthemselves as black when they joined the department 10 yearsbefore.   A subsequent investigation found two other cases ofminority poseurs in Boston's fire department. Impostors havealso been uncovered in programs aimed at steering governmentcontracts to minority groups, and there have been similarcases in private business, though companies are reluctant totalk about them. &quot;It's like any other form of resumepadding,&quot; says Burke Stinson, spokesman for employment issuesfor American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., a pioneer inaffirmative-action programs. &quot;Phony Ph.D.s litter the wallsof America. Unless something arises to make you scrutinize itclosely, how would you know?&quot;   The objective of affirmative-action programs, of course,is to redress past discrimination by hiring or promotingmembers of protected minority groups, even if it meanspassing over white counterparts who scored higher on tests orperformance ratings. The programs began sprouting inbusiness, government and academia in the 1960s. They varywidely -- some agencies in the same cities even differ on whoshould get protection -- but the basic concept of givingminority groups an edge has been upheld by the Supreme Court.   Even critics of affirmative action generally regard itsgoals as worthwhile, but government vagueness and someformidable illogic make affirmative-action programsfraud-ready. Federal guidelines spell out broad categories.Whites, for instance, are &quot;all persons having origins in anyof the original peoples of Europe, North Africa or the MiddleEast.&quot;   But Spaniards, a mainly white original people of Europe,do receive minority protection. Portuguese, Spain'sneighbors, don't get protection. Nor do Italians. Butcitizens of South American lineage, many of whom are directlydescended from white European immigrants, are protected.Except for non-black Brazilians; they aren't protected.   Definitions are meant to be loose, partly to avoid thesort of pseudo-scientific reckoning found in South Africanapartheid laws -- or in the Jim Crow laws of the old South.But the guidelines don't require substantiation of claims, sopeople who want to be considered minority-group members needdo nothing more than say so.   The San Francisco flap reflects the problems. The city'spolice department once considered American Indians aprotected minority group but gave up on that after uncoveringa flood of bogus claims to Indian ancestry by white officers.The fire department never considered Indians a minority groupeligible for special treatment. Federal guidelines do.   The police and fire departments here are under separatecourt-sanctioned affirmative-action programs that aresupposed to end decades-long discriminatory hiring policies.The fire department's program has increased minorityrepresentation. For example, the department now has 84Hispanic firefighters, up from 66 before the program wentinto effect in 1987.   But Capt. Roybal and his supporters allege that withaffirmative action has come affirmative-action fraud. RodrigoIzquierdo, a 17-year department veteran who was born poor inMexico, says that a few years ago, several white firementried to list themselves as black. They didn't get far, andLt. Izquierdo says their actions partly were meant to mockblack firefighters' insistence on equal treatment.   A more recent case involves Alberto Da Cunha, a 23-yearveteran and a captain in the department's training division.Capt. Da Cunha was born of white Portuguese parents in thePortuguese colony of Macao. In 1988, he applied to have hisethnic status switched to Asian, though he had never claimedto be anything other than Portuguese and says so. (He is aU.S. citizen.) His application sailed though departmentchannels but was later rejected by the civil servicecommission. Capt. Da Cunha today says he didn't try to switchdesignations to win easier advancement, but he does say: &quot;Atthe time, there were few minorities at the top. . . . Ifigured I'd let somebody else decide if I was a minority ornot.&quot; He says he was encouraged by peers and superiors, whoobserved that for him to be listed as a member of a minoritygroup would &quot;make the ethnic balance of the captains lookbetter.&quot;   Another case that galls certain Latin-Americanfirefighters involves the move last April by LawrenceGiovacchini, a lieutenant with 17 years in the department, tochange his official ethnic status to Hispanic. Lt.Giovacchini can do what he did because he was able toestablish that his mother's parents both were born in Spain.But Lt. Giovacchini's father's ancestors were Italian.Hispanic firefighters complain that he is aJohnny-come-lately Hispanic. Lt. Giovacchini says that isn'tso. His family even has a subscription to Hola, a popularSpanish-language monthly, he says.   More appalling to Hispanic firefighters is Lt.Giovacchini's alleged firehouse demeanor. &quot;Larry Giovacchini,many times, to my face, has called me a `beaner,'&quot; says Capt.Roybal, citing the ethnic slur. Others volunteer themselvesas witnesses to that. &quot;All his life he calls himself a proudItalian, he calls us beaners, and suddenly he decides hewants to be a beaner himself,&quot; says Lt. Izquierdo.   Lt. Giovacchini is blunt about why he switched his ethnicstatus. &quot;If the city wants to give me an advantage for beingHispanic, fine,&quot; he says. He says he doesn't remember callingpeople &quot;beaners.&quot; And now it's official: For fire-departmentemployment purposes, he is Hispanic.   For many years, Capt. Santoro was, too. In 1974 or 1975,according to the fire department, Capt. Santoro changed hisethnic status to Hispanic. At the time, no explanation wasrequired and, so far as anyone can tell, none was requestedor tendered. Capt. Santoro made the switch without tellingeven some of his oldest friends in the department, who knewhim as an Italian-American whose father, an immigrant, hadcome to America and gone into the produce business.   It was chatter about Capt. Santoro's status as a Hispanicthat Mr. Roybal heard last summer in the men's room the daythe captains were taking the exam to qualify for battalionchief. &quot;The guys were saying, `Did you hear? Santoro islisted as Hispanic.' I thought, `Bull, this man has been aproud, loud Genoese Italian with no connection to theHispanic community,'&quot; says Mr. Roybal. &quot;I had to dosomething.&quot;   So Mr. Roybal hunted down Capt. Santoro's birthcertificate, which did indeed list his father as born inItaly. It said his mother, however, was born in Hayward,Calif., which is in the Bay Area. When fire departmentofficials asked him about that, Capt. Santoro told them thathis mother was born in Mexico. He said her birth certificatehad been lost, but he produced a baptismal certificatestating that his mother, Josephine Ann Colla, had been bornin Mexico and baptized a few days later in Hayward.   Mr. Roybal then located a birth certificate for Josephinein the musty files of the registrar's office in Sacramento,the state capital. It said she was born on July 20, 1915 --in Hayward.   Last Nov. 5, Capt. Santoro, looking dazed, stood beforethe civil-service commission's president, A. Lee Munson, whoticked off the evidence against his claims of ethnicity. WithCapt. Roybal and his supporters looking on, Capt. Santorogave his defense: The California birth certificate wasn't hismother's, he said. Perhaps another woman with a similar namewas born in Hayward that day.   The commission didn't buy that. As the meeting ended,Capt. Santoro said, &quot;I'm not sure what just happened to me.&quot;Replied a stern Mr. Munson: &quot;The {city} will amend therecords to show you as white and not Hispanic. . . . That'swhat just happened.&quot;   Capt. Santoro, through his lawyer, declines to comment onthe episode and is considering a legal challenge. He is stilla captain in the department pending an internalinvestigation, but he has been on leave lately because of aknee injury. In certain quarters of the fire department, heis now known as Tom Sancholo, cholo being Spanish slang for astereotypical low-rider Latin street dude.   A lot of people in the fire department think Capt. Roybalis out to get some Hispanics just because they scored higherthan he did on recent promotion exams. Discrediting themwould improve his chances of making battalion chief.   Capt. Roybal denies that. But he is beginning to wonderwhether his mission has been worth the trouble. Although hehas exposed Capt. Santoro, he has made little progress in hissimultaneous effort to get the department to stop givingpreferential treatment to people whose ancestors came fromSpain. Mr. Roybal doesn't feel they have known thediscrimination and hardship he and others of Latin Americanbackground have experienced.   Meanwhile, he, Lt. Izquierdo and others are trying toorganize an association to represent their interests, acounterpart to the department's Black Firefighters'Association. Progress has been held up by a dispute over whatto name the group. Mr. Roybal and his friends want to call itthe Latino Firefighters' Association. The descendants ofSpaniards are holding out for Hispanic Firefighters'Association.</TEXT></DOC>