<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911107-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>911107-0116.</DOCID><HL>   Fatal Flaws:   Artificial Heart Valves   That Fail Are Linked   To Falsified Records   ---   Pfizer Unit Evidently Marked   Cracked Parts as Repaired   When They Hadn't Been   ---   `Phantom Welder' Is Found   ----   By William M. Carley   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   PFE</CO><MS>CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)</IN><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Artificial heart valves have been a godsend for manypatients. With an artificial valve replacing a diseased one,a patient can listen to a steady &quot;click-click,&quot; assured thata tiny disk is opening and shutting to regulate blood flow.   For some, however, the clicking has stopped. In some ofPfizer Inc.'s valves, a wire strut holding the tiny disk inplace has fractured or broken off. With the disk floatingfree, blood floods unregulated through the heart. Of 86,000Pfizer &quot;C-C&quot; valves implanted in patients, about 450 havefractured so far, leading to nearly 300 deaths.</LP><TEXT>   The mounting toll has triggered sharp criticism of thecompany at congressional hearings and in the media.Allegations have included sloppy manufacturing and failure tofully inform the Food and Drug Administration about theproblems -- charges Pfizer has vigorously denied.   Now, the tale has taken an ominous new twist, a twist thatmay at least partly solve the mystery of why some valvesfracture. Interviews with former Pfizer workers andexamination of internal Pfizer documents indicate thatmanufacturing records for many valves were falsified.Critical work on these valves -- work recorded as having beendone -- apparently never was.   One example involves a &quot;phantom welder&quot; who worked forShiley Inc., the Pfizer subsidiary that made the valves.During manufacturing, the wire struts welded to the valvessometimes developed cracks, which then required rewelding.Employee No. 2832, according to Pfizer/Shiley records,supposedly rewelded nearly 1,900 valves. But, it turns out,this worker had quit the company months before these valveswere made. Even when he did work at Shiley, he says in aninterview, he never welded valves.   Falsifying work records apparently wasn't uncommon on theshop floor at Shiley's plant at Irvine, Calif. In a memo tohis boss, one Shiley supervisor wrote that according topractice, &quot;even though no rewelding occurs, the {worker}signs off the {record} as if it were rewelded.&quot; Obviouslyconcerned, the supervisor added in his memo: &quot;I think we arehiding our worst defect.&quot;   Why workers might falsely certify that work was completedisn't known for sure, although pressure to meet productiongoals apparently played a role. However, some valves withfalsified paper work clearly pose a threat. Most fracturesoccur in large valves. Fractures in 500 large valvessupposedly rewelded by employee 2832 are 12 times more commonthan in ordinary C-C valves. So far, 32 of the 500 valveshave fractured; 20 people have died.   Citing the high risk, the FDA has ordered Shiley to warnpatients with these valves, and most have been. It isn'tfeasible to remove intact valves because the open-heartsurgery involved is thought riskier than leaving them in. Butpatients can be warned that if they suffer strut-fracturesymptoms -- shortness of breath, chest pain, falling bloodpressure and shock -- they should immediately have the brokenvalve replaced.   Pfizer declines to provide details about the falsifiedrecords, although it has acknowledged problems with employeeNo. 2832's paper work. The company has launched aninvestigation and interviewed nearly 80 current and formeremployees in an effort to pin down what happened. But Pfizerexecutives apparently are still baffled. &quot;We do not yet knowall the facts surrounding the . . . records, which were madea decade ago,&quot; the company says in a written statement.   In the statement, Pfizer also argues that the C-C valve'sstrut-fracture problem is diminished by the valve's tendencyto reduce other fatal side effects, especially blood clots.Pfizer pulled the C-C valve off the market in 1986 onlybecause of adverse publicity, the company has said. More than54,000 of the valves are still in patients' hearts -- and 30to 40 a year are breaking.   Shiley was a pioneer in artificial valves, beginningmanufacture in 1965 and developing a reputation for quality.Shiley, like other manufacturers, has made heart-valve modelsthat have never fractured. In 1979, its founder, DonaldShiley, and other investors sold the company to Pfizer.   Shiley began developing a new valve in the late 1970s. Thedevice consists of a metal ring through which blood flows,and, protruding from the ring, two wire struts that hold atiny disk in place. Set in motion by the natural flow ofblood through the heart, the disk tilts up and down withinthe struts, opening and closing.   It was hoped that the shape of the disk -- convex on oneside, concave on the other -- would allow better blood flowthan other models did and thus help reduce blood clots. Thenew product, because of the disk's convex-concave shape, wasdubbed the &quot;C-C&quot; valve and was approved for sale by the FDAin 1979.   It was an instant hit with surgeons, who hoped to avoidblood clots in patients. In the early 1980s, Shiley raisedproduction from 100 C-C valves a week to 200 and then tonearly 400. Some work went from two shifts a day to three --around the clock. By 1981, Shiley was supplying more thanhalf the artificial heart valves in the world.   But making the new valve was tricky. Many of Shiley'sproduction workers were Mexican or Vietnamese immigrants whospoke only broken English. &quot;I became the unofficialtranslator&quot; for job instructions, one Mexican-American workersays. Some workers, in their early 20s, had scant jobexperience; one welder had been a dishwasher.   Yet each valve was hand-built, &quot;like a Rolls-Royce,&quot; saysLarry Gendreau, a former employee. One strut had to be weldedto the valve's metal ring at a much sharper angle than in theearlier model. Then, the wire strut had to be bent up anddown, sometimes repeatedly, to insert the disk. Finally, anyscratches had to be polished off to let blood flow throughsmoothly.   However, frequently bending the strut could crack it. Orsometimes the weld was faulty, leaving a crack. Inspectorssent such valves back to be rewelded.   But were they?   For years, most people thought so. Indications thatsomething was amiss emerged only last year in Houston federalcourt, in one of scores of lawsuits filed in variousjurisdictions over fracturing valves. In Houston, JohnJohnson, a lawyer suing Pfizer, began examining themanufacturing process and encountered a &quot;baggie&quot; card. Abaggie was a small bag used to hold a valve as it movedaround the plant; attached was a card recording dates andmanufacturing operations performed, including, on this card,rewelding signed off by employee No. 2832.   Who, Mr. Johnson asked Pfizer, was No. 2832?   He was Manuel Vizcarra, Pfizer found. To its surprise, thecompany also found that Mr. Vizcarra had quit Shiley sixmonths before the valve had been manufactured. That touchedoff a broader investigation by Pfizer, which eventually foundthat Mr. Vizcarra's number had been signed off for work on1,900 valves produced after he had left the company.   Dubbed the &quot;phantom welder,&quot; Mr. Vizcarra now works atrepairing soft-drink machines. Interviewed in Visalia,Calif., where he lives, he confirms he never rewelded those1,900 valves. In fact, he didn't weld any valves while atShiley because, he says, &quot;I was a polisher.&quot; His job was topolish off surface scratches.   Mr. Vizcarra adds that while at Shiley, in 1980 and 1981,he learned that data on the baggie cards were beingfalsified. &quot;We knew each other's numbers,&quot; he says, &quot;and I'dpick up a baggie and say, `What's this?' because I knew thisguy {indicated by the number} had nothing to do with theoperation&quot; supposedly performed on the valve. Mr. Vizcarra,then about 21 years old, says he didn't question thepractice. &quot;I just thought it was strange.&quot;   After the first discovery of falsified employee numbers,lawyers suing Pfizer began matching up baggie cards withemployees' time cards. One attorney says he has found scoresof valves supposedly worked on by employees who were out sickor on vacation on those days.   Why were records being falsified?   Rewelding valves was risky. It might work, but the jobrequired even more heat, which often melted down the metalcomponents and ruined the valve. Harvey Hilman, a formerShiley welder, says rewelding was &quot;hardly ever successful.&quot;   Whether a valve needed rewelding at all was often debatedon the shop floor. A blemish might be just a surface scratchthat could be polished off rather than a microscopic crackthat could grow into a fracture. &quot;The controversy {amongproduction workers} always was, was it a surface scratch or adeep crack?&quot; Mr. Gendreau says. In his job providingmanufacturing support such as tools and technical advice, theformer Shiley employee worked closely with the productionworkers.   Mr. Gendreau now believes that some production workers,&quot;under a great deal of pressure to get product out the door,&quot;polished over cracks rather than put valves through a chancyrewelding. Another worker's number might be entered forrewelding never done, he suggests.   George Sherry, another former manufacturing supportworker, says that by polishing over cracks, &quot;You're justsmearing metal around {and} you hide the cracks.&quot; That, hesays, could enable a valve to pass subsequent inspections. Atthe time, he adds, &quot;no one realized what was happening; theywere fooling themselves.&quot;   An internal Shiley memo confirms that cracks were polishedover and the records falsified -- and the memo raises a redflag over the practice. In March 1982, Bob Herman, asupervisor, wrote a memo to his boss, Ron Pate. Thehandwritten memo, titled &quot;Cracks/Rework,&quot; stated: &quot;Under ourcurrent rework process, most of our cracks are not reweldedbut polished or blended. Even though no rewelding occurs, thepolishing lead{er} signs off the baggie as if it wererewelded. I think we should only be signing off operationsactually performed. Secondly, if QC {quality control} isidentifying valid cracks, then polishing is merely anappearance Band-Aid. I think we are hiding our most seriousdefect.&quot;   What was done as a result of this memo, if anything, isn'tknown. In its investigation, Pfizer interviewed Messrs.Herman and Pate. Both now say they can't recall the memo.   Despite the memo, few within the company knew that anyrecords were being falsified, several former workers say. Andin the frantic hunt for the cause of the fracturing valves,Shiley scientists were focusing on rewelding for anotherreason. The metal alloy that was being used for valve strutsapparently was unsuitable for rewelding. Thus, ironically,even if rewelding was done, the valve still might fracture.   Discovery of this problem, also disclosed in the Houstoncourt recently, didn't come easy. As production was climbingin the early 1980s, so were reports of valve fractures, whichjumped from three in 1980 to 66 in 1984. &quot;Reports werepouring in, there wasn't any logical explanation for thefractures, and it was driving us crazy,&quot; a former Shileymanager says.   Shiley hired outside consultants, set up its own taskforce, studied every step of the manufacturing process andchanged some procedures, all to no avail. Then Nancy Willcox,a Shiley employee, found that valves produced betweenFebruary 1981 and March 1982 had a much higher failure ratethan earlier valves. Shiley recalled these valves. Ms.Willcox suspected that rewelding might be the problem, andshe uncovered a clue by telephoning Cabot Corp., whichsupplied Shiley with the metal alloy used in valve struts.The conversation, according to a plaintiff's memorandum inthe Houston court records, went like this:   Ms. Willcox: &quot;If we weld a heart valve and the guy says .. . `I see a small crack, I'm going to hit it again with atorch,' is that an acceptable practice?&quot;   A Cabot official: &quot;We don't normally recommend welding{again}. . . . We don't normally advise people to do that atall.&quot;   Ms. Willcox: &quot;Does it just fool you, you think it's {beenfixed}, but it really hasn't?&quot;   Cabot official: &quot;Well, yeah.&quot;   Following this and other metallurgical studies, Ms.Willcox recommended against rewelding. About the same time,two more valves fractured in quick succession only days afterthey had been implanted in patients. Baggie cards indicatedthat both of the valves had been rewelded, one of them twice.In mid-1983, Shiley halted all rewelding; from then on, anyvalves with cracks were junked. In addition, Shiley reducedthe angle of the outlet strut, making the initial weld of thestrut to the metal ring an easier job.   How could faulty valves have passed Shiley's inspections?   Polishing over cracks might help conceal them, but equallyimportant was the tough job facing inspectors. &quot;They spentall day peering through a microscope at reflective {metal}surfaces which made it hard to see, looking for tiny,hairline cracks,&quot; a former manager says. A June 1984 internalmemo written by Richard Longemann, a member of Shiley's taskforce on valve fractures, also voiced concern. &quot;QC inspectorsare required to inspect a given number of valves per hour,&quot;he wrote. &quot;As a result, the inspector often has to hurry andmay not notice defects. . . . The eye strain that developsover the course of a work turn improves the probability ofmissed defects.&quot;   Pfizer now contends that the rapid buildup of C-C valveproduction was partly offset by a decline in making an oldermodel, easing strains on manufacturing operations. It alsocontends that the attention paid to rewelding has beenoverdone. The company says it eventually found that the majorreason for fractures has been abnormal closure of the disk,causing it to strike the tip of one strut with unusual force.The repeated striking would produce metal fatigue andeventually break the strut. As proof of its theory, Pfizersays that in early 1984, it made some changes in the valve toavoid abnormal disk closure and that not one valve producedafter that has fractured.   Other observers, including a former Shiley scientist, citethe additional problems as well: the hard-to-weld angle ofthe strut; the rapid production increase; strut wireapparently unsuitable for rewelding; and the failure to dosome rewelding. The FDA has taken the position that nospecific cause of fractures has been proved.   Pfizer, meanwhile, has contracted with Medic Alert, ofTurlock, Calif., to provide information to valve patients. Italso has been trying to solve the mystery of the falsifiedrecords, with meager results. Many of the 80 employeesinterviewed say they don't know, can't remember or giveconflicting accounts. Pfizer found one former worker who saysthat, concerned about production goals and reweldingproblems, he merely polished over cracks. But he says thenumbers he falsely entered for rewelding weren't the phantomwelder's number. He says he used other numbers.   Pfizer hired a handwriting expert to identify who wroteMr. Vizcarra's number on baggie cards, but the expert didn'thave enough evidence to reach firm conclusions. The experttentatively fingered one former employee. When Pfizerinterviewed the person, he denied making any of the entries.   A Pfizer attorney, referring to one valve supposedlyrewelded by No. 2832, displayed his frustration during ahearing in the Houston lawsuit last year. &quot;As I sit heretoday,&quot; the attorney said, &quot;I still don't know who reweldedthe valve.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>