<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910930-0094</DOCNO><DOCID>910930-0094.</DOCID><HL>   Slimming Down:   Bush's Arms Initiative   Stirs Talk in Congress   Of Slashing Defense   ---   Cutting Back Nuclear Arsenal   Makes It Harder to Justify   B-2 and Other Weapons   ---   A Gamble for the President   ----   By Andy Pasztor and Michel McQueen   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   NOC</CO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- When President Bush announced Friday that hewants to scrap a big chunk of the nation's nuclearcapability, he took one of the boldest steps yet towardvastly transforming the arms race. But while the move is goodnews for world peace, and has been embraced by the SovietUnion and other nations, it remains a big political gamble athome -- one that could easily backfire.   By deciding to remove short-range missiles from Europe andend the military's 24-hour air alert for nuclear war, Mr.Bush is hoping the Soviets will follow suit and stand down aneven larger part of their nuclear capability. At the sametime, he's hoping his initiative will wrest the momentum fromcongressional budget-cutters keen on slashing defensespending and will let him protect defense programs heconsiders crucial in the post-Cold War era.</LP><TEXT>   But by underscoring that the old philosophy of Cold Wardeterrence may now be a relic, President Bush may have openedthe door to a wave of military spending cuts by Congress thatcould easily surpass his worst expectations -- eliminatingsome of his cherished programs in the process.   This weekend, Democratic lawmakers were already sharpeningtheir budget ax, sensing the best opportunity in 50 years toslash defense. Even Sen. Sam Nunn, the usually circumspectGeorgia Democrat whose voice on military issues carries thegreatest weight on Capitol Hill, sees a battle shaping up.Appearing on the CBS News program Face the Nation yesterday,he indicated that the president &quot;might not have taken intoaccount&quot; the escalating pressures driving lawmakers to cutmilitary spending. When the political fireworks are over,Sen. Nunn predicts, &quot;there will be some savings come out ofthis.&quot;   The president's nuclear weapons cutbacks are &quot;validatingwhat an awful lot of us are saying,&quot; said Rep. Pat Schroeder,a Colorado Democrat, &quot;that there is good news and we cancapitalize on it, and it's stupid to cling to a budget thatwas written when the world looked very different.&quot;   Even before the president moved to reduce nuclearweaponry, public opinion was already shifting heavily in thatdirection. Of the voters polled in a survey by The WallStreet Journal and NBC News, 41% agreed that defense spendingcould be halved by the year 2000.   At the very least, the Pentagon's $291 billion spendingplan for fiscal 1992 undoubtedly will undergo some seriousrevamping. And when lawmakers begin debating the next year'sbudget -- in the middle of a presidential campaign that isincreasingly focusing on the tension between foreign anddomestic concerns -- the White House is likely to facebipartisan demands for deeper cuts.   &quot;I think it {President Bush's arms initiative} is badlytimed,&quot; said Sen. Malcolm Wallop, a Wyoming Republican on theArmed Services Committee, who believes the pressure willincrease for broader cuts.   Even the entire five-year federal spending plan that theadministration and Congress worked out last year could comeundone. One administration official sees some potential in aproposal by Sen. Phil Gramm, a Texas Republican, that woulddivide Pentagon savings between a possible tax cut forindividuals and a reduction in the federal deficit. Suchtalk, repeated in both Republican and Democratic camps, couldlay the groundwork for an electionyear tax bill.   Among the likely Pentagon casualties:   -- The beleaguered B-2 stealth bomber, which had been on adeathwatch even before Mr. Bush's speech.   -- The Navy's plan to deploy a fleet of super-quietSeawolf attack submarines, each of which costs $2 billion.Even such staunch Republican hawks as Sen. John McCain ofArizona concede that only two or three of the behemoths willever be built.   -- Star Wars. Only a few weeks ago the Pentagon's plan todeploy a limited antimissile defense system, or StrategicDefense Initiative, by 1996 was gaining momentum. Mr. Bushrepeatedly threatened to veto any defense bill that axed thisitem. But now -- with the White House publicly calling forthe Soviet Union and other missile-producing countries tostart negotiations to control the spread of such weapons --House Democrats especially are expected to dig in their heelsagainst SDI. And Sen. Nunn said that proponents &quot;are notgoing to have the leverage&quot; to carry the day.   There's more. Several multibillion-dollar weapons programsnow gearing up for full-scale production -- for instance, theAir Force's C-17 cargo plane and its new generation F-22fighter -- could be delayed, with total purchases cutsubstantially over the next few years, according to lawmakersand industry planners.   The biggest single source of savings, if lawmakers gettheir way, would involve quickly pulling back from Germany,South Korea and elsewhere tens of thousands of troops --soldiers the Pentagon wants to keep abroad for the next fewyears.   The nation's top military brass has worried for weeks thatthe very step taken by Mr. Bush on Friday could start anunstoppable chain of events. Immediately after the failedSoviet coup, Mr. Bush, vacationing in Maine, instructedofficials to begin drafting a new round of arms-controlproposals. But according to military officials, DefenseSecretary Dick Cheney and the Joint Chiefs of Staff initiallymade recommendations much less sweeping than those thepresident finally announced.   For instance, the initial recommendations, officials said,didn't call for eliminating most land-based, short-rangenuclear weapons. But Mr. Bush, who wanted to announceextensive unilateral cutbacks, held firm.   As a result, foreign leaders from Soviet President MikhailGorbachev to German Chancellor Helmut Kohl over the weekendembraced Mr. Bush's decision to destroy or withdraw some3,000 short-range nuclear weapons, while removing fromhairtrigger alert status hundreds of front-line Air Forcemissile and bomber crews.   Although the Soviets, too, reacted enthusiastically toPresident Bush's proposals, they will treat them as only thefirst step in a new round of arms-control negotiations. Andthe bargaining could be tough. In the short term, the U.S. ischallenging Kremlin leaders to eliminate nearly fourshort-range nuclear warheads for each one the U.S. removes.And Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs,acknowledges that many of the weapons the U.S. is phasing outare vintage models which can easily be replaced withsophisticated nonnuclear versions.   Indeed, the Soviets, as well as Congress, may now see anopening to push for even deeper cuts. The Kremlin'sshellshocked new leadership could decide to up the ante,pushing for broader cuts to regain the political andpublic-relations advantage. Some Pentagon officials worrythat such a scenario would, in turn, only increase thecongressional hunger for hefty defense cuts. Mr. Bush'sstrategy &quot;is a tremendous gamble,&quot; former high-rankingDefense Department official Richard Perle told reporters overthe weekend.   The White House's eagerness to quickly win Sovietparticipation in unprecedented nuclear-arms reductions --without resorting to formal negotiations, if possible --reflects heightened U.S. concern about the stability of theKremlin's central government. Some administration officialsalso want to increase the pressure to get Soviet concessionsby linking the disarmament issue to Soviet requests forWestern aid.   Secretary Cheney insisted that the timing of the proposaldidn't indicate &quot;any sense of panic&quot; in the Bushadministration about the presence of nuclear warheads inbreakaway Soviet republics. Still, he pointedly toldreporters, &quot;The old world has changed. . . .We must act now.&quot;   As it now stands, though, Mr. Bush's proposal sacrificeslittle U.S. capability at the outset and envisions continuedheavy American reliance on nuclear-armed submarines andbombers, which now carry more than two-thirds of all U.S.warheads. The Soviets, by contrast, are being urgedeventually to gut their land-based missile systems -- theheart of their nuclear punch -- to free up money desperatelyneeded to revive their moribund economy.   But while suggesting that the proposals could help theSoviets give more attention to their domestic needs, theWhite House didn't discuss a similar swords-to-plowsharestransition in the U.S. But, Mr. Bush said, &quot;The peacedividend I seek is measured not in dollars, but in nationalsecurity.&quot;   Mr. Cheney -- who for weeks has warned reporters andlawmakers about the danger of being blinded to long-termSoviet threats by the &quot;euphoria of the moment&quot; -- echoed thepresident's assertion. In the short term, in fact, the armscutback will cost money, he said. Hundreds of millions ofdollars will be spent to safely destroy or store theantiquated tactical, or shortrange, nuclear missiles, bombs,artillery shells and depth charges that are being removedfrom U.S. forces world-wide.   As part of the overall package, the Bush administrationmoved to halt all further work on two long-range mobilemissiles -- the multiple-warhead MX and the so-calledMidgetman -- which Congress already was threatening to put onthe shelf. Mr. Bush also announced cancellation of ashort-range missile, called the SRAM-II, which some Europeanallies have suggested they probably wouldn't allow to bedeployed anyway. The short-term savings from these moves arerelatively small, but the Pentagon estimates they eventuallywill total well over $15 billion when all production,personnel and maintenance costs are added up.   That sum is clearly insufficient for many lawmakers, whowant to see a windfall in the budget. &quot;To tell the Americanpeople that we're not going to be able to save any money isunreal,&quot; fumes Rep. David Obey, who chairs a powerfulappropriations subcommittee. &quot;This is just the first roundand ought to lead to major reductions, even short term.&quot;Without being specific, the Wisconsin Democrat sayssignificant savings should be available from cuttingdevelopment and purchases of nuclear weapons not included inMr. Bush's cutbacks.   Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont, another Democrat itching toraid the Defense Department's kitty, insists that the B-2bomber and SDI research are two areas &quot;where you candemonstrate very fast and short-term savings.&quot; With respectto both programs, he says, &quot;I think the handwriting's on thewall from a congressional standpoint.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>