<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910212-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>910212-0122.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- The Gallery:   Tom Thumb's Suit and Other Wonders   ----   By Amy Gamerman</HL><DATE>02/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Baltimore -- If the admissions lady at the Peale Museumhadn't warned me to look out for it, I probably would havemissed Tom Thumb's suit. Fashioned out of brown velvet,glittering with diamante buttons, and tiny enough to fit atoddler, the suit was eclipsed by its neighbor, a modelidentified as &quot;the Englishman Daniel Lambert, famous when hedied in 1809 for weighing 739 pounds.&quot;   Both Mr. Lambert and Tom Thumb's tiny trousers seem bettersuited to a circus sideshow than to this small, statelymuseum, best known for its prints, paintings and photographsof Baltimore and for its low-key atmosphere. Here, visitorshang their coats up in the gift shop and can make local callson the office phone -- if they ask politely. Browsing throughthe small rooms of paintings and old furniture, you're likelyto hear the security guards gossiping about a local hockeygame. Shows change about once every couple of years.</LP><TEXT>   So longtime visitors are in for a surprise when theyencounter the massive fake mastodon skeleton now hanging fromchains on the museum's second floor. A wax head with ahornlike tumor curving from forehead to chin stares out froma neighboring case, alongside a pair of Persian slippers andframed silhouettes by &quot;the armless Miss Honeywell.&quot; By thetime visitors reach P.T. Barnum's &quot;Feejee Mermaid&quot; -- a tinydessicated head with two rows of pointy teeth, attached to afish's body -- in a cabinet of famous fakes, they may wonderif they're in a museum at all.   &quot;This is the most outlandish thing we've ever done,&quot; saidGusty Taler, marketing director for the Peale and five otherBaltimore City Life Museums. &quot;People weren't accustomed toseeing these sort of things in the Peale, which had areputation as staid and elegant.&quot;   But as &quot;Mermaids, Mummies and Mastodons,&quot; a quirky show ofantiquities, curiosities and fakes on view till June 1992makes clear, the outlandish was right at home in the earlyAmerican museum. And the Peale Museum, originally known asthe Baltimore Museum and Gallery of Fine Arts, was one of thefirst.   The museum biz was a Peale family affair. Charles WillsonPeale, an artist, scientist and inventor, founded thenation's first public museum on the second floor ofPhiladelphia's Independence Hall in 1785. In 1814, his son,the painter Rembrandt Peale, followed his example and openedhis own museum in Baltimore with a collection of butterflyand moth specimens, Indian artifacts, paintings, one suit ofarmor -- and the mastodon skeleton, which had been excavatedby his multitalented parent near Newburgh, N.Y., in 1801.   Despite its scholarly trappings, Peale's museum was nevershy about catering to the public's taste for entertainment.In the sky-lit room where Rembrandt Peale displayed his andother artists' paintings, a long timeline now charts how thefor-profit museum laid on everything from shadow-puppet playsto a band that played three nights a week to boost ticketsales.   Live exhibits, such as a night-blooming cactus and &quot;thelearned dog, Apollo,&quot; who performed feats of addition andsubtraction, added to the fun -- and fit the museum'seducational mission, according to show curator Richard Flint.Take Apollo.   &quot;Here was a display of animal intelligence,&quot; Mr. Flintexplained. &quot;There was a question about whether animals couldindeed add and subtract.&quot;   In a further show of its commitment to science, theBaltimore museum booked the armless Miss Honeywell, who spentthree weeks here in 1828 showing visitors how she createdsilhouettes with her teeth. And in 1829, a group of SanduskyIndians were brought in to demonstrate tribal dances and&quot;maneuvers of scalping.&quot;   Unfortunately, even the scalping Sanduskys weren't enoughto keep the Peale museum solvent. P.T. Barnum was one of astring of impresarios who ultimately took over the Baltimoremuseum in the 1840s. The collection was finally dispersed in1858. After a stint as City Hall and a slew of subsequentincarnations -- including one of the city's first schools forblacks -- Rembrandt Peale's building finally reopened as amuseum in 1931.   Now, with the obvious though regrettable exception of MissHoneywell, some of the famous and not-so famous attractionsthat once graced the two Peale museums have been reassembledin a dimly lit, curiosity-crammed room intended to evoke amuseum of the 1820s or '30s.   The room is lined with tall glass cabinets, with rows ofportraits hanging high on the walls. The gloomy lighting isintended to simulate the atmosphere of an evening visit tothe Peale, when the museum's gas lighting was an addedattraction. The windows have been tinted and low-wattagelamps hung from the ceiling. Adding to the general obscurityis the absence of identifying labels next to the exhibits:For an explanation of the mysterious objects inside eachcase, visitors must consult a mimeographed handout.   It is quite candid about identifying the exhibits thataren't completely authentic. The mastodon hangs suspendedfrom chains as did the original, but this &quot;subterraneanwonder&quot; is made of Fiberglas, not fossils. The waxwork Mr.Lambert in his ballooning waistcoat and swollen white gaiters-- a standard feature of early of museums from here to Boston-- is in fact a papier-mache copy. But the brown velvet suitdid indeed belong to Tom Thumb -- although curators aren'tsure if it's the one he actually wore to meet Queen Victoria,or the duplicate P.T. Barnum displayed in the museum in 1845.And that sarcophagus in a dim wall cabinet first appearedhere -- along with its mummified occupant -- on awhistle-stop tour in 1824, the first Egyptian mummy everbrought to the Western Hemisphere.   More authentic even than the objects themselves is thealmost haphazard way they're thrown together. A model trainkeeps company in one case with a woman's ankle ring andGeorge Washington's ceremonial blue sash (faded to the palestgreen). In another case, a hodgepodge of objects from threecontinents knock elbows, with African porridge spoons a shelfaway from Indian hunting canteens and a wooden Easter Islandidol. In a nice touch of Victorian prudery, the idol wears atiny loincloth added long ago by a cautious curator.   The room also stays true to the scientific enthusiasms ofearly museum professionals. Fragile leather books ofbutterflies and moths from the Philadelphia museum aredisplayed back-to-back with glittering mineral specimens.Just across the way, a faded and somewhat moth-eaten pinkflamingo stares balefully from a wall case of ancient stuffedbirds, 14 survivors from the Philadelphia museum collectionthat once numbered 1,600.   If the rows of paintings by the Peales and theircontemporaries -- many of which hung in the old Baltimore andPhiladelphia museums -- take a back seat to these wonders,the historically accurate bad lighting is at least partly toblame. Peering through the pseudo gas-lit gloom, you may beable to make out Charles Willson Peale's &quot;Exhumation of theMastodon,&quot; a painted document of his magnificent discovery,or James Warrell's portrait of the sword swallower, SenaSama. Mr. Sama, dressed here in a turban and jewel necklace,a long sword poised delicately between his fingers, performedin a rival Baltimore museum in 1818.   I found myself missing Mr. Sama as I made my way throughthis eccentric show. The room looks right, but it lacks thegarish finishing touches that must have made the originalPeale so much fun to visit. Where's the band and the shadowpuppets? How about a scalping demonstration? And surely,somewhere in Baltimore, there must be a learned dog.</TEXT></DOC>