<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900806-0006</DOCNO><DOCID>900806-0006.</DOCID><HL>   The Mideast Conflict:   Mexico, Canada Can't Fill   Any Gap in U.S. Oil Needs   ----   This article was prepared by   Matt Moffett in Mexico City   And John Urquhart in Canada</HL><DATE>08/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9</SO><CO>   LATAM CANDA MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   The U.S. is lucky in having two friendly, oil-producingneighbors. Too bad neither can come close to cranking outenough to make up for lost Mideast oil.   With its abundant crude reserves and close ties to theBush administration, Mexico at first glance seems like theace in the hole for the U.S. during the Iraq crisis. But lookcloser, oil analysts say, and doubts emerge about Mexico'sability to step up oil production enough to help fill thevoid left by Kuwait's fall to the Iraqis.</LP><TEXT>   Likewise, after spending billions of dollars on subsidizedoil exploration, Canadians are no longer promoting theircountry as a counterweight to the Organization of PetroleumExporting Countries. Exploration has slumped and major oildevelopment projects have been shelved or canceled as aresult of the fall in oil prices and smaller-than-expectedoil finds. Canadian oil analysts see no sign of an earlyturnaround even if the current Mideast crisis pushes up oilprices.   &quot;Canada doesn't look as promising as in the 1970s, when wewere wining and dining people from around the world withregard to Dome Petroleum Ltd. and the Beaufort Sea,&quot; says IanDoig, editor of Doig's Digest, an oil publication. DomePetroleum ran up huge debts in Arctic exploration before itwas acquired by a Canadian unit of Amoco Corp. in 1988.   Venezuela may turn out to be the best hope. Analysts sayVenezuela could relatively quickly supply an extra 700,000barrels a day -- replacing nearly half of Kuwait's dailyoutput of 1.6 million barrels. However, Venezuela hasn't yetsaid whether it plans to increase production. And there'sstill the question of filling the gap of Iraq's 2.8 millionbarrels a day of output.   To be sure, continued high prices for oil could spur U.S.oil companies to resume full-scale drilling activity inTexas. Even so, the dependence on imported oil isn't likelyto go away.   Mexico has abundant natural resources. The governmentestimates its reserves at 45 billion barrels of oil, with anadditional 21 billion barrels of condensate and dry gas.Bernardo Grossling, a petroleum geologist at the U.S.Geological Survey, says there's a good probability thatMexico's reserves are as much as 260 billion barrels. &quot;Iwould put Mexico's potential higher than Saudi Arabia's,&quot; hesays.   It's extracting those reserves that's a problem. PetroleosMexicanos S.A., the Mexican state oil monopoly, is theworld's fifth-largest oil company and supplies about 11% ofU.S. crude. About 55% of the 1.2 million barrels it exportseach day go to the U.S. But Pemex is widely considered themost inefficient operator.   &quot;My best guess is that Pemex cannot increase productiontoo much, and wouldn't be able to sustain any increase itdoes make for very long,&quot; says Benito Solis, a Mexicaneconomist and business consultant. Analysts say it would takeprofound and politically delicate changes in Mexico'snationalistic oil policy, hundreds of millions of dollars ininvestment and lots of time for the country to achieve asustained increase in output.   Since the debt crisis of 1982, Mexico's capital investmentin Pemex has shrunk by 75%, as the government has milked thestate company's coffers to meet interest payments. Mechanicalproblems stemming from neglected maintenance continuallyplague drilling rigs in the Bay of Campeche. The company'smammoth Morelos Petrochemical Complex is years behindschedule and still $1.5 billion short of being finished.Cutbacks in exploration have been so severe that Pemex lastyear drilled only about half the exploratory wells it did in1987.   Pinching Pemex from the other side is domestic demand thatis burgeoning by 7% a year, spurred by a growing populationand more vibrant economy. Consumption of gasoline has been sogreat that the government had to import 10,000 barrels ofgasoline a day in the first five months of this year.   Meanwhile, Mexico's proven reserves have declined 8% since1984 and a Pemex study says Mexico mightn't have sufficientcrude to export by 1997 if it doesn't significantly increaseproductivity.   Making Pemex more efficient would require a massiverestructuring. President Carlos Salinas de Gortari laid thegroundwork for such an overhaul last year when he arrestedthe powerful and corrupt head of the oil workers' union. Thegovernment followed up by cutting some union privileges,expanding private-sector participation in petrochemicals, andestablishing a new marketing affiliate to push Pemex into thespot market.   But investors say the government must find somelegislative formula for bringing private capital intoexploration and production. Pemex's poor reputation forefficiency makes it hard for the company to find partners.   Some say the sudden increase in oil prices will postponeneeded reforms in Pemex. For each $1-a-barrel increase in theprice of oil, Mexico's revenues jump $450 million or $500million. &quot;Increased oil revenues reduce the pressure forchange,&quot; says Mr. Solis. &quot;In the short term, it's great forthe budget.&quot;   Canada has a different set of difficulties tapping intoits large reserves, which aren't easily accessible. Industryexecutives say crude prices would have to rise sharply towarrant development of its costly far north reserves and itsbig western Canadian deposits of tar sands, a tarlike mixtureof sand, clay, water and bitumen. In the meantime, Canada'sreserves are expected to continue declining. Since 1985,production has exceeded annual additions to the reserves.   Canada's reserves of &quot;conventional&quot; crude oil areestimated at 4.2 billion barrels. Conventional crude doesn'tinclude resources in the frontier areas and the tar sandsreserves that are produced by high-cost mining operations.   If a new oil supply crisis were to occur, Canada couldn'timmediately boost its production, because it doesn't have theavailable capacity, said Hans Maciej, vice president of theCanadian Petroleum Association, an industry group. Canadaexports about 700,000 barrels of crude oil a day, most of itto the U.S. Midwest. It imports about 500,000 barrels a dayfor its eastern Canadian refineries, leaving net exports ofabout 200,000 barrels a day.   Three oil fields are due to be developed off the Canadianeast coast, but their production is expected to no more thanoffset the expected decline in output from western Canadianfields. The three fields include the Hibernia oil field offthe Newfoundland coast. Hibernia was discovered 11 years ago,but its development has been delayed by jurisdictionaldisputes and financial problems. If a final agreement onHibernia's development is reached later this month asexpected, the field would produce about 110,000 barrels ofoil a day, starting in 1996.   Bernard Picchi, oil analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc., saidthe Canadian government can no longer afford its heavysubsidies for oil exploration and development because of itsbudget deficit, expected to total 28.5 billion Canadiandollars (US$24.8 billion) this year. As a cost-savingmeasure, the government recently terminated its explorationincentives program for conventional oil drilling.   After two decades of subsidized exploration in theCanadian sector of the Beaufort Sea, drilling in the regionhas come to a halt this year for lack of interest among oilcompanies.   The prospects also don't look bright for furtherdevelopment of synthetic oil from the western Canadian heavyoil and tar sands deposits. Synthetic crude oil productionplants are &quot;extremely expensive refineries&quot; and theirconstruction could never have been undertaken withoutsubsidies, says Mr. Picchi of Salomon Brothers.</TEXT></DOC>