<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911231-0097</DOCNO><DOCID>911231-0097.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS:   An Indian Lawyer and His Ruby as Big as the Ritz   ----   By Anthony Spaeth</HL><DATE>12/31/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5</SO><LP>   Bangalore, India -- The Guinness Book of Records has itsloonies, its freaks of nature and its 5,500-pound hamburgers.But it also has gemsreal gems, huge gems-and that list is themost glittering in the book. There's the giant Star of Africadiamond, Queen Elizabeth's crown jewel, sunk in a high-techvault in the Tower of London. And there's a 136-poundflawless crystal ball on display at the SmithsonianInstitution in Washington, D.C.   The two largest star rubies in the world, according to theGuinness Book, are the Rajaratna and the Indumathi fromIndia. One of the largest double star sapphires is theNeelanjali. For years -- possibly centuries -- these threestones, and a smaller fourth stone, were disguised beneath acovering of black soot. Then, in 1983, an aging lawyer namedG. Vidyaraj found the black lumps in his parents' house,attempted to give them away and then, mildly curious, took anold toothbrush to them. Overnight, he became the owner of oneof the most stupendous gem collections in the world.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;The value of these gems is impossible to estimate,&quot; saysMr. Vidyaraj, a tall, lumbering and, these days, ailing man.&quot;Literally, they're priceless. Some people say I am therichest person in the world.&quot;   It's one of those amazing fairy tales that seems onlypossible in India -- the homeland of Queen Elizabeth'sKohinoor, another crown jewel -- but one with a bittersweetending. Seven years after his find, Mr. Vidyaraj has hisrubies, his sapphire and his three entries in the GuinnessBook. Otherwise, he's gotten nothing. He's reluctant to sellthe gems, wondering if anyone can afford such treasures. Heand his wife live on a stipend sent by his engineer son, wholives in Washington, D.C. He's bitter that his own countryhas shown no interest in the collection. And he constantlyworries about robbers and kidnappers. Threats come throughthe mail and by phone; the local police are frequentlydispatched to guard his modest, first-floor rental apartmentin this southern Indian city.   Mr. Vidyaraj is a distinguished man, with precise,lawyerly speech, an impeccable double-breasted suit andstarchy, white hair. He is a direct descendant of theVijayanagara kings, who controlled much of south India fromthe 14th to 16th centuries. History recalls the strongestking, Krishna Deva Raya (1509-30), as an early advocate offree trade. He imported velvets and damasks from Aden andChina, horses from Arabia, elephants from Ceylon, gold,silver -- and precious gems. Presumably, this solves theessential mystery of Mr. Vidyaraj's gems: They were courtjewels, or the spoils of the Vijayanagara era, which someoneprotectively blackened against invasion or plunder. How,when? Mr. Vidyaraj doesn't have a clue. All he knows is thathis parents inherited the four black lumps, which they keptin the family &quot;puja&quot;, or offering, room. They considered themsacred, not invaluable.   &quot;I remember my father worshipping them,&quot; says Mr.Vidyaraj, &quot;and singing songs in praise of Shiva {a majorHindu god}.&quot; His parents died in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1982he cleaned out the family house and brought the sacred stonesto his cramped apartment here, storing them in a cupboard.The next year he and his wife tried to donate them to atemple, but the donation got caught in India's infamous redtape. Driving home from the temple, he examined the blacklumps for the first time. He wondered aloud whether theymight contain gold. His wife, Indumathi, reacted with horror.She said it would be sacrilege to melt them down and insistedthey be donated to another temple as soon as possible.   But Mr. Vidyaraj had different plans. One day, hedispatched his wife, daughter and the family chauffeur to themovies. He brought the lumps to the kitchen and went at oneof them with a soapy toothbrush. &quot;Until then I thought it wasmetal,&quot; he says. &quot;I held it against the light. I saw specksof red.&quot; Underneath the soot was a star ruby weighing 2,805carats. The second lump was a double star ruby weighing 1,125carats. The third was a double star sapphire of 2,470 caratsand the fourth lump, though not Guinness Book material, was aruby of 650 carats.   The lawyer-turned-gem-owner took a crash course ingemology and hauled the stones to a succession of localjewelers for cleaning and cutting. He was security consciousfrom the start, using different cutters for different stonesand never revealing the full extent of his find. He wentpublic with the smallest ruby, the Vidyaraj, named forhimself, in 1984. The Indumathi, which was named after hiswife, was revealed a few months later. In 1987 he displayedthe big ruby, the Rajaratna, which after cutting, weighed2,475 carats, and then the sapphire. He had them certifiedand made the Guinness Book, which he considers his highestachievement, or, as he puts it, &quot;this height of eminence. IfI was in another country I'd probably be honored.&quot;   Mr. Vidyaraj has hidden the gems in bank vaults and won'teven disclose if they remain in India. No one is allowed nearthem, including journalists. The gems, which are uninsured,are cut in cabochon shape, producing convex round stonesthat, to a layman, lack the visual appeal of the glittering,faceted gems in jewelry shops. &quot;To an untrained eye, they arerough stones not meaning anything,&quot; says Mr. Vidyaraj. &quot;Butthey can't be faceted: These are not ordinary articles ofcommerce. For a person well-versed in gemology they aregeological wonders because of their size.&quot; Gem experts saythe value of the stones depends largely on their color andtheir purity, which need to be assessed. Mr. Vidyarajbelieves they are worth a fortune easily exceeding $500million. &quot;The person who wants to buy them would have to bethe richest person in the world,&quot; he says. &quot;I am just anordinary person, maybe below ordinary, out of fashion. Andyet, if my collection is valued . . .&quot;   Why hasn't Mr. Vidyaraj tried to sell the stones? Becausehe's terrified of a &quot;web of intrigue.&quot; His wife is a content,pious woman, he says, totally uninterested in money. He andhis family have lived in the same one-bedroom apartment fordecades. His rent: $5.80 per month. His son supports thecouple and pays Mr. Vidyaraj's medical bills. (Last year, healmost died of complications from diabetes.) He's spent hissavings getting the gems cut and recognized by the outsideworld.   The government of India once considered issuing postagestamps honoring Indians in the Guinness Book, but the plannever came through. This disappointed Mr. Vidyaraj, who seeshis gems as a national treasure. He also considers himselfthe top Indian in the Guinness Book. There are quite a few,most of them holding records for such feats as the longestafter-dinner speech or consumption of the greatest quantityof glass. &quot;How much publicity does a guy get who grows thelongest fingernails?&quot; Mr. Vidyaraj asks sarcastically(apparently referring to Shridhar Chillal of Pune, whostopped cutting his nails in 1952. The Guinness Book reportsthat Mr. Chillal is having trouble sleeping with his14.4-foot nails and is willing to clip and sell them to anyinterested party).   But Mr. Vidyaraj still talks big about his gems, pepperinghis conversation with quotes from Shakespeare and AldousHuxley. &quot;My intention is to donate this treasure to humanity.In its humble way, it could help with the scourge of cancer,AIDS or education. So large is my head, so big is mythinking]&quot;   His is a strange and somewhat sad tale, but perhaps not asunique as it sounds. The Guinness Book relates that thelargest natural intense fancy blue diamond was found in 1904.It was exhibited in Paris in 1925 and then sold. The buyerwas an Indian maharajah. According to Guinness: &quot;Its currentowners are unknown.&quot;   ---   Mr. Spaeth is a journalist and novelist living in NewDelhi.</TEXT></DOC>