<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910123-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>910123-0008.</DOCID><HL>   Haga Is Everywhere,   And for a Change   It's Winning Respect   ---   A Once Risible Civil Defense   Is Now Doing Israel Proud;   Digging Out Scud Victims   ----   By Peter Waldman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   TEL AVIV -- Lodged high in the pantheon of Israeli warheroes is the late Defense Minister Moshe Dayan, the dashing,one-eyed general who led Israel to a stunning victory in theSix Day War in 1967. Israel's local hero these days is MosheGalili.   Mr. Galili is a construction-company executive and areserve colonel who commands a crew of carpenters andcrane-operators who pull survivors from buildings demolishedby Iraqi missiles. Mr. Dayan's soldiers marched towardDamascus, Amman and Cairo. Mr. Galili's men, part of whatIsraelis call the Haga, or civil defense force, are stationedhere at home, in tent camps in Tel Aviv.</LP><TEXT>   Last night at about 8:30 in Israel, when an Iraqi Scudmissile severely damaged two buildings in the Tel Aviv area,the Haga rescue unit was among the first on the scene. Withspecial equipment Haga troops checked the area to be sure itwasn't a chemical attack. Ambulances and special debrisremoval equipment were rushed to the scene. Haga rescuers,using searchlights, continued to dig toward crying survivorshours after the missile struck, Israel radio reported.   In previous Mideast conflicts, nearly every able-bodiedman in Israel would have been immediately called up to themilitary reserves and dispatched toward one of this nation'smany hostile fronts, leaving the homefront to older men andcombat-exempt soldiers in the Haga. In the beginning of thiswar, most members of Israel's elite fighting units are athome, sweating out the air-raid sirens like everyone else intheir gas masks and specially-sealed rooms. Instead, the menof Haga -- long the laughing stock of a society that reveresmilitary status -- have been in the trenches for a change.   Haga is everywhere. With their ranks swelling from thecall-up of nearly 10,000 reservists, Haga soldiers have beenin charge of nearly everything.   In addition to Mr. Galili's rescue squad, which earnedfleeting fame two years ago from its work in the aftermath ofthe Armenian earthquake, teams of Haga doctors, Hagapsychologists, Haga bomb-detectors and Haga chemical-warfareexperts have been activated. Haga troops control the air-raidsirens, distribute gas masks and tell parents how to keeptheir kids occupied during missile alerts. (Onerecommendation: painting gas masks.) It is Haga disasterexperts who rush out to determine the nature and scope of thedamage inflicted by Iraqi missiles.   Yet respect for the force still comes grudgingly. &quot;Hagahas been spoiled for the last 40 years by the air force;they've never had any work to do,&quot; says reserve Gen. BanjaminPeled, a former air force commander himself. For every personwounded in the first wave of missile strikes, Gen. Peledsays, &quot;Haga mustered 10 ambulances and 100 psychologists. Thewounded felt they were being hugged to death.&quot;   &quot;The {Haga troops} don't have the same respect as theparatroopers,&quot; says Dan Levinsohn, a student at Tel AvivUniversity. &quot;But they're less of a joke now, I suppose.&quot;   Attitudes are hard to change. For years, Haga has been arefuge of the obese, the physically impaired, and the regularsoldier too old to fight but too young to retire, at 55, fromthe reserves.   Haga men have checked purses and bags at the door of movietheaters for bombs. They have stayed behind when others wentoff to war, slinging World War Ivintage rifles over theirshoulders while patrolling city streets. During blackouts,Haga troops have driven around with loudspeakers on theircars, ordering individual violators to turn off their lights.   &quot;Haga is where people go when they can't go anywhereelse,&quot; says Daniel Weiner, a goat herder and a reservist inone of Israel's elite fighting brigades.   For many Haga reservists, who never expected a conflict toarise that they would be involved in, the war has put aswagger in their step.   &quot;In the younger guys, you can see a quiet pride in gettingresponsibilities that they never had,&quot; says Reuven Stein, a52-year-old social worker who joined Haga three years agoafter a reservist military career as a truck driver. &quot;In theolder guys, you see a rebirth from having a job again.&quot;   For the past few years, whenever Haga called up YitzhakValach, 27, for reserve duty, the Jerusalem laborer dutifullyreported, but never talked about it afterward, he says. Whenhis friends swapped tales from combat training, Mr. Valachwould leave the room. Now he has something to talk about. Mr.Valach has recently been putting in 15-hour days at agas-mask dispensary.   The pride of Haga is Mr. Galili and his crew of disasterexperts. Besides Armenia, the elite Haga rescue squad hassifted rubble in Mexico, Colombia, Greece and El Salvador.(The Israeli military won't let any of the crew members beinterviewed during the present war.)   Mr. Galili puts his 400 or so men through rigorousexercises at a block-long training facility that has five orsix of its own giant heaps of crushed cement. Orange nylonbodies are strewn everywhere. Adjacent to each pile of rubbleare classrooms that open on to the training areas withlecterns provided for instructors. Mr. Galili proudly holdsup a polyurethane block, the size of a large shoe box, thathe says can hold up a 25-ton chunk of cement to unpin avictim. A suitcase-size version, he says, can hold up 32tons, and the inflatable air pads he has can boost 50 tons.   Mr. Galili claims that in Armenia &quot;the Americans andBritish came with dogs; we came with 40 tons of equipment tosave people.&quot;   Back at Haga headquarters, even the brass feels relievedthat Haga is coming into its own. Ten years ago, Lieut. Col.Solomon Shefer, chief of staff for Haga's commanding general,Uri Manos, gave up a 22-year career as a photo-reconnaissanceofficer in the prestigious Israeli air force for a crack atcareer advancement in Haga. But until now, he says, &quot;peopleonly saw the pilots and tanks. They never saw Haga.&quot;   For some officers, Haga's sudden respectability has openednew doors. Col. David Klivanski, who commanded paratrooperunits in the 1967 and 1973 wars, was put in charge of theherculean task of distributing the 4.5 million gas-mask kitsto Israeli citizens. It turned out, though, that Col.Klivanski was just the telegenic person needed to givespecial gas-mask demonstrations on TV. So for the past week,he has appeared at least once a day on the Israeli TV,reminding people to carry their masks at all times, to putthem on when the sirens blow, and not to forget to remove thefilter caps so as not to suffocate.   &quot;I'm a regular, normal officer and a regular, normalofficer would prefer to be at the front,&quot; he says.   Upstairs at Haga headquarters is the national emergencyhotline room where people can call with questions about thewar embroiling Israel. The hotline is run by Lieut. Col.Shmuel Hershkowitz, who, in a prior assignment, spent sevenyears devising ways for the army to reduce traffic accidents.His Haga operation consists of a dozen young women answeringphones in a loop. Inside are a panel of five specialists whohandle the tough questions: a doctor, a chemical-warfareexpert and three psychologists.   Most of the inquiries are standard fare. Yes, you canblow-dry gas masks if they get wet. No need to worry, ittakes several hours for a few people sitting in anaverage-size room to run out of oxygen. But one person calledthe hotline from a pay-phone to report his house had justbeen destroyed by a missile.   &quot;We told him to wait there, help was on the way,&quot; Col.Hershkowitz says.</TEXT></DOC>