<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900727-0030</DOCNO><DOCID>900727-0030.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>07/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   THE HOUSE VOTED to reprimand Rep. Frank, rejecting acensure penalty.   Frank, a liberal Democrat from Massachusetts and anacknowledged homosexual, was punished for using his officialinfluence on behalf of a male prostitute. The 408-18 vote,which came after the House rejected a GOP-backed motioncalling for the harsher censure penalty, upheld therecommendations of the Ethics Committee. The issue split thechamber emotionally and reflected more partisanship than inany ethics case in the past decade. The censure motion, whichfailed 287-141, was opposed by all but 12 Democrats, whileRepublicans were almost 3-1 in favor of it.</LP><TEXT>   In a statement before the vote, Frank explained that hetook some of the actions in part to &quot;conceal&quot; hishomosexuality, which he later disclosed.   ---   Bush signed the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990,which bans discrimination against the nation's 43 milliondisabled people in employment, public accommodations,transportation and telecommunications. The legislationincludes a variety of sanctions for violators and providesnew protection for AIDS-infected workers.   ---   Souter brushed aside questions about a letter he wrotenearly a decade ago opposing legislation that would haveforced judges to make decisions on abortions for teenagers.The Supreme Court nominee said he would disclose what is&quot;constitutionally appropriate&quot; at his confirmation hearings,expected to begin in September.   ---   The EPA said last month's easing of federal controls onlow-level atomic wastes raises public health concerns.Meanwhile, members of a House subcommittee said at a hearingthat the new policy could turn some states into dumpinggrounds for radioactive waste in landfills.   ---   Waldheim met in Salzburg, Austria, with the presidents ofCzechoslovakia and West Germany in a break with theinternational diplomatic isolation imposed on the Austrianleader because of his wartime past. Waldheim has acknowledgedhe concealed his World War II service as an officer in aGerman army unit linked to atrocities.   ---   Iraq prepared for direct talks with Kuwait on ending adispute over land rights and oil production. EgyptianPresident Mubarak sent an adviser to Baghdad and Kuwait tohelp organize the talks, expected to start over the weekendin Saudi Arabia.   ---   Armenia's Parliament set up a panel to respond to Sovietleader Gorbachev's threat to use force against illegal groupsunless they surrender their arms. One Parliament member said&quot;we can't be left defenseless,&quot; adding that Armenians hadlost faith in Soviet security forces on the Azerbaijan borderand had to rely on armed nationalists.   ---   A federal jury in Los Angeles found a Honduran, JuanRamone Matta Ballesteros, guilty of racketeering, kidnappingand conspiracy in the 1985 murders of U.S. drug agent EnriqueCamarena and his pilot. But the jury acquitted Matta on asingle charge of murdering Camarena. Three other defendantsare awaiting verdicts in the case.   ---   Researchers said a woman apparently got AIDS from herdentist during a tooth-pulling procedure, though he woregloves and a mask. The case has prompted the government toreview its recommendations for AIDS prevention. AmericanDental Association officials said the Centers for DiseaseControl may have jumped to conclusions.   ---   North and South Korea reached an accord to have theirprime ministers meet in a bid to end hostilities, but a newdispute developed soon after the pact was signed inPanmunjom. The controversy erupted after a plan by five NorthKoreans to cross into South Korea was scrapped because of afeud involving their accommodations.   ---   A juror was dismissed from deliberations in amoney-laundering trial in federal court in Tampa, Fla., afterreports that a member of the jury apparently telephonedpeople linked to a Colombian drug ring. The judge decided notto declare a mistrial and ordered the 11 remaining jurors tocontinue deliberations.   ---   Secretary of State Baker rejected criticism from Asianallies over how to deal with Vietnamese boat people seekingrefuge in neighboring countries. Baker said the U.S. remainedopposed to forcibly repatriating the bulk of the refugees toVietnam. He arrived in Indonesia for a conference of foreignministers scheduled to start today.   ---   East Germany's coalition appeared likely to survive afterpoliticians from both German states narrowed theirdifferences on how an all-German Parliament will be electedin December. The two governments agreed they should concludea treaty by the end of August outlining voting procedures.   ---   The U.S. death rate from asthma rose over 30% in sevenyears, and nearly 10 million Americans are affected by thedisease, the Centers for Disease Control reported. Officialssaid a number of factors may be contributing to the increase,including air quality and exposure to infections and other&quot;triggers&quot; for bronchial constriction.   ---   Salvadoran officials and rebels agreed to have a U.N.commission monitor human rights in El Salvador, where tens ofthousands of civilians have died in a decade-old civil war.The commission wouldn't begin work until a cease-fireagreement is reached between the government and theguerrillas, who are holding talks in Costa Rica.</TEXT></DOC>