<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910214-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>910214-0081.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Hazardous-Waste Liability Curbs Backed   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Ellen Joan Pollock   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   DH AMR DAL TWA CTA WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BANKS (BNK)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)AIRLINES (AIR)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The Environmental Protection Agency proposed a rulelimiting the liability of banks and other private creditorsthat lend money to companies which own or operate propertycontaminated with hazardous waste.   The rule revises an earlier proposal the EPA circulatedlast fall, and lawyers say it gives bankers broaderprotections from environmental lawsuits. Nevertheless, thelending community is expected to continue lobbying Congressto introduce legislation that would lessen liability inprivate suits that don't involve the EPA.</LP><TEXT>   The EPA has been under pressure by Congress and thelending community to clarify its position on an exemption inthe federal Superfund law that shields lenders from liabilitywhen they have a security interest in a company but don'tparticipate in its management. Under Superfund, those who ownor operate contaminated sites are responsible for cleaningthem up.   Environmental lawyers said fears of liability in the wakeof a May decision by a federal appeals court in Atlantaprompted some lenders to refuse credit to such high-riskindustries as manufacturing and small businesses withsignificant real estate assets. In that decision, the courtruled that Fleet Factors Corp., a commercial financingcompany, may be liable for the cleanup of hazardous waste ata site owned by a company to which it lent money. FleetFactors is a subsidiary of Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc.of Providence, R.I.   Under the EPA proposal, lenders would be permitted toengage in a variety of activities, including monitoring andprotecting security interests, providing financial advice toborrowers, requiring the cleanup of a facility during thelife of a loan, and even foreclosing on property, withoutincurring Superfund liability.   Like the earlier draft, the proposal also provides that ifa lender forecloses on a property with a hazardous wastesite, it is not liable for a cleanup if it sells the propertywithin six months. But Alan P. Vollmann, a Washingtonenvironmental lawyer, said the new version leaves open thepossibility of extending that period under somecircumstances.   In addition, the rule would establish that anygovernmental agency that acquires property involuntarily orthrough the administration of a governmental lending programwould be shielded from liability. That provision wouldprotect the government from liability concerning propertiesacquired by taking over failed thrifts, lawyers said.   The new proposal has generated controversy amongenvironmental groups who say it is a blow to efforts to cleanup the environment. &quot;The prospect of Superfund liability onlenders made them cautious when they made loans. This ruletakes away the incentive for lenders to carefully underwriteloans and for borrowing businesses to be clean to getfinancing,&quot; said William J. Roberts, the legislative directorof the Environmental Defense Fund, an advocacy group.   And some lenders are arguing that the proposed rule stilldoes not go far enough. John Byrne, a senior counsel with theAmerican Bankers Association, says courts would not be boundby the rule in private cleanup actions.   But John Fogarty, an EPA lawyer who headed the group thatdrafted the rule, said that the agency thinks there is noneed for legislation and that the courts will give weight tothe EPA's policy. The rule, which is still in draft form,will be circulated for public comment before being put intoeffect.   In a statement yesterday, Sen. Frank R. Lautenberg (D,N.J.) said he would hold hearings April 10 on the issue oflender liability under Superfund.   ---   RIGHTS COMMISSION BANS questions in widely usedpersonality test.   The Rhode Island Commission for Human Rights has orderedthat three questions in the Minnesota Multiphasic PersonalityInventory test be deleted when administered to applicants forlaw-enforcement jobs in the state.   The order affects only tests administered in Rhode Island.But a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, whichbrought the case on behalf of an unsuccessful job applicant,says the national organization will encourage its affiliatesaround the nation to pursue similar actions in wake of theorder.   Lewis Maltby, the director of the ACLU's national projecton workplace rights, said Rhode Island's human-rights lawsare similar to those in other states. &quot;This case would havebeen won in many other states, and we'd like to see similarcases nationwide,&quot; he said.   The Rhode Island case was brought by Paul Tucker, whoobjected to religious questions on the test. Some of thosequestions were deleted when the test was revised in 1989. Butthe state human rights commission ordered that threeremaining questions involving sin and the afterlife bebanned.   Beverly Kaemmer, a spokeswoman for the University ofMinnesota Press, which publishes the test, said that thethree questions are not &quot;explicitly religious&quot; and that testresults should not be evaluated on an item-by-item basis. Theuniversity was not a party in the litigation.   David W. Dugan, a special assistant attorney general, saidthe state agreed to delete the questions because &quot;omittingthose questions would have no impact on the overall resultsof the test.&quot;   The MMPI, used by many employers to evaluate jobapplicants, has generated controversy in recent years. In theearly 1980s, the City of New York's personnel departmentagreed to delete religious questions from a previous versionof the test after a suit was filed by an unsuccessful jobapplicant, according to Michael DiBiase, the Providence,R.I., lawyer who represented Mr. Tucker.   A suit against Dayton Hudson Corp.'s Target storeschallenging its use of the test is expected to go to trial ina California state court in June.   ---   TRAVEL COMPANIES BARRED from brokering frequent-fliercoupons.   A federal judge in Salt Lake City ruled that brokering thecoupons undermines the purpose of frequent-flier programs andharms the airlines. Airlines that offer the coupons permitpassengers to give them away -- but not sell them.   About 30 brokers nationwide deal in the coupons, oftenbuying them from fliers and selling them at a discount. Insuits pending around the country, American Airlines, DeltaAir Lines, Trans World Airlines and Continental Airlines areseeking to prohibit the practice. They contend that brokeringthe coupons violates their rules and diminishes the purposeof the frequent-flier program -- to promote good will betweenthe airline and its passengers.   In the Salt Lake City case, one of the first in the nationto address the issue, Judge David K. Winder ordered threebrokers to discontinue the practice. The judge ruled that AMRCorp.'s American Airlines was damaged by the brokered couponsand that airlines are entitled to restrict travel incentiveprograms. The three brokers are no longer operating.   Salt Lake City attorney Scott Wangsgard, who representedthe three brokers, said the rule serves no valid consumerinterest and that he plans to appeal. Once fliers haveaccumulated these frequent-flier miles, Mr. Wangsgard said,&quot;they really should be allowed to do with them what they wantto.&quot;   ---   NOTED: Former thrift prosecutor James G. Richmond hasjoined the Chicago law firm Coffield Ungaretti Harris andamp;Slavin as a partner. He will specialize in financial serviceslitigation, white-collar criminal defense and other complexlitigation. Mr. Richmond announced his resignation as theJustice Department's coordinator of savings-and-loanprosecutions late last year. He also served as U.S. attorneyfor the Northern District of Indiana. Mr. Richmond'ssuccessor as the Justice Department's special counsel forfinancial institutional fraud is expected to be IraRaphaelson, the first assistant U.S. attorney in Chicago. Theselection requires Senate confirmation.</TEXT></DOC>