<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901228-0054</DOCNO><DOCID>901228-0054.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>12/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 1</SO><LP>   GORBACHEV PERSUADED lawmakers to confirm his vicepresidential choice.   The Soviet legislators voted to approve Gennady Yanayev onthe second ballot as they concluded a stormy, 10-day session.The confirmation came after Yanayev was defeated in a firstround of voting and Gorbachev made an impassioned plea forthe Congress of People's Deputies to reconsider. Meanwhile,the parliament of the Russian Federation -- the largest ofthe Soviet Union's 15 republics -- decided that it wouldslash its contribution toward the national budget for nextyear.</LP><TEXT>   Russia's finance minister, Boris Fyodorov, resigned,reportedly saying the republic has made no progress in thetransition to a market economy.   ---   IRAQ EXPRESSED readiness to talk but denied it waslaunching a peace initiative.   Saddam Hussein said Baghdad was ready for &quot;a serious andconstructive dialogue&quot; to avert war in the Persian Gulf, buthe repeated his demand that any Iraqi pullout from Kuwaitmust be linked to the Palestinian issue. Iraq also said thatit isn't preparing a diplomatic initiative ahead of the Jan.15 U.N. use-of-force deadline. Kuwait's foreign minister,meanwhile, said it was too late for peace efforts in theGulf.   Bush sought to dismiss news accounts that his two seniormilitary advisers had told him American forces aren't fullyready to fight a war in the Mideast.   ---   A milk-testing program is to begin nationwide in Februaryto check for antibiotics and other veterinary drug residues,the FDA said. This will be the first time the agency hasroutinely tested milk for illegal drug residues. Criticschallenged the FDA's claim that the program will increaseprotection for consumers.   ---   The FDA approved a new imaging agent that can help doctorsdiagnose and treat the damage caused by heart attacks withoutusing invasive procedures. The injectable chemical tracingagent, which can produce images of blood flow in the heartwhen viewed under medical cameras, was developed by Du Pont.   ---   Massachusetts adopted stringent auto-emission standardsmodeled after recently enacted California rules, making itthe second state to clamp down harder on car-related smogthan the new federal clean-air legislation does.Environmentalists, who have said the federal rules are weak,hailed Massachusetts' move.   ---   The Israeli Supreme Court barred the immediate expulsionof four Palestinians suspected as leaders of the Moslemfundamentalist movement Hamas. The court issued a temporaryrestraining order preventing Defense Ministry officials fromexpelling the Arabs after Palestinians living in the GazaStrip appealed the military orders.   ---   Three brands of dental adhesive contain unacceptablelevels of benzene, according to the FDA, which said the threeproducts will be voluntarily recalled by their manufacturers.   ---   Suriname's army said it had been constitutionallyempowered to force the civilian government to step down lastMonday, and denied the characterization of the ouster as amilitary coup. The acting army chief, Ivan Graanoogst,announced that the National Assembly would elect a newpresident and vice president by tomorrow.   ---   Argentina's President Menem said he will pardon CarlosSuarez Mason, a general who was extradited from the U.S. tostand trial for murders committed during the 197683dictatorship. Separately, Menem said he no longer supportsthe idea of executing the leaders of a Dec. 3 army rebellion.   ---   More than 100,000 people marched through Algiers toprotest legislation making Arabic Algeria's national languageand setting fines for using other languages in officialtransactions. The measure must be signed by President ChadliBandjedid before taking effect. Two other languages, Frenchand Berber, are widely used in the nation.   ---   Iran test-fired a Soviet-made, SA-6 anti-aircraft missile,as Tehran acknowledged for the first time that it hadacquired the weapon. The purchase of the long-range missileswas believed part of a $6 billion defense and industrial pactthat Iranian leader Rafsanjani signed in 1989 in Moscow.   ---   Albania's new opposition party called for a referendum tofix the date of the nation's first multiparty elections afterthe ruling Communists refused its request for a delay. TheDemocratic Party, founded Dec. 12 as the first noncommunistforce in Albania in 46 years, wants the February votepostponed to May to allow time to organize.   ---   Yugoslavia's leaders met in an effort to solve economicand political crises threatening breakup of the Balkan state.The meeting of the eight-member collective state presidency,Prime Minister Markovic and other officials was expected tofocus on the nation's crippled economy.</TEXT></DOC>