<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910415-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>910415-0084.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   U.S. Settles Racketeering Charges   Against Hotel Employees Union   ----   By Ann Hagedorn and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   AIT LABOR WNEWS</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)EASTERN U.S. BANKS (BAE)ALL REGIONAL BANKS (BAR)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)</IN><NS>LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)</NS><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>ARIZONA (AZ)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)ILLINOIS (IL)MICHIGAN (MI)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NEW YORK (NY)</RE><LP>   The Justice Department, in an unusually quick turnaround,has settled its four-month-old racketeering suit against theunion that represents hotel, restaurant and casino workers inAtlantic City, N.J.   Under terms of the settlement, the Hotel and RestaurantEmployees International Union has agreed to allow acourt-appointed monitor to oversee its Local 54. The union'sinternational president, Edward J. Hanley, has agreed torefrain from contact with Local 54 unless permitted by themoni tor.</LP><TEXT>   As part of the union's pact with the government, sevenLocal 54 officials resigned and agreed not to participate inunion affairs. The settlement, which was negotiated by theU.S. attorney in Newark, also bars 10 alleged organized crimefigures from union activity.   The union did not admit to any wrongdoing.   In a civil racketeering suit filed in December, thegovernment alleged that Local 54 has been controlled for thelast 20 years by a Philadelphia-based organized crime familythrough a pattern of extortion, murder, embezzlement, andbribery. The family's head, Nicodemo Scarfo, the governmentclaimed, was running the 22,000-member local from his cell infederal prison with the help of his son, Nicky Scarfo, afrequent visitor.   As of last Friday, all defendants have settled, agreed tosettle, or defaulted. Mr. Scarfo and his son, both of whomnever responded to the suit, were declared in default by U.S.District Judge Garrett E. Brown Jr., who then barred themfrom any assocation with Local 54.   &quot;The full import of such an agreement may not be realizedfor some time, but from this day forward the members of Local54 can begin to rebuild after the years of damage dealt bythe corrupt influence of the Scarfo crime family,&quot; said U.S.Attorney General Richard Thornburgh in a statement.   At a news conference, U.S. Attorney Michael Chertoff said,&quot;Local 54's members need no longer fear murder, terror andfraud at the hands of organized crime.&quot;   Meanwhile, at their own news conference in Atlantic City,union officials denied any wrongdoing and any connections toorganized crime. &quot;While there was never any doubt that wecould disprove the government's allegations,&quot; said Local 54President Roy Silbert, &quot;the cost of continuing the litigationsimply became impossible . . . There is also the fact thatLocal 54's membership would be subjected to two or three moremonths of rumor, hearsay and misstatements concerning theirleadership.&quot;   And in a written statement from union headquarters inWashington, D.C., Mr. Hanley said, &quot;We welcome theopportunity to work with the monitor to serve the bestinterests of the membership of Local 54.&quot;   Judge Brown, of federal court in Newark, is expected toappoint a monitor within two weeks. The monitor will overseeunion finances and personnel matters, review union contractsand supervise the first direct election of union officerssince 1976.   ---   INDUSTRY CONCERNS about criminal enforcement ofenvironmental laws grow.   Defense lawyers say their clients are increasingly fearfulof being targeted for criminal prosecutions for violatingcomplex environmental regulations despite their best effortsto comply with the laws.   &quot;The concern stems from the fact that many environmentallaws that carry criminal penalties don't require that aprosecutor prove a company or official willfully broke thelaw or had a malevolent intention,&quot; said Richard Leland, aNew York environmental lawyer who has defended corporationsin such cases.   Robert Zastrow, another New York environmental lawyer,said that the recent increase in the number of federal,state, and local prosecutors focusing on environmental crimehas also sparked fear that the prosecutors, competing forwork, may end up bringing marginal cases.   A Justice Department memo listing environmental crimestatistics indicates that the number of indictments issteadily rising. One hundred and thirty-four indictments werebrought in fiscal 1990, compared with 101 the year before. Sofar, 87 indictments have been brought in fiscal 1991, whichends in September.   Since 1983, the Justice Department has indicted 790defendants: 250 were corporations and 540 were individuals.Of the 578 convictions, 191 were against corporations and 387were against individuals.   Mr. Zastrow, the defense lawyer, said that some companiesworry that programs designed to ensure compliance withenvironmental laws might be used against them. &quot;Everyonethought that environmental audits were a good idea. But if acompany's audit turns up a violation that can't be correctedright away, that's enough for a criminal prosecution,&quot; saidMr. Zastrow.   Environmental audits are conducted by many companies todetermine if their facilities and operations areenvironmentally sound. Although the audits are for acompany's own use, the government can often subpoena therecords.   Richard B. Stewart, the Assistant Attorney General in theJustice Department responsible for prosecuting violators offederal environmental laws, acknowledges that audits pose aCatch-22 problem for many companies.   He said that the Justice Department is currentlydeveloping guidelines that will reassure companies that theywon't be criminally prosecuted if an audit turns up aviolation that is corrected in a reasonable time period andreported to the proper regulatory authorities.   &quot;We're trying to reassure people that if they do a goodjob and take reasonable steps, we won't go after themcriminally,&quot; said Mr. Stewart.   ---   TRAVEL AGENCY ORDERED to pay fine for false advertisingscheme.   A federal judge in Chicago ordered a suburban travelagency to pay nearly $16 million in fines for falselyadvertising that $29 certificates were good for round-tripfares to Hawaii.   The agency, World Travel Vacations Brokers Inc., Alsip,Ill., was ordered by U.S. District Court Judge Nicholas Buato pay the fine to the Federal Trade Commission, which fileda suit against the agency in 1987. At that time, the FTC saidthe agency misrepresented its product and failed to complywith the Truth in Lending Act by not paying refunds.   Judge Bua noted in his ruling that World Travel requiredcoupon buyers to make hotel accommodations through theagency, then built the true cost of the airfare into theprice charged for the hotel room. The coupons &quot;were virtuallyworthless,&quot; he said.   ---   PAUL, WEISS is dismissing associates.   The New York law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton andamp;Garrison has asked the associates to leave for economicreasons, according to lawyers at the firm, a New Yorkheadhunter and others familiar with the situation. Estimatesof the number of firings start at 30 lawyers in many of thelaw firm's practice areas.   Several Paul Weiss partners said the law firm's policy wasnot to comment about internal matters.   Many large law firms across the country have dismissedassociates since the onset of the recession. But Paul, Weiss,which has a significant litigation practice, was consideredto be less vulnerable because it was not overly reliant oncorporate transaction work.   ---   MICHIGAN BELL LOSES an age and sex discrimination case.   A Michigan jury awarded almost $1 million in back pay to a58-year-old woman who had been a manager for Michigan Bell, aunit of Chicago-based Ameritech.   The award, with interest and attorney fees, will exceed$2.4 million. The woman, Veronica Town, had been a managerfor Michigan Bell until 1981, when the company consolidatedher department, eliminated a managerial slot and kept ayounger male manager. Mrs. Town was offered a job she hadrejected the year before, and she declined to take it.   Michigan Bell has asked the judge to overturn the verdict,arguing that it &quot;is not supported by either the facts or thelaw.&quot; A hearing was set for May 8.   ---   JUDGE WON'T REMOVE himself from case on military's gayban.   U.S. District Judge Oliver Gasch, who called the plaintiffin the lawsuit a &quot;homo&quot; during a hearing, said his commentsdidn't reflect any personal bias against homosexuals. JosephSteffan, who was dismissed from the U.S. Naval Academy forsaying he was gay, asked Judge Gasch last month to disqualifyhimself from the case. Mr. Steffan's suit seeks to have theban declared unconstitutional.   Although noting that the word &quot;is often useddisparagingly,&quot; Judge Gasch, of Washington, D.C., said, &quot;thecourt equated the term with homosexual. No offense wasintended by the use of the word.&quot;   In the same ruling, Judge Gasch granted much of Mr.Steffan's request for Defense Department documents on theban, including any changes in policy during the Persian Gulfcrisis. Gay-rights lawyers maintain that the military inrecent months was less strict in enforcing the ban because itneeded soldiers and reservists for the war. The DefenseDepartment said the policy hasn't changed.   ---   HARRIS TRUST BANK is accused of racketeering by investors.   The investors, seven Arizona retirees, have filed a civilracketeering suit against Harris Trust Bank of Arizona, asubsidiary of Harris Bankcorp Inc. of Chicago.   In the suit, filed in Maricopa County Superior Court inPhoenix, the retirees allege that Harris Trust invested largeamounts from their trust accounts in high-risk real estate.Caroline Barron, a Phoenix lawyer, said her clients lost morethan $1 million as a result of the investments.   In a prepared statement, Harris Trust denied anywrongdoing.   &quot;The company's management believes the allegations to bewithout merit, and intends a vigorous defense,&quot; said ThomasF. Jones, vice chairman.</TEXT></DOC>