<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900619-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>900619-0001.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>06/19/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   PROTESTS FLARED in Romania, and police were authorized tostop them.   The newly elected lower house of Parliament voted to allowthe police and army to move against anti-governmentdemonstrators who retook a Bucharest square after beingbrutally routed by police last week. Meanwhile, oppositionlegislators demanded the government investigate events thatled President-elect Iliescu to summon thousands of miners tocrush last week's protests. Hundreds gathered for a secondday in University Square to seek the ouster of Iliescu, whoseinauguration has been delayed until later this week becauseof the turmoil.</LP><TEXT>   Officials in Romania's Interior Ministry confirmed thearrest of an important leader of the opposition, Students'League President Marian Munteanu.   ---   A GUNMAN KILLED eight people in a rampage at an auto loanoffice in Florida.   The man stalked through the company in Jacksonville,firing at customers and shooting under desks at hidingemployees before killing himself. Five others were listed incritical but stable condition after the latemorning shootingat a General Motors Acceptance Corp. office. The gunman,identified as James Edward Pough, 42, recently had a vehiclerepossessed by GMAC, according to Jacksonville's sheriff.Pough mainly used a semi-automatic rifle, but he also carrieda revolver, officials said.   Local authorities said the gunman had killed a man and awoman in separate shootings early Sunday on the streets nearhis Jacksonville home.   ---   Mandela told Canada's Parliament that the struggle ofblack South Africans for liberty and equality can't bestifled, and he urged the world to maintain economicsanctions against the Pretoria government. The blacknationalist leader intends to travel to New York Citytomorrow.   ---   Administration officials plan to recommend a veto oflegislation to overhaul federal housing programs, partlybecause the bill would allow new federally financed housingconstruction. A draft of an administration statementthreatening a veto listed seven major problems with theNational Affordable Housing Act.   ---   Militant Kashmiris declared a government-in-exile toadvance their Moslem secessionist movement in the disputednorthern region between India and Pakistan. The movecomplicates already tense relations between the twocountries, which earlier in the day agreed to holdnegotiations aimed at easing the threat of war over Kashmir.   ---   The PLO opened an inquiry into the May 30 Palestinianguerrilla raid on two Israeli beaches. The inquiry's aim,according to the head of the organization's security service,is to find out if civilians were targeted. The U.S. hasthreatened to suspend talks with the PLO unless the groupcondemns the raid and takes disciplinary steps.   ---   The Supreme Court ruled that police may ask suspecteddrunken drivers most routine questions and videotape answerswithout warning them of their rights. The 8-1 ruling in aPennsylvania case means slurred answers about age, height andweight may be used to convict drivers who haven't been giventhe so-called Miranda warning.   ---   Genscher and Shevardnadze met in Muenster, West Germany,to discuss Germany's unification. Bonn's foreign ministerheld talks with his Soviet counterpart as West GermanChancellor Kohl told his Christian Democratic party that 1990would be &quot;the year of German unity.&quot;   ---   U.S. safety officials said they believe the fan-diskfatigue crack that led to the crash of a United Airlines jetin Iowa was &quot;of a detectable size&quot; at the time of a majorinspection before last July's accident. The NationalTransportation Safety Board called on the FAA to developimproved methods for detecting cracks.   ---   A fuel oil barge ran aground in Buzzards Bay off Cape Cod,Mass., within one mile of the site where the cruise ship theBermuda Star ran aground in fog on June 10, the Coast Guardsaid. The barge, which leaked only briefly, was being towedby a tugboat and was carrying more than five million gallonsof heating oil, officials said.   ---   Central American presidents welcomed a proposal from Bakerto coordinate foreign aid to the region through a group ofdonor countries. The secretary of state presented a sketch ofthe plan during a meeting in Guatemala with the six leaders.Baker later met individually with each of the presidents.   ---   Sri Lanka declared an all-out offensive on Tamilseparatist guerrillas. The government left the door open fortalks, but the insurgents pledged to fight. The deputydefense minister of the Indian Ocean island said 600 rebelshad been killed since June 11. Unofficial estimates had putthe overall death toll, including civilians, at more than450.   ---   The Angolan rebel movement said it was suspending peacetalks with the Angolan government until it had cleared up&quot;misunderstandings&quot; that arose during secret contacts inPortugal over the weekend. The UNITA statement was signed byJonas Savimbi, the leader of the U.S.-backed rebel movement,along with his senior aides.   ---   Liberia's Doe offered amnesty to rebels poised tooverthrow his government, but the insurgents rejected theoffer. The president said an amnesty would allow theguerrillas to form an opposition party in the West Africannation. Rebel insistence that Doe must quit was the mainstumbling block during peace talks last week in Sierra Leone.   ---   A Soviet conservative criticized advocates of a freemarket. Yegor Ligachev, the leading conservative in theSoviet Politburo, also called for a referendum on whether thenation should be capitalist or socialist.   ---   Hale Irwin won the U.S. Open golf championship, beatingMike Donald in a suddendeath playoff at the Medinah CountryClub in Illinois. It was Irwin's third Open title.</TEXT></DOC>