<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901228-0055</DOCNO><DOCID>901228-0055.</DOCID><HL>   Cozy Ties:   IMF, World Bank Aide   Has Dealings Hinting   At Conflict of Interest   ---   Jacques de Groote Counsels   Zaire, Got Help of People   He Was in Position to Aid   ---   He Denies Any Improprieties   ----   By Edward T. Pound   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 1</SO><CO>   FORGN AFRIC EUROP</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   WASHINGTON -- In the secretive world where internationalpolitics meets money, Jacques de Groote is a man ofinfluence.   Suave and erudite, Mr. de Groote is a senior executivedirector of both the World Bank and the InternationalMonetary Fund -- a bridge between developed and developingnations. He involves himself in the affairs that he chooses,rendering advice as he sees fit while helping to channel the$25 billion or so in international aid the organizationsannually dispense. It is a position of much autonomy, withwide freedom from interference and scrutiny.</LP><TEXT>   The 63-year-old Mr. de Groote, who is paid a tax-free$119,000 a year, lives in a style that suggests substantialwealth. He has long been something of a bon vivant, with ataste for the finest in clothes, restaurants and residences.He has a $1 million house in the Georgetown section ofWashington, a $2 million working farm in Italy and a $1million apartment in Brussels. &quot;De Groote is an eccentric,&quot;says a friend, Hugues Leclercq, a professor in Brussels. &quot;Hewill go to a shop and buy 20 shirts, six pairs of shoes,flashy ties. He loves the finer things in life.&quot;   By his own admission, Mr. de Groote has at times beenhard-pressed for cash. In July, in fact, a court in hisnative Belgium said that he was &quot;facing serious financialproblems.&quot; Today, he acknowledges debts totaling $1 million.   Once Mr. de Groote needed a small, tide-me-over loan; hewent to the owner of a brewery in Zaire whom he also counselson World Bank policy. Another time he needed big money; heturned to the head of a mining operation in Rwanda who at thetime was seeking help from the IMF and World Bank.   Mr. de Groote also has long advised Zaire and itspresident, Mobutu Sese Seko, even though Zaire isn't one ofthe countries he officially represents. His relationship hasincluded informing Zaire, a major recipient of IMF and WorldBank aid over the years, about the organizations'confidential strategy for granting future aid. Mr. de Grooteacknowledges that these ties have provoked suspicions he wason Mr. Mobutu's payroll.   Mr. de Groote says these suspicions are false. He saysthat he has never used his position for personal gain, andthat there is &quot;no relation whatsoever&quot; between his officialpositions and his personal finances.   Mr. de Groote's activities do not appear to violate anypolicies at the World Bank and IMF. &quot;We don't have any rulesin writing for executive directors,&quot; says Francois Gianviti,IMF general counsel. &quot;We have no code of ethics in writingfor executive directors.&quot; World Bank president Barber Conableadds that a 1954 bank resolution only requires a director todisclose any &quot;substantial&quot; personal interest in a matterbefore the bank, though he says he would feel compelled tourge a director's constituent countries to investigate anyallegations of improprieties.   The lack of formal guidelines at these powerfulorganizations, and the secrecy with which they conduct theirbusiness, seem almost an invitation to engage in conflicts ofinterest. They may also bear on a frequent complaint ofcritics: That corrupt regimes still manage to get generousaid from the IMF and World Bank -- institutions whose aid ismuch-coveted in these times of tight capital. Zaire is oftencited in this connection. The African nation owes the IMF andWorld Bank more than $1.6 billion, yet President Mobutu hasbecome one of the world's wealthiest men, reputedly abillionaire.   Mr. de Groote, Zaire's longtime adviser, explains thatcorruption is simply a way of life there. &quot;Mobutu is corrupt,of course,&quot; says Mr. de Groote. Only corruption, he says,could explain how many Zairean officials &quot;drive Mercedes,have luxurious apartments in Europe, send their children tothe best private schools and take two-month holidays.&quot; (Mr.Mobutu has publicly denied plundering his country but didn'trespond to written questions for this article.)   Mr. de Groote has served Zaire off and on, officially andunofficially, for 20 years. In 1967, it was he, then a youngeconomist, who urged the strife-torn Congo to adopt &quot;zaire&quot;as the name of its new currency. The word means river or bigwater, Mr. de Groote explains, and &quot;I thought it would be akind of unifying factor.&quot; Four years later the country took&quot;Zaire&quot; as its name.   Mr. de Groote, son-in-law of a former Belgian foreignminister, was an official of the National Bank of Belgium andchief economic adviser to the Zairean national bank. Hedesigned a Zairean economic overhaul, of which he says theIMF was &quot;the cornerstone.&quot; At one point Mr. de Groote wasordered out of Zaire for giving tough economic advice. But bythe late 1970s, after he had joined the boards of the IMF andthe World Bank, he was back to advising the Mobutu regime.   In precisely what capacity was Mr. de Groote serving hisold friend and client? The answer is fraught with ambiguity.   Mr. de Groote's official duties at the IMF and World Bankinvolve Belgium, several other European nations and Turkey;other directors are responsible for Zaire. Yet when businessinvolving Zaire has come up, Mr. de Groote has often involvedhimself. This is because of his personal commitment to thecountry, he explains, as well as the long, historic tiesbetween Zaire and Belgium.   When he has corresponded with Zairean leaders, Mr. deGroote has done so on the agencies' stationery. When he hasdrawn up reports on Zaire, he has used the staff andstationery of the IMF and World Bank. But he has flown in andout of the country at Zaire's expense.   In 1982 and 1983, the IMF cut off Zaire's funding becauseof economic mismanagement. Mr. de Groote says that hepersonally urged Mr. Mobutu to rein in his personal spendingand to increase taxes -- &quot;highly unpopular advice.&quot;   But he went much further than rendering advice.   In an April 1983 letter to Kengo wa Dondo, then Zaire'sprime minister, Mr. de Groote disclosed what he knew aboutthe confidential negotiating strategy that other IMFofficials were developing for Zaire. His purpose, he wrote,was to share the views of &quot;the higher echelons of the IMF andthe World Bank.&quot; At the time, a group of IMF staffers waspreparing a visit to Zaire, and their negotiatinginstructions, he wrote, had been &quot;given to no one, apart fromthe team of negotiators.&quot;   He listed the economic measures the negotiators wouldexpect Zaire to take, predicting that compliance would freeup $246 million from the fund -- precisely the amountapproved eight months later.   He even pointed out that the finance ministry of his owncountry, a major creditor to Zaire, would be &quot;very reluctant&quot;about some aspects of the program. But not to worry, hereported: A top foreign-affairs official in Belgium whohappened to be a good friend of Mr. de Groote was &quot;exerting avery useful influence to obtain a political decision&quot;favorable to Zaire.   Mr. de Groote insists that what he did for Zaire was nodifferent &quot;than anything I write for other countries&quot; herepresents.   In a series of interviews, Mr. de Groote is remarkablyblunt about the rumors swirling around him. He acknowledgesthat even at the World Bank and the IMF, some believe that hehas acted as a paid Mobutu agent. He attributes suchallegations to false &quot;street talk&quot; spread by Mr. Mobutu'sopponents in Zaire and in Belgium, where he reports tobanking authorities. &quot;I am not a money man,&quot; he says. &quot;If Iwanted to obtain money, I could have done it very easily inZaire; I'm sure they would give me money.&quot; He adds: &quot;I am nota Mobutu agent.&quot;   Nevertheless, in Belgium, the suspicions have taken atoll. In the fall of 1980, for instance, there was talk inBrussels of Mr. de Groote's possible appointment to themanaging board of Belgium's national bank, which might haveled to his becoming national bank governor. But according topeople familiar with the events, one board member, RolandBeauvois, told a secret board meeting of being informed by ahigh Zairean official that the official had made payments toMr. de Groote for Mr. Mobutu.   The allegations, coupled with political considerationsinvolving Mr. de Groote's Franco-Flemish background, causedhis name to be withdrawn. Mr. de Groote says he wasn'tinterested in the post anyway, and attributes the controversyto bad blood between himself and Mr. Beauvois.   Mr. de Groote was also mentioned in 1982 for thegovernorship of the Belgian central bank. But this timeanother problem arose: his personal finances. &quot;I told Jacqueshe would not get it,&quot; recalls his friend Mr. Leclercq. &quot;Hewas late on his debts.&quot;   Mr. de Groote could, however, tap an old connection insuch lean times. That was Baron Jean-Louis van den Branden,whose Belgian mining and real-estate company, Geomines,operated in Zaire as well as in the African nation of Rwanda,and which boasted advisers including prominent European andU.S. political figures. About a decade ago, Mr. de Grooteobtained a short-term, unsecured loan of about $50,000 (attoday's exchange rates) from Banque Nagelmackers 1747 SA,where Baron van den Branden did some business and where,within two years, he would become chairman. Did Mr. van denBranden, his friend of 35 years, arrange the loan? &quot;Oh, yes,absolutely,&quot; Mr. de Groote says. Mr. van den Branden insists,however, that he merely gave Mr. de Groote &quot;advice on who tosee&quot; at the bank.   To this day, Mr. de Groote hasn't retired the bank debt,which has grown with interest to about $150,000. Frustrated,the bank obtained an order last July from the Court of theFirst Instance in Brussels preventing Mr. de Groote fromselling his $1 million duplex apartment in Brussels before herepays the debt.   Mr. de Groote maintains he isn't in financial distress.Besides his total income of $119,000 from the IMF and WorldBank, he says he also shares income of about $120,000 withhis wife, who, he adds, will inherit money soon.   Mr. de Groote, who lives apart from his wife, acknowledgesa reputation as one who enjoys varied female companionshipand concedes that his lavish life style has drawn the concernof friends. &quot;I certainly had a number of women in my life. .. . I had stormy liaisons with well-known ladies, and it wasa matter of worry for some of my friends that I would notmanage my financial business with care,&quot; he says. As for thebank loan, &quot;I don't worry about that bank,&quot; he says. &quot;I willpay them when it suits me&quot; -- soon, he says.   The bank's managing director, Baudouin Nagelmackers, saysof Mr. de Groote: &quot;He will say, `I have money coming fromItaly, I have money coming from here, coming from there.'He's interested in art -- paintings -- and he'll say, `I amgoing to sell this piece of art, that piece of art.'&quot;   Mr. de Groote has other bank debts as well. Mr.Nagelmackers says he has learned, under a Belgian bankingprocedure, that Mr. de Groote owes more than $300,000 toother Belgian banks. He says his bank delayed taking legalaction against Mr. de Groote because it feared that theBelgian national bank, to which Mr. de Groote officiallyreports, &quot;would take action against us -- put auditors onus.&quot; But a few years ago, he says, he finally complained tothe central bank governor.   &quot;Normally, if I see what he is earning, he should easilybe able to pay back,&quot; Mr. Nagelmackers says. &quot;But he lives inhigh style: a villa in Italy, an apartment in Brussels, ahouse in Washington.&quot;   Besides helping Mr. de Groote get this long-unpaid bankloan, Baron van den Branden has assisted him in other ways,helping Mr. de Groote turn his Georgetown home into cash in atransaction that also allowed him to continue living in it.   &quot;I badly needed money,&quot; Mr. de Groote recalls. &quot;I said oneday to him {the baron}, `Since I do not wish to go to a bank,do you have a way for me to mobilize liquidity?' He said, `Iwill find a way out.'&quot; The upshot was that in early 1982, Mr.de Groote sold his Georgetown home to a Panamanian company,Mapagico S.A., bringing in $380,000. Mr. de Groote says itwas agreed he could rent the house and ultimately repurchaseit at market value.   When questioned, Mr. de Groote initially identified theowner of Mapagico as Mr. van den Branden. And he says he knewthe Swiss managing director of Mapagico as someone &quot;involvedin some of van den Branden's business.&quot; But the baron insistshe neither bought the house nor had anything to do with theoutfit that did. He says he simply recalls referring thematter to his top finance man at Geomines, now deceased.   In any case, the deal worked for Mr. de Groote. In July1987 he repurchased the house for $550,000 -- $40,000 belowMapagico's official appraisal, and a price representingannual appreciation of only about 8% despite a red-hotWashington real-estate market. Mr. de Groote now values thehouse at $1 million.   Mr. de Groote assisted the baron at about the same time ofthe house deal. In 1982 Mr. van den Branden was seekingroughly $30 million in financing from a World Bank affiliatefor his Rwanda mining operation. The company, which was inpartnership with the government of Rwanda, was struggling forcash.   That's where Mr. de Groote came in. &quot;He was trying to helpus as much as he could at the World Bank,&quot; says a formerGeomines director, Bernard van Ommeslaghe. &quot;He helped us tomake the proper introductions to find our way within thatlarge organization for the loan.&quot;   Mr. de Groote says he can't procure a World Bank loan foranyone. He acknowledges opening doors for Geomines but saysit is the same service he gives to any Belgian company. (Mr.van den Branden, in fact, did not get the World Bank credit.)   Mr. de Groote says that in 1982 Mr. van den Branden alsobegan &quot;pestering&quot; him to press the Rwandan government todevalue its franc, a move that would have generated morelocal currency for the cash-strapped company. Mr. de Groote'sofficial duties at the IMF and World Bank don't includeRwanda, any more than they include Zaire. But he gotinvolved, because, he says, Rwanda was without an IMFexecutive director at the time and Rwandan officials askedhim to serve as its unofficial representative.   In a March 1982 letter to Rwandan President JuvenalHabyarimana, Mr. de Groote cited the need to increase exportsof tin, which were managed by Mr. van den Branden's company.He notified him that the IMF was about to recommend adevaluation, a position behind which he was throwing his ownendorsement. He also visited Rwanda urging devaluation.   Mr. de Groote says today that he was acting not at thebehest of Mr. van den Branden but at the request of oneofficial in Rwanda, the central bank governor. Officials inBelgium also favored a devaluation, he says, adding, &quot;It isunfortunate . . . that I had to defend an idea&quot; that Mr. vanden Branden happened to be promoting. (Rwanda finallydevalued the franc about 5%, though this was far less thanMr. de Groote sought.)   Baron van den Branden ultimately stumbled. In 1985 heresigned as chairman of the bank that lent $50,000 to Mr. deGroote, and Geomines finally succumbed to bankruptcyproceedings in Brussels.   Mr. de Groote has turned elsewhere to borrow funds. In1986, Michel Relecom, a Brussels businessman with extensivebrewery and agricultural interests in Zaire, lent him $4,000.&quot;He needed immediately the money and he repaid it by check acouple weeks later,&quot; Mr. Relecom recalls. He is open aboutthe fact that Mr. de Groote over the years had provided himadvice on World Bank policy, but he says that had nothing todo with the loan.   Mr. de Groote's more recent activities in Africa have onceagain focused on his old client, Mr. Mobutu.   He counseled Mr. Mobutu on IMF business at the ruler'svilla in the south of France in August 1986. He traveled toZaire in March 1987 to discuss Zaire's tattered relationswith the IMF, helping to repair ties. And in June 1989,despite worsening Zairean corruption, government misspendingand economic decay, Mr. de Groote began promoting yet anotherIMF undertaking being planned with Zaire. The board approvedthe plan, and before long another $211 million in loans wason its way to the African nation.   Within months, alas, the reform program was a shambles.Mr. Mobutu was again spending too much on himself and notenough on his impoverished country. Under IMF and World Bankregulations, the spigot was closed.   Today, Zaire's economy is crumbling amid food riots andinflation. Mr. Mobutu's days in power may be numbered,according to Mr. de Groote and others. But Mr. de Groote saysthat the bank and the fund needn't apologize for helping tokeep Mr. Mobutu in power for this long. &quot;We work withimperfect data sometimes, imperfect political systems, highlyimperfect local people sometimes,&quot; he says. &quot;But we {try} tomake the most out of it.&quot;   ---   Martin du Bois in Brussels contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>