<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910225-0140</DOCNO><DOCID>910225-0140.</DOCID><HL>   Pressure on OPEC:   War May Encourage   Oil Price Moderation   By Bolstering Saudis   ---   They Won't Want to Sacrifice   Own Big Output to Keep   Cartel Production in Line   ---   A Newfound Faith in U.S.   ----   By James Tanner   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><LP>   The Persian Gulf war is likely to mean an end to the oldorder at the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.   Though no one can be sure how the war will finally end, aquick victory by the coalition could speed the current pricedecline because it would remove from the marketplace anynotion that the war is going to cause major damage to globaloil supplies.</LP><TEXT>   And the possibility of Iraq and Kuwait resumingproduction, even in modest amounts, could exert more downwardpressure on oil prices and make it even more urgent for theOPEC countries to reach some kind of production accord.   While oil prices in the teens are unlikely to remain inthe long term, the war is expected to produce an OPEC that ismore fractious and even more dominated by Saudi Arabia, asituation that could herald moderate and more stable oilprices in the future.   &quot;Only one factor is involved in where the price of oil isgoing to go -- and that is Saudi Arabia,&quot; says Joseph Story,a consultant on the Middle East and a former Aramco officialin Saudi Arabia.   Worried about the surplus in oil supplies, OPEC PresidentSadek Boussena of Algeria invited all the OPEC ministers toVienna today to start planning a return to production quotasto prop up falling prices. But only four other ministers saidthey would attend. Some of OPEC's poorer members, such asAlgeria, would like the Saudis and some other major producersto cut back on production immediately in order to help firmup prices.   But the Saudis aren't willing to move very fast. In fact,their approach to prices has changed somewhat.   With their tremendous reserves, the Saudis have alwaysbeen willing to accept a slightly lower oil price than OPECcolleagues to prevent erosion of demand. Nations with weakereconomies but stronger militaries, such as Iraq, have in thepast restrained the Saudis somewhat. Often, the Saudis havebeen willing to unilaterally reduce their own output in orderto maintain OPEC unity.   Now, however, the Saudis have spent a lot of money toexpand their production capacity and they have spent billionson the war. This and the Saudis' newfound faith in the U.S.as their protector have led to something of a change ofheart. The Saudis have indicated that they won't intervene tostop a short-term free fall in oil prices. And while they arewilling to agree to quotas in the long term, they want theirshare of production to be much higher than before.   This is bad news for countries such as Iran, Libya, Gabon,Ecuador and others for whom the Gulf tension was something ofa boon as long as prices were moving up. But now that pricesare coming down, these countries, already producing atcapacity, cannot step up their output to maintain revenuelevels. Several of them would like to see oil prices sharplyhigher than the current $14-to-$18-a-barrel range.   The Saudis' don't really mind oil prices at current levelsor even lower for a while, although they would prefer to tryto maintain them at around $20 a barrel.   That is good news for importing nations such as the U.S.Even if a much-divided OPEC cannot agree on new productionquotas in the months ahead -- a meeting to discuss such anarrangement is scheduled for March 11 -- the Saudis' desiresfor moderate price levels are likely to win out over anydesires for higher prices.   Oil at $20 a barrel would let the Saudis generate revenueto pay war bills, and it would be conducive to economicrecovery in the U.S. and other Western nations burdened byrecession.   Before oil settles at $20, however, the Saudis and mostother oil market players are anticipating further pricedeclines -- possibly even a plunge -- as market fundamentalsof excess crude and sluggish demand reassert themselves inpeacetime. During the last week, the world got a taste ofwhat peace may mean to oil prices. Crude oil futures pricesfell more than $3 to less than $18 a barrel as peaceproposals, since rejected, emerged.   &quot;OPEC will have to get together after the crisis anddecide how to cut production,&quot; warns Diego Tamariz, Ecuador'soil minister, &quot;or there will be a sharp fall in prices.&quot;   Led by Saudi Arabia, the 11 members of OPEC unaffected bythe U.N. embargo have been surprisingly successful in makingup for the lost Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil. Current OPEC output isaround 23.5 million barrels a day, up from some 20 millionbarrels a day last August. That strong production, combinedwith demand declines in several big oil-consuming nationssuch as the U.S. because of economic recession, has resultedin a huge overhang.   The amount of oil above normal world inventories &quot;is onthe order of 225 million to 235 million barrels -- andbuilding,&quot; says Brice Sachs, a former Exxon Corp. planningofficial who is now a principal in International EnergyConsultants Ltd.   Around one-half the excess inventories are so-calledproducer stocks, held mainly by Saudi Arabia and Iran asunsold cargos of crude in tankers at sea or parked near majormarkets. Both countries have become aggressive oil marketers,with Iran targeting many of Iraq's former customers.   Although it's possible crude-oil prices will rebound a bitas a result of the allied ground assault, they have been on ageneral decline since reaching the Gulf-crisis peak of$40-plus last October. Currently, West Texas Intermediate,the U.S. benchmark crude, is down to pre-crisis levels ofless than $18 a barrel.   Still to come is the seasonal weakening of demand thatspring normally brings. Demand for OPEC oil is expected todrop between two million and three million barrels a day inthe second quarter from the first quarter level.   In the longer run, another factor that could press priceslower is the resumption of production by Kuwait and Iraq.   Iraq, which isn't believed to have sustained much damageto its oil fields, should be able to resume some productionquickly. Because the Iraqis have set fire to roughly half ofKuwait's oil wells and because of the extensive damage donethroughout that country, it will take at least several months-- and some fear it could take as much as two years -- beforeKuwait can resume significant production. When thesecountries do return to the market, they will be underpressure to produce at very high rates to pay for all thedamage done to their economies.   Before the war began, Kuwait was being criticized by someOPEC partners -- notably Iraq -- for producing more than itsassigned quota. Of course, just how willing Iraq itself willbe to join any quota agreement will depend in part on whetherSaddam Hussein remains in power.   &quot;Whichever way one looks at the situation, the price ofoil is destined to end 1991 much lower than it started,unless OPEC manages in the aftermath of the Gulf crisis toimpose upon itself strict production discipline,&quot; reports theCentre for Global Energy Studies, the London-based energyresearch firm founded by Ahmed Zaki Yamani, the former Saudioil minister.   Indonesia's pragmatic oil minister, GinandjarKartasasmita, has suggested that OPEC should cut its oilproduction to around 21.5 million barrels a day for thesecond quarter. He and the other OPEC oil ministers alreadyhad confirmed in December that they would return to theirJuly 1990 agreement once the Persian Gulf crisis ended. Thatagreement set a production ceiling of 22.5 million barrels aday and an oil target price of $21 a barrel.   But the individual country allocations under that ceilingwere set before Saudi Arabia and some other countries such asVenezuela made major investments to accelerate expansion oftheir production capacities, and before all OPEC nationsincreased their production to make up for that of Kuwait andIraq.   For example, the Saudis' pre-invasion quota was 5.4million barrels a day. But an economist in the Saudigovernment argues that with his country's financial burdens,most notably an estimated $50 billion to cover war-relatedcosts, Saudi Arabia should never let its production fallbelow seven million barrels a day again and that it shouldtry to maintain output at 7.7 million to 7.9 million barrelsa day. He says the higher volumes are better even if theprice of oil falls to $10 a barrel or less.   It might seem simple arithmetic that Saudi Arabia couldhave more revenue by producing less oil at a higher price.But the economist insists there are a number of other factorsto take into consideration, including maintenance of marketshare, helping major customers such as the U.S. end theirrecessions, and preserving long-term demand for oil.   Opinions differ even in the kingdom on how much the Saudisshould reduce output on OPEC's return to quotas. But thereare signals from the kingdom's oil-policy makers that theywill be willing to cut output as much as necessary to supporta $20 or $21 price so long as others in OPEC cooperate. &quot;Wepromised to go to a quota as soon as the crisis ends, whichwe will do.&quot; says a Saudi official.   Still, the Saudis expect their vastly expanded capacity tobe taken into account by the others when quotas aredistributed again, the official says. &quot;We hope that we getmore commitments from the others -- and a betterunderstanding of our sacrifice in not using all ourcapacity,&quot; he says.   With all that is negative, there are some factors inOPEC's favor. The supply situation outside OPEC istightening. There could be more shutdowns of wells in theNorth Sea, U.S. crude oil output is still declining, and theoutlook for Soviet oil exports is grim. What's more, thelower prices may bring a turnaround in sluggish oil demand.&quot;We may well be surprised that demand will be stronger thanexpected, even with the recession,&quot; says William Randol,international oil analyst with First Boston Corp.   OPEC has been through price collapses before. In fact, itseems to work best under such crises. &quot;I never agreed {withthe theory} that after this war OPEC would be paralyzed,&quot;says Nordine Ait-Laoussine, president of NALCO EnergyConsulting Services in Geneva and a former delegate to OPECfrom Algeria. He adds, &quot;The bottom line is, I personallybelieve the oil exporting countries are condemned to worktogether.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>