<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910725-0067</DOCNO><DOCID>910725-0067.</DOCID><HL>   New Regime:   Amid Court Reversals,   Securities Law Cops   Grow More Cautious   ---   After Giuliani's Crackdown,   Wall Street Crime Isn't   A Priority for Successor   ---   SEC Also Tries a New Tack   ----   By Wade Lambert and Ann Hagedorn in New York   And Kevin Salwen in Washington</HL><DATE>07/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   NEW YORK -- Last week, following a string of embarrassingreversals of celebrated securities-fraud cases, the ManhattanU.S. Attorney's office issued a press release to trumpet asuccess: After an &quot;extensive investigation,&quot; a mailroom clerkhad been convicted for ordering unneeded office supplies inexchange for about $7,000 in gifts.   How times have changed at the office that was once thebailiwick of Rudolph Giuliani and the bane of big-time WallStreet crooks. Otto Obermaier, who for the past 20 months hasbeen running the nation's most important U.S. Attorney'soffice, has turned his attention just about everywhere butWall Street, from car dealers and labor leaders to drug andweapons merchants.</LP><TEXT>   People familiar with Mr. Obermaier's operation say there'snothing in the works now to compare with the hugeinsider-trading and stock-manipulation investigations of Mr.Giuliani's reign, which netted guilty pleas from dealmakersand traders such as Ivan Boesky, Dennis Levine, Martin Siegeland Michael Milken.   Of course, that may be because there aren't any more suchcriminals on Wall Street. But Mr. Obermaier makes no bonesabout his preference for prosecutorial restraint. As adefense lawyer for, among others, stock speculator JohnMulheren -- whose securities fraud conviction was reversedearlier this month -- Mr. Obermaier sharply criticized Mr.Giuliani and his assistants for seeking criminal sanctionsfor securities-law violations rather than leaving enforcementto the SEC.   In an interview, Mr. Obermaier says he still believes thatcriminal prosecutions in securities cases should be a lastresort, after civil remedies have been pursued. He adds thathe tends to avoid bringing charges regarding complexfinancial matters, such as what he calls &quot;put and callcases.&quot; He says he would be much more receptive to &quot;classic&quot;insider-trading cases and allegations involving penny-stockfraud and embezzlement.   &quot;It's back to the old days of corralling shady operatorsof boiler rooms pitching Florida land deals, instead ofpillars of the community in blue-chip firms,&quot; says a formerfederal prosecutor in Manhattan now in private practice. Fewbig Wall Street cases are &quot;in the pipeline, and there's noincentive to make them,&quot; he adds.   With the Securities and Exchange Commission also shiftingresources from big trading cases to bank fraud, corporaterecord-keeping abuses and garden-variety scams, the tradersand investment bankers may be freer of governmentinvestigators than at any time since Mr. Boesky began tellingtales in 1986.   The new order is playing to mixed reviews. Many on WallStreet say they are glad to see the end of Mr. Giuliani'scrusading, which some describe as &quot;a reign of terror.&quot; Butsome former Giuliani aides and other lawyers contend that anenforcement vacuum could allow big-time cheats back into themarkets. As Joel Bernstein, an investors' lawyer, puts it,&quot;The securities industry is one that requires a tremendousamount of vigilance, and any slack in enforcement is harmful. . . in one way or another.&quot;   Securities lawyers say the heat is being turned downpartly because takeovers and other big deals have dwindled,thus reducing the opportunities to trade on insideinformation or manipulate stock prices.   In addition, the memory of the enforcement blitz of the1980s, especially searing images like the handcuffing ofRichard Wigton on the Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. trading floor,remains a deterrent. (Charges against Mr. Wigton were laterdropped.) &quot;The reputational risks of questionable activityare so high that I can't believe the first-rate firms and thelarge firms will take such risks,&quot; observes Peter Peterson,chairman of Blackstone Group, a New York securities firm.   And some of Mr. Giuliani's efforts to prosecute complexsecurities-fraud cases have backfired, as appeals courts haveoverturned convictions won in the 1980s. The most notableinvolved the stock-manipulation case against Mr. Mulheren, inwhich appellate judges this month faulted prosecutors' graspof both the facts and the law. After such stinging reversals,&quot;the government is going to have to be more cautious inbringing these more exotic cases,&quot; says Alan Bromberg of theSouthern Methodist law school.   But beyond these reasons lie fundamental philosophicaldifferences between the enforcers of the 1980s and of the1990s -- differences perhaps indicating that Wall Street willbe left more to itself.   Mr. Obermaier's tenure at 1 St. Andrew's Plaza in NewYork, home to a staff of 180 prosecutors, has been a radicaldeparture from his predecessor's. Mr. Obermaier, who hadspent years representing targets of securities-fraudinvestigations, came to office as the choice of Sen. AlfonseD'Amato, a Republican long considered one of Wall Street'sbest friends in Washington. The 55-year-old Mr. Obermaierimmediately set a new course.   The first thing to go was the high public profile. Mr.Giuliani used to summon reporters at least three times amonth, drawing attention to white-collar crime but irritatingdefense lawyers, who said he was imperiling their clients'rights. In 20 months on the job, the wry, scholarly Mr.Obermaier has held only four news conferences, andcircumspect ones at that.   His caution extends to the style and substance ofprosecutions. Lawyers term his office basically reactive,often handling cases brought to it by the SEC or FederalBureau of Investigation rather than shaping prosecutionsindependently and giving direction to the agencies. Thispassivity, a return to the pre-Giuliani approach, has criticssaying the office runs on &quot;Otto-pilot.&quot; The cases that resultusually involve relatively clear-cut crimes againstidentifiable victims, rather than -- in securities cases -- apattern of wrongdoing that might disrupt honest operation ofthe marketplace.   Lawyers say Mr. Obermaier's cases are easier to prove tojuries than Mr. Giuliani's and are more likely to pass musteron appeal. But they also are less likely to involvesophisticated trading schemes involving large sums of money.The contrast is illustrated by one of Mr. Obermaier's few bigsecurities cases, against commodities traders Preston Semeland Charles Federbush; their indictments followed the outlineof a civil case brought by commodities regulators weeksearlier. (They are fighting both the civil and criminalcases.)   Though denying his style is reactive, Mr. Obermaier sayshe believes that Congress, not an individual prosecutor,should set law-enforcement priorities and that the toppriorities now are cases involving drugs, weapons and violentcrime.   That approach produces fewer securities cases. Mr.Giuliani brought an average of 29 securities andcommodities-fraud cases during his last three years, while sofar Mr. Obermaier has averaged about half as many -- and farfewer big cases. That leaves the U.S. Attorney's officehandling more conventional white-collar-crime cases, such astax shelters, boiler-room operations and low-level insidertrading.   One big securities case known to be in the pipeline now isleft over from the Giuliani years. It's an investigation ofThomas P. Spiegel, former chief executive of Columbia Savingsandamp; Loan. Thrift regulators, in a civil suit filed in federalcourt in Manhattan, accuse him of defrauding Sandamp;Ls in a schemeinvolving Mr. Milken, the former junk-bond chief at DrexelBurnham Lambert. Both men deny the allegations.   Because of the changed approach, &quot;there's been someRudy-withdrawal&quot; in the office, says Stephen Robinson, whorecently left to become associate general counsel for KrollAssociates, a corporatesecurity firm. He adds that Mr.Giuliani &quot;was a boss with a certain style who brought acertain amount of attention to the office. . . . It is adifferent feeling now. I don't know whether it is necessarilygood or bad. It isn't good to the extent that there may notbe that level of enthusiasm that there might have been.&quot;   As prosecutors who worked under Mr. Giuliani leave, thechanging of the guard -- in an office where turnovergenerally runs about 10% a year -- is also likely to affectthe U.S. Attorney's vigilance on Wall Street. Someprosecutors who handled Mr. Giuliani's biggest cases, such asBruce Baird, Charles Carberry and Randy Mastro, have movedon. Now Jess Fardella, one of the lead prosecutors in theMilken case, is said to be considering leaving to head theSEC's New York office. He and SEC officials decline tocomment.   As a result of these changes, the heaviest enforcementload is likely to fall back on the SEC, which competedfiercely during the Giuliani years for primacy in the battleagainst Wall Street fraud. But the SEC, under ChairmanRichard Breeden, also seems to be shifting its attention awayfrom big-time trading crimes.   &quot;Maybe there just aren't any more Moby Dicks out there,&quot;shrugs Thomas Newkirk, the SEC's top trial lawyer, describingthe dearth of blockbuster Wall Street enforcement cases.&quot;We're going back to the way we were before May 1986, whenthe average guy probably couldn't name the biggest case webrought.&quot;   Still on the SEC's plate is the case of Robert Freeman,the Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. arbitrager who pleaded guilty to asingle criminal count in 1989 following several false startsby prosecutors. The word then was that the SEC would bringbroader civil charges against him, but after two years itstill hasn't done so. The SEC won't comment; people familiarwith the case say it is likely to take some action soonagainst Mr. Freeman, who admitted trading on insideinformation in the 1986 leveraged buyout of Beatrice Cos. Mr.Freeman's lawyers decline to comment.   The agency also has an enforcement team working on thefallout from the criminal and civil settlements of Mr. Milkenlate last year. But no cases have been brought. &quot;It isamazing at this juncture after his settlement that there isnot a single case that has come out or even one in theoffing,&quot; says Harvey Pitt, a Washington securities lawyer whorepresented Mr. Boesky. He notes that the agency brought newcharges against targets of Boesky finger-pointing in a monthor so.   The SEC's enforcement chief, William McLucas, says peopleshouldn't count the SEC out when it comes to junk-bond cases.These new cases may not involve Mr. Milken or his associatesbut rather are likely to stem from restructurings ofjunk-bond-financed deals, Mr. McLucas says. His staffers arebearing down on lawyers, members of creditors' com- mittees,accountants and others connected with restructurings andother deals, looking for evidence of misappropriation. TheSEC is currently probing trading in Tonka Corp. bonds by afund run by Goldman Sachs.   Overall, the SEC enforcement staff in Washington isgrowing fast -- it was up 9% last year and is seeking an evenbigger increase.   Although Mr. McLucas says a big case against a Wall Streetfirm is imminent, he concedes that most new investigationsdon't point in that direction or toward the dwindlingarbitrage community. He says insider-trading referrals fromthe exchanges fell 30% last year from 1989.   Today, the SEC is going after improper financialreporting, such as a recent case involving Bank of NewEngland, which issued a $250 million bond offering shortlybefore becoming insolvent. The bank settled the case. Anothermajor current concern at the SEC: scams based on race,religion or ethnicity. The agency has brought several suchcases in recent months.   Defenders of the shift in enforcement by the U.S. Attorneyand the SEC say Wall Street firms themselves, in the wake ofthe Giuliani cases, are taking up any enforcement slackthrough improved internal compliance systems. Under the 1988insider-trading law, moreover, firms can be held liable foremployees' violations if they lack an appropriate system.   Some also say the real troublemakers in the investmentworld are just the sort of operators that the government nowis targeting. &quot;There are bucket shops churning people'saccounts and penny-stock artists peddling worthless stock,&quot;says Guy Wyser-Pratte, who heads a New York firm specializingin takeover stocks.   Nonetheless, some former prosecutors, SEC alumni andothers -- veterans of the 1980s cases -- say moresophisticated fraud rings could re-emerge in a less forcefulenforcement climate and hurt the markets as a whole. &quot;If thegovernment is gun-shy in bringing cases,&quot; says RichardGreenfield, a shareholders' lawyer, &quot;the private investor isleft to fend for himself.&quot;   ---   Staff reporter George Anders contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>