<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920212-0115</DOCNO><DOCID>920212-0115.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- The Gallery:   Jewish History Reconsidered in Berlin   ----   By John Marks</HL><DATE>02/12/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><LP>   Berlin -- A hundred yards from the Martin-Gropius Museumentrance, a provisional building of concrete and glassencloses a Gestapo barrack complete with kitchen. It wasfound in the rubble of World War II and preserved. Now it isthe prelude to an enormous historical exhibition of Jewishsocial and intellectual history.   &quot;Judische Lebenswelten,&quot; or &quot;Patterns of Jewish Life,&quot; upthrough April 26, inevitably is connected with Germany's Nazipast. Looking out the museum windows, visitors can discern amountain of rubble and an empty field, the former site ofS.S. and Gestapo headquarters. Not far away, at PotsdamerPlatz, a nondescript mound marks Hitler's bunker, and aroundthe corner what was once Hermann Goering's Air TransportMinistry is now a bazaar where East German industry is soldoff.</LP><TEXT>   Given the current overall atmosphere of healing andreunion, the reconsideration of Jewish history by Germans iswell timed. Last month, German politicians, Jewish leadersand survivors of the Holocaust gathered in Berlin for the50th anniversary of the Wannsee Conference in the villa inwhich the plan to annihilate all of Europe's Jews wasannounced.   If this seems to symbolize reconciliation, a recent poll,jointly taken by a German and an Israeli firm, also indicatesthat one in every eight Germans professes some degree ofhatred toward Jews and that a majority of Israelis are notecstatic about German unification.   &quot;Patterns of Jewish Life&quot; will strike a blow against thesetrends, its organizers contend, by dispersing ignorance aboutJewish culture and stressing its continuity from biblicaltimes through the present.   &quot;My deepest concern is for the people of the five newGerman states,&quot; writes Heinz Galinski, the head of Berlin'sJewish community, in the introduction to the show's catalog.&quot;In East Germany, the subject of Jewish life was largelytaboo, and this project will have reached its goal in acertain sense if as many visitors as possible from thesestates come to see it.&quot;   The objects on view, lent by some 300 donors in 19countries, include: a menorah (ritual candelabrum) made ofsmall souvenir Statues of Liberty, an ornate Torah ark thatprotected a scroll of the first five books of the OldTestament in an Indian synagogue, an illuminated Haggada(Passover prayer book) from 14th-century Spain, Torahs fromChina, an Afghan sacramental cup, and a scorched set of theTalmud, the central work of scriptural commentary in Jewishtradition, from pre-World War II Berlin. These objects aremeant to convey the vitality and diversity of Jewish culturethrough the ages, and to draw attention away from Holocaustimages of packed trains, concentration camps and gaschambers.   Showing such images &quot;has become almost a ritual with whichwe begin and end every exhibition,&quot; says the show's director,Andreas Nachama. &quot;As a result, the image persists of the Jewas victim, as a dead body. This exhibit should counter thatimage.&quot;   In trying to display the length and breadth of Jewishculture, the curators have taken on an enormous and at timesfutile task. The show begins with artifacts preceding thedestruction of the Temple of Jerusalem in A.D. 72 and movesthrough the Diaspora and the Middle Ages to present-dayIsrael. But this history is only one facet of thepresentation. The show covers rituals, sacred objects,customs, architecture, institutions such as community andsynagogue, holy days and the different permutations of Jewishculture as it developed in North Africa, India, China, Spain,Northern Europe, the U.S. and the Soviet Union.   At the center of &quot;Patterns of Jewish Life,&quot; metaphoricallyand physically, are texts, an astounding collection of rareHebrew religious, legal and scientific works dating as farback as the 10th century. These are collected under atabernacle-like tent and surrounded by a history of secularJewish culture from Moses Mendelssohn in 18th-century Berlinthrough Heinrich Heine, Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud and FranzKafka to Woody Allen in contemporary New York. This is theimaginative high point of the show, a demonstration of thecentrality of the book, and hence the life of the mind, inevery manifestation of Judaism, no matter how far-flung.   Despite many wonders, the show is too much. It succumbs tothe German propensity for exhibitions of Wagnerian excess,and one senses beneath the plenitude a thread of despair, asif the curators were launching one last mad attack onforgetfulness.   The sections on Asia seem underdone when compared withthose on Eastern Europe, a fact partly due to the rarity ofartifacts from that region. The early history of Judaism, aroom filled with fragments of ancient temples and synagogues,seems unnecessary, a nod for the sake of comprehensiveness toa period in Jewish history that would fill several museums onits own. Most disappointing are the rooms dedicated toIsrael, which contain displays of photography, Israeli artand video footage of Jews talking about the country. Not onlyis the visitor exhausted by this time, but the imagination ofthe curators seems to have flagged -- a crucial failure giventhe importance of Israel to contemporary Judaism.   The fact that the show falls flat in some areas does notreduce its power, and to quibble over aesthetics is to missthe point. Relations between Germans and Jews are at aturning point. The generation that lived through World War II-- victims and culprits for whom the experience is mostpainful and most real -- are passing away. The vast majorityof German citizens were born after the war or during itsfinal stages, and many of them reject the burden of inheritedguilt. Over the years, the number of Jews living in Germanyhas remained small, from a prewar total of 500,000 to a tenthof that today. Jews elsewhere, Israelis in particular, havederided German Jews for staying in the country of theHolocaust. They have pleaded with Jews from the former SovietUnion arriving in Germany to come to Israel and not repeatthe mistake of living among the sons and daughters ofNational Socialists.   In the end, no one can say for sure what will happenbetween Germans and Jews, but one German sees the end of theCold War as a great opportunity to grapple with the past asnever before.   &quot;The Cold War was not the time for dealing seriously withthe past and for finding out what went wrong in thiscountry,&quot; says Georg Schoenberner, who has spent his lifedocumenting the Holocaust and most recently organized a smallmuseum in the Wannsee villa. &quot;Now, so many decades later, wehave a chance. The majority of people haven't the slightestreason for feeling personally guilty. For them, the war ishistory. They have the inner freedom to find a new approach.&quot;   ---   Mr. Marks is a free-lance writer based in Berlin.</TEXT></DOC>