<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920114-0041</DOCNO><DOCID>920114-0041.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Former Makers of Lead Pigment   Win Round in Poisoning Lawsuit   ----   By Jonathan M. Moses and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/14/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   AFP ARC BCCI ICI NL SHW WNEWS</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)ENERGY (ENE)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)BUILDING MATERIALS, CONCRETE, GLASS, PAINT (BLD)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)SPECIALTY CHEMICALS (CHS)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)</IN><NS>CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)POSTAL SERVICE (POS)</GV><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)CALIFORNIA (CA)CONNECTICUT (CT)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)LUXEMBOURG (LU)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)OHIO (OH)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)TEXAS (TX)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   Former manufacturers of lead pigment won an importantvictory in their battle against lawsuits seeking damages forinjuries allegedly caused by ingestion of lead paint.   In Boston, U.S. District Judge Joseph Tauro rejected aplaintiff's argument that all former makers of the pigment beheld liable when the maker of a particular batch of leadpaint can't be identified. If the so-called market-sharetheory had been permitted, the plaintiff would have had amuch easier time collecting significant damages.</LP><TEXT>   Defendants in the Boston case included NL Industries Inc.,Atlantic Richfield Corp., Sherwin-Williams Co., and GliddenCo., none of which make lead pigment any more. &quot;This is a bigwin. It may stem the tide of other people filing suits,&quot; saidPaul M. Pohl, an attorney in Pittsburgh at Jones, Day, Reavisandamp; Pogue who represents Sherwin-Williams.   Other big lead cases are pending in Philadelphia and NewYork, where no decisions have yet been made on use of themarket-share theory in such suits. While the Boston decisionisn't binding on judges in those cities, the ruling by thechief judge of the federal court in Boston could be extremelyinfluential, lawyers said.   The decision came in a case filed four years ago on behalfof a Boston teen-ager, Monica Santiago. The lawsuit seeks$2.5 million from the companies to compensate her for leadpoisoning that allegedly resulted when, as a toddler, she atepaint that had peeled from the walls of her parents'apartment.   Central to her case was the argument that, since it wouldbe impossible to identify which company had manufactured thepaint that she ate, all companies that once used white-leadpigment in their paints should contribute to any award shereceived in proportion to their historic market shares of theproduct.   The market-share theory, pioneered by California courts incases involving the pregnancy-drug diethylstilbestrol, orDES, has been a powerful weapon for plaintiffs' lawyers insome product-liability cases. However, while additional statecourts, such as New York, have adopted the theory in DEScases, few have extended market-share liability to otherproducts, and many states, including Massachusetts, have yetto recognize it at all.   In his opinion, Judge Tauro highlighted several factorsthat made market-share liability inappropriate in alead-paint case. He wrote that DES causes a &quot;signature&quot;disease, while lead paint causes health problems, such asbrain and bone damage, that might have had numerous othercauses. The judge also questioned how accurate market sharescould be calculated over the 50-plus years that lead pigmentwas used in paint. The period applying to DES was much morenarrowly defined.   While a number of landlords have been held liable fordamage done by lead paint to their tenants, personal-injurylawsuits against major manufacturers of the white-leadpigment used to make lead paint are only a few years old.Residential use of lead paint was banned nationwide in 1977.Plaintiffs' lawyers said they filed suits after uncoveringdocuments allegedly showing that the lead industry conspiredto keep lead paint on the market after its dangers wereknown, a charge the industry denies.   The lead-paint litigation has been spearheaded by a fewplaintiff lawyers who had great success representing victimsof asbestos-related diseases.   &quot;This is a broad setback,&quot; Neil T. Leifer, an attorney atThornton andamp; Early who represents Ms. Santiago, said of theBoston ruling, which he plans to appeal. He also noted thatthe judge has yet to rule in the case on whether thedefendants can be held liable for working together to keeplead paint on the market.   Over the past year, several other courts have issuedrulings favorable to defendants in lead-paint litigation.Most recently, a New York state judge threw out severalclaims by New York City against lead-pigment makers, sayingthat the statute of limitations had run out. New York isseeking restitution for work done in removing lead paint fromthe walls of city-owned housing.   ---   BUSH TRADE mission may open legal market to U.S. lawyersin Japan.   Auto parts and computers weren't the only trade issues onthe table last week. In a concession to U.S. lawyers, theJapanese government agreed to &quot;redouble its effort to resolveissues related to foreign lawyers.&quot;   That could mean lowering the stiff barriers preventingAmerican law firms from developing a better foothold inJapan's legal market, particularly in corporate and financialtransactions.   While American lawyers are allowed to do business inJapan, they may only practice the law of the U.S.jurisdiction in which they are licensed. In addition,American law firms in Japan may not use the firm's own nameon its letterhead or business card, only the names of theattorneys actually in Japan, and may not lobby or arbitrate.   Most importantly, American law offices in Japan are barredfrom hiring Japanese lawyers, although Japanese firms arefree to hire Americans. That restriction is the mostrepressive, says Linn Williams, a former deputy U.S. TradeRepresentative.   &quot;The basic issue is whether law firms can have Japanesepartners,&quot; said Mr. Williams. &quot;Unless they can do that, theycan't develop a capacity in Japanese law. And unless foreignlaw firms can develop a capacity in Japanese law, they willbe of limited value helping foreign companies get intoJapan.&quot;   The language in last week's trade declaration, thoughvague, reflects a recognition by Japan that U.S. lawyers arekey to opening Japanese markets as &quot;trade facilitators,&quot; saidPeter Ehrenhaft, the chairman of the American BarAssociation's task force on legal practice in Japan. &quot;Here,in a presidential communique, is a recognition that lawyers'services are an important part of trade issues,&quot; said Mr.Ehrenhaft, an international law specialist at the Washington,D.C., firm of Bryan, Cave, McPheeters andamp; McRoberts.   What change might come from last week's trade partnershipagreement won't be known until trade representatives on bothsides sit down again &quot;sometime soon,&quot; a U.S. trade officialsaid yesterday.   ---   BOSTON GLOBE wins libel appeal involving protection foropinion columns.   The First U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Boston upheld alower court ruling dismissing a libel suit brought by PhantomTouring Co., a theater production company, against the BostonGlobe newspaper, which is owned by Affiliated PublicationsInc. Lawyers said the ruling is especially significant in thewake of a 1990 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that columnsexpressing opinion have no greater protections than newscolumns.   Phantom had alleged it was defamed in a series of 1989articles by Globe theater critic Kevin Kelly, who suggestedthat the company benefited from public confusion over thehighly successful Broadway version of &quot;The Phantom of theOpera&quot; and Phantom Touring's musical comedy version of theshow.   In the earlier case, Milkovich v. Lorain Journal, theSupreme Court in 1990 said statements in opinion columns thatcannot reasonably be interpreted as stating facts are stillprotected, but statements that can be proved false or truecan be the subject of court action.   The First Circuit said the Globe case was different fromMilkovich because Mr. Kelly &quot;not only discussed all the factsunderlying his views but also gave information from whichreaders might draw contrary conclusions.&quot; The court addedthat because all sides of the issue were exposed, Mr. Kelly'sconclusion could only be interpreted as his personal view and&quot;not as a statement of fact.&quot;   &quot;It is true that there has been concern since Milkovich,and there remains some concern,&quot; libel-law specialist FloydAbrams said. &quot;However, this ruling can go far to relievingthe fears of columnists, critics and others that the FirstAmendment no longer protects their words. It makes clear thatin the ordinary case of criticism of a play or movie or adish in a restaurant that the critic continues to beprotected.&quot;   E. Susan Garsh, a lawyer for the Globe, said the FirstCircuit ruling in the Globe's favor should make columnistsbreathe easier. &quot;What is significant here is that the FirstCircuit, without looking at Massachusetts law, toldcolumnists they need not fear expressing their conclusionsfreely. It is for the reader -- not a judge -- to decidewhether a columnist's opinion is well founded.&quot;   ---   BAN ON CAMPAIGNING at post office upheld by U.S. appealscourt.   The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattanruled that the U.S. Postal Service's ban is constitutional.Overturning a lower court's decision, the appeals court panelsaid that a walkway adjacent to the entrance of a post officeisn't a public forum and an evenhanded ban that applies toall candidates regardless of their views is acceptable there.   Postal worker Frank Longo, who sought to run for theSenate in 1988 in Connecticut, challenged the ban after hewas barred from soliciting signatures in a post officewalkway to put him on the ballot as an independent.   The appeals court noted that authorities have more leewayto restrict free speech in nonpublic forums than intraditionally public locales such as parks or streets. Andthe court said that the ban on campaigning serves a validpurpose, namely preventing postal officials from gettingembroiled in partisan politics.   &quot;If campaigning for public office on public property werenot prohibited, the Postal Service surely would be beset byrequests from eager politicians competing for time and spacein the most strategic locations possible, such as the postalwalkway involved in this case,&quot; the appeals court said. Mr.Longo's attorney couldn't be reached for comment.   (Longo v. U.S. Postal Service, Second U.S. Circuit Courtof Appeals, 91-6141)   ---   BCCI CREDITORS appeal bankruptcy judge's decision not toblock settlement.   U.S. Bankruptcy Judge James Garrity Jr. last week rebuffedthe creditors' request to block a plea agreement thatliquidators for Bank of Credit andamp; Commerce Internationalreached with prosecutors. Under the settlement, BCCI, a unitof BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg) S.A., has admitted fraud andracketeering charges and agreed to forfeit its $550 millionin U.S. assets. The creditors, led by insurer Lloyd's ofLondon, fear that the settlement won't leave BCCI with enoughmoney to pay their claims.   On appeal, the creditors have asked a federal districtjudge in Manhattan to determine whether the bankruptcy courthad exclusive jurisdiction over BCCI's assets in the U.S.BCCI sought the protection of the bankruptcy court inManhattan last summer after its operations were closed byregulators in several countries amid allegations ofwidespread fraud.   ---   NOTED: Judy Whalley, a veteran government lawyer whosupervises all criminal and civil litigation in the JusticeDepartment's antitrust division, will leave to join theWashington law firm Howrey andamp; Simon. Other governmentantitrust lawyers said Ms. Whalley's departure will hurt thedivision, which is still struggling to recover from severecutbacks imposed by the Reagan administration. Howrey andamp; Simonsaid Ms. Whalley will become a partner in the 200-lawyer firmApril 1.</TEXT></DOC>