<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910514-0101</DOCNO><DOCID>910514-0101.</DOCID><HL>   Markets and Morality   ---   Or Arbitragers Get No Respect   ----   By Harry M. Markowitz</HL><DATE>05/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><LP>   Usually the only thing I lecture on lately is portfoliotheory, but this time I think it best if I make an exception.I have decided, instead, to discuss questions of right andwrong, especially as applied to participants in financialmarkets. Now, you know as much as I do about right and wrong.So, this afternoon I will be an equal opportunity speaker: Iwill explore a subject on which the audience knows as much asthe speaker.   There are many obvious ways in which a society's rules ofright and wrong influence its quality of life. Wherelittering is not frowned upon, all live in a world of litter.Where &quot;excuse me&quot; and &quot;thank you&quot; are passe, all live in arude world.</LP><TEXT>   The consequences of rules of right and wrong are sometimessubtler. A few years ago a friend asked me to have dinnerwith him and a Russian emigre mathematician. I was disturbedto hear the mathematician predict that the Gorbachev reformswould not succeed. &quot;The basic problem is the Russian people'sattitude toward profit,&quot; he explained. &quot;If there are goodsone place that are needed someplace else and someone makes aprofit moving these goods from the one place to the other, heis considered greedy and evil.&quot;   In fact, the Gorbachev reforms did not succeed. Wheneconomic collapse had proceeded far enough, Mikhail Gorbachevfroze bank accounts, causing much distress among those whohad managed to save anything. The purpose was to frustratethose Mr. Gorbachev said were the true culprits: theblackmarketeers. Thus in Mr. Gorbachev's mind, or at least inhis words to the Soviet people, the source of the Soviet illwas the greedy, evil people who seek to benefit from themisfortunes of others by moving goods from where they are towhere they are needed, not out of altruism but out ofavarice.   My own views are much closer to the gospel according toAdam Smith. The invisible hand is clumsy, heartless andunfair, but it is ever so much more deft and impartial than acentral planning committee. Consequently, I am troubled bythe indiscriminate way many Americans use &quot;greed&quot; as anexplanation of economic events. For example, the cover of&quot;Liar's Poker,&quot; a book about Salomon Brothers, shows a dollarbill with a picture of John Gutfreund, head of Salomon.Inscriptions on the dollar include &quot;In Gutfreund We Trust&quot;and &quot;Wall Street Greed.&quot; The back cover of &quot;The Predators'Ball,&quot; about Drexel Burnham Lambert and Michael Milken,contains part of a New York Times review, which says the book&quot;dramatically captures the philosophy of greed that hasdominated Wall Street in the 1980s.&quot;   The blanket condemnation of the &quot;greedies&quot; of the 1980sfails to distinguish between the complaint that too manypeople sought to maximize their own well being, as Adam Smithwould have us all do, legally, and the complaint that toomuch leverage was used in the 1980s. If the latter is thetrue complaint, the blanket condemnation of &quot;the greedies&quot;fails to ask whether the reason for excess leverage was thefact that slick salesmen disguised the true risks of the junkbonds they sold. Or was it that unwise laws structuredinstitutions so that they were induced, and sometimescompelled, to take high risks?   The blanket condemnation of the greedies of the 1980sblurs other important distinctions. It lumps together peoplewho were remarkably stingy with those who were remarkablygenerous, either with public donations to good causes or withquiet private help to others in need. It lumps together thosewhose sole interest in life was the winning of the financegame, as measured by their accumulating wealth, and those whoplayed the game well, accumulated fortunes, but found timefor other interests. It lumps together those who committedwell-defined crimes and deserved the punishment they got, andperhaps more, with those who were arrested conspicuously,left waiting for the next round of charges, then had theircases dropped as a big mistake; and those whose crimes hadbeen civil offenses before, but now were elevated to criminaloffenses.   I'd like to examine some of these distinctions moreclosely, but before that I'd like to correct twomisimpressions I may be giving. First, you may think that Ithink that maximizing well-being is the same as maximizingwealth. But I believe that most people find that once somemoderate needs for food and shelter are satisfied, it dependsmore on how you spend your time than on how much money youmake.   Second, since I have emphasized the efficacy of markets ascompared to bureaucrats, you may think I think that marketscan run themselves. This is not the case. Laws and lawenforcement are needed to assure me that the meal I buy isnot poisoned and the airplane I fly on is well maintained;that those who manufacture things for my use pay their fullcosts, including the costs of cleaning up the mess they make;that if I deposit money with a bank or pay a premium to aninsurance company the banker or insurer will not go to LasVegas to gamble with my money.   These two things now said, let's return to the allegedgreedies of the 1980s. I would like to organize my remarksaround two product areas of major importance in the 1980s.One is mortgage bond products as pioneered at SalomonBrothers; the other is junk bonds -- that is, high-yield,high-risk bonds, whose market was dominated by Mr. Milken atDrexel.   &quot;Liar's Poker&quot; is the story of Salomon Brothers as told byMichael Lewis, who entered the firm early in 1985 as a youngtrainee and left it three years later when he decided makingthat much money wasn't that important. When he speaksgenerally, he speaks of the greed that permeated anddominated Salomon Brothers. When he describes specificindividuals and actions we find that some are mean and somekind, some are stingy and others generous, some you can trustand some you cannot. The individuals seem no more nor lessthan human.   Mr. Lewis considers his to be a tale of greed. I view thesame events and find in them the triumph of two great ideas:Adam Smith's invisible hand at its clumsy but beneficentbest; and option-pricing theory as applied and enhanced bythe &quot;rocket scientists&quot; whom Salomon Brothers had gathered.   The mortgage-backed bond did not become a great source ofprofit for Salomon Brothers until the 1980s, but its causewas championed within Salomon Brothers by Bob Dall as earlyas 1977. By February 1979, Lewie Ranieri, who had started inthe mailroom, was officially placed in charge of mortgageoperations. Eventually the mortgage bond business blossomed,thanks in part to a tax break passed in 1981 that made ithighly desirable for savings and loans to sell their oldmortgages and use the proceeds for other investments, eventhe mortgages sold by other Sandamp;Ls.   In the following years the market grew. It also changedcharacter. Mr. Lewis quotes Samuel Sachs, longtime mortgagebond salesman, as saying: &quot;They wheeled in the rocketscientists, who started to carve up mortgages into itty-bittypieces. The market became more than the five things thatLewie {Ranieri} could hold in his brain at any one time.&quot;   Mr. Lewis contrasts the refinement of analysis that laybehind some mortgage products with the crudeness of some ofthe traders who bought and sold these products. My own viewis that the fact that the invisible hand could work its magicthrough mere humans is an essential part of Adam Smith'sinsight. Not many thousands of years ago, men like this wouldhave clubbed each other over hunting rights. A few hundredsof years ago they would have hacked each other with axes andswords. Now they yelled at trainees while they broughttogether the supply and demand of home mortgages on aworld-wide scale.   At first, Salomon Brothers had a great advantage overother investment banks in the mortgage product area. Thisadvantage was temporary. Bright young people could see thatthey were bringing millions of dollars of profit to SalomonBrothers, and felt that their annual bonuses should reflectthis. This conflicted with Salomon caps on bonuses as afunction of how long the person had been there. But otherinvestment banks were delighted to bid away many of SalomonBrothers' young stars. As other investment banks built theirown capabilities, customers gained the ability to shoparound. In short, I take the story of mortgage products atSalomon as an example of Adam Smith's thesis that individualsseeking their own self-interest through the marketplace willpromote the common good, even if some of them are crude.   Now let us turn to the junk bond market under MichaelMilken at Drexel. I find Connie Bruck's detailed account in&quot;The Predators' Ball&quot; quite plausible and will use it as myprincipal source. In the 1980s Michael Milken engaged inillegal and near-illegal behavior as a regular part of doingbusiness. Part of this behavior had as its purpose thesuppression of competition in the junk-bond business.   For example, in 1985 the board of Wickes decided to do adebt underwriting through Salomon Brothers, which had beentrying to break into the junk-bond business. After Mr. Milkenlearned of the forthcoming underwriting, Saul Steinberg, aclose Milken associate, accumulated 10.4% of Wickes's stock,and duly reported this to the SEC. Then Mr. Milken had aSaturday breakfast meeting with Sandy Sigoloff, president ofWickes. According to a Wickes director, &quot;Mike told Sandy whatSaul held, what Drexel held, and how, when you combined thatwith whatever other pockets Mike might have placed stock in,it meant they would have control of the company.&quot; In the nextfew days Drexel became co-manager and then sole manager ofthe Wickes underwriting.   Ms. Bruck notes that if Mr. Steinberg, Drexel and perhaps&quot;other pockets&quot; did plan to act in concert, they were inviolation of securities laws by not filing with the SEC as agroup. Ms. Bruck also provides other examples of &quot;the brassknuckles, threatening, market manipulating Cosa Nostra of thesecurities world.&quot;   A small part of Mr. Milken's illegal or near illegalactivities involved his association with Ivan Boesky. Mydictionary defines greed as &quot;excessive or reprehensibleacquisitiveness.&quot; The word is so overworked that I hesitateto use it. But it does seem that Mr. Milken was asexcessively acquisitive as one could get, and Mr. Boeskyabout as reprehensible. Since Mr. Boesky is usuallyassociated with the words &quot;greed,&quot; &quot;insider trading&quot; and&quot;arbitrager&quot; I cannot resist saying a few words in defense ofthe perfectly respectable business of doing arbitrage. Thisis in part self-defense since, for three years, I was in thearbitrage business.   In index arbitrage, the arbitrager looks for moments intime when the price of a futures contract for a stock indexis out of line with the appropriate sum of prices of theindividual stocks that make up the index. The arbitrager thenbuys the one and shorts the other. This would tend to keepprices in line. Admittedly, this may seem like a rather fussyfine tuning of the price system; but it seems, at least tome, to be a good thing rather than a bad one to have pricesof related things be closely linked.   Ivan Boesky practiced merger arbitrage or risk arbitrage.A simplified example will serve to illustrate. Suppose thatCompany A agrees to buy Company B, and B agrees to be bought.A agrees to exchange one share of its $150 stock for eachshare of B's $100 stock. Upon the announcement of the deal,let us assume that A's stock stays at $150 while B's rises to$140. If you owned neither stock, and you were sure that thedeal would go through, you could assure yourself a $10 profitby shorting (that is, selling) one share of A at $150 andbuying one share of B at $140. This procedure would be saferthan just buying a share of B, since the price of both A andB might fall.   But there is one risk: Sometimes deals do not go through.Thus inside information is very valuable to the mergerarbitrager, but it is not legal to act upon. It is much lesslikely that any kind of inside information would be of valueto other sorts of arbitragers.   The proposition &quot;inside information is especially usefulto merger arbitragers&quot; does not imply the proposition &quot;allmerger arbitragers use inside information.&quot; For a reducedsentence Ivan Boesky implicated Marty Siegel among others,and Marty Siegel implicated three arbitragers in prominentpositions. The three were arrested with great fanfare, onebeing led away in tears and handcuffs.   One of the three was eventually convicted of havinglearned that a merger might not go through for which he hadan arbitrage, and acting on this information. This was indeeda crime, or at least a securities law violation, and deservedsome kind of punishment. But it was not a pattern of buyingand selling inside information as with Messrs. Boesky, Siegeland Levine. As for the other two arbitragers arrested, aftermuch delay it was decided that no charges would be brought,that there had been a miscommunication between Mr. Siegel andthe prosecutors. I agree with those who feel that if theprosecutor had been less politically motivated he would haveprepared his case first and made his arrests second.   Returning to Michael Milken and the junk market, as wenoted already Mr. Milken engaged in illegal activities, inpart to maintain a near monopoly in junk bonds. One use ofthis monopoly was to obtain high fees for junk-bondunderwritings. Implicitly, part of the fee was in the form ofwarrants -- the right to buy the issuing company's stock at afixed price, which would prove highly valuable if the stockprice rose. Frequently Drexel insisted that the warrants wereneeded to induce prospective buyers to buy the bonds. Infact, most warrants went to Drexel employees, favoredclients, and investment partnerships controlled by Mr.Milken.   But the chief complaint about junk bonds was not thatDrexel charged too much for them but that they were used fordestructive purposes, that they weakened the Americaneconomy. I believe this to be true, but there are exceptions.   Only a small minority of companies commandinvestment-grade ratings from the bond-rating services. Thejunk-bond market provides a major source of capital for therest. Clearly this market serves a useful purpose in bringingtogether supply and demand for such higher-risk and thereforehigher-yield securities.   The chief complaint about junk bonds is that they wereused to finance highly leveraged deals -- management buy-outsor hostile takeovers. The extent of the leverage isillustrated by Ms. Bruck's description of Nelson Peltz's 1985hostile takeover of National Can, financed by Mr. Milken'sjunk bonds: &quot;Five hundred sixty-five million dollars was atowering debt load for $100 million of equity to carry. AndPeltz pointed out that even the $70 million from Triangle, atthe equity base, came from its earlier offering of junk. . .. `We called it equity here, but it was debt over here. Doyou understand the leverage in this deal? It was eleven toone]'&quot;   Part of the standard takeover strategy is to attempt toreduce the debt once the target firm is acquired. In somehostile takeovers the stock of the company is sufficientlyundervalued as compared with the underlying assets that acorporate raider can buy the company at a high price(compared with the stock's recent market price), sell offpieces of the firm, pay off most of the debt and thus acquirethe core business for almost nothing.   In general in such situations, either the market has setan irrationally low value on the company or, as corporateraiders often contend, the market reflects the poor wayentrenched management uses resources. This point is welltaken. Such raids, and the threats of such raids, tend to puta boundary on how inefficient management can become incorporations where no individual or small group considersitself the company's owner. But in highly leveraged dealssuch as Mr. Peltz's takeover of National Can, the sale ofinessential assets still leaves the company highly in debt.   Another source of debt reduction is the company's cashflow. To increase the cash flow the raider, now owner of thecompany, reduces research, employment and maintenance.Sometimes, some of this makes the firm more efficient. Butbased on the levels of debt that had to be paid down, Iimagine that the raiders, now owners, of the highly leveragedcompanies had to cut back research, maintenance and staff tothe point where firm value fell.   If so, then somebody had to lose. Who? Not the oldstockholders, since they were bought out at a favorableprice. Not Drexel or Michael Milken, since they receivedlarge fees plus warrants. Not the raider, since he took ahighly advantageous gamble. If things went well, his betwould have a high payoff. If it went poorly, for the mostpart it was not his own money that was at stake; and, in themeantime, he enjoyed the perks of his large enterprise.   Old bondholders lost as the firm became more risky, sincethe quality and therefore the price of their old bonds fell.Perhaps better bond covenants could protect bondholdersagainst such increases in firm risk at their expense. Thepeople who were laid off lost. But it is hard to see how toprotect them without passing laws that generally restrictfirms' abilities to lay off workers. In the long run it wouldlead to a rigid and less productive economy -- therefore amuch smaller pie for all to share.   What about the investors in the junk bonds? Were theywinners or losers? Here we must distinguish between those whochose to invest in junk bonds and those who had their fundsput at risk in these bonds without their knowledge orconsent. If people invest in a high-yield investment fund,they have little or no cause to complain if they lose. ButMr. Milken's vast sources of funds were not such investmenttrusts; they were pension plans, Sandamp;Ls and certain kinds ofinsurers.   The Sandamp;L structure encouraged gambling by Sandamp;L managementswith Sandamp;L funds. The risks they took were in real estate andjunk bonds. The game was structured so that if bets were wonon average, then the Sandamp;L and its management gained; if theylost, then the U.S. taxpayer lost.   A similar game was available to some insurance companies.A good example is Fred Carr's First Executive Corp. As Ms.Bruck tells us in &quot;The Predators' Ball,&quot; Mr. Carr was one ofMr. Milken's best customers. The money with which Mr. Carrbought junk bonds was mostly the reserves of insurancepolicyholders. As with Sandamp;Ls, Fred Carr bore little of therisk of the junk bonds. The risk was principally borne by thepolicyholders, who were not warned of this risk. They wereprovided no notice saying: &quot;This policy is backed by riskyinvestments. It may or may not pay off in full.&quot;   This situation raises regulatory and moral questions. Onthe regulatory side, we should try to eliminate situationswhere one party makes the decisions and reaps the gains whilesomeone else pays the costs or suffers the losses. Theindividual needs protection against such financial risk, ashe needs protection against bad food and unsafe planes.   The moral question is this: Suppose you can legally gainthe reward and stick other people with the risk. It is easyenough for me to tell you not to do it. But will it changeyour action? Perhaps you should weigh this in your decision:Someday people you put at risk without comparable reward mayseek retribution. Even if what you did to them was legal,some regulator or prosecutor may look at everything else youdid to see if anything can be used to embarrass or punishyou. Is it worth it?   Crimes were committed in the financial industries duringthe 1980s. But I know of no study that shows that, per personwith comparable opportunity, the financial industries of the1980s had more lawbreakers than other industries or othertimes. It is also true that members of the financialcommunities have been the victims of overzealous prosecutors.It is this that makes me feel that the blanket condemnationof the greedies of the 1980s is not just silly, butdestructive.   The chief complaint about Wall Street in the 1980s was notabout lawbreaking, but about highly leveraged hostiletakeovers. I now hold the hypothesis that excesses in thisarea were primarily due to the availability of large pools ofmoney whose ultimate owners or guarantors could be stuck withrisk with little or none of the reward, without theirknowledge or consent. Without these pools the junk bond wouldmostly be a vehicle for bringing together those who needfunds, but do not have an investment-grade rating, with thosewho seek higher return, understanding that it comes withhigher risk.   ---   Mr. Markowitz, a professor at Baruch College, CUNY, andconsultant to Daiwa Securities, shared the 1990 Nobel Prizein economics. This article is adapted from the 1991 RobertWeintraub Memorial Lecture at Baruch's Center for the Studyof Business and Government.</TEXT></DOC>