<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900913-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>900913-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   New York Judge Halts Publication   Of Book About Israeli Espionage   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Stephen Wermiel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   MDEST GM GMH</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)SECURITIES (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   A state judge in New York temporarily barred St. Martin'sPress from selling a book about the Israeli intelligenceservice, the Mossad.   State Supreme Court Justice Michael J. Dontzin signed theorder early yesterday morning after lawyers for the Israeligovernment argued that publication of the book would endangerlives and disclose confidential in formation.</LP><TEXT>   Justice Dontzin ordered the New York publishing house torecall approximately 18,000 copies of the book that havealready been shipped. And St. Martin's said an additional30,000 orders are being withheld from distribution as aresult of the judge's order.   The book, &quot;By Way of Deception: The Making and Unmaking ofa Mossad Officer,&quot; was written by Victor Ostrovsky. Mr.Ostrovsky, who now lives in Canada, claims he spent two yearsas a Mossad agent. He wrote the book in collaboration withClaire Hoy, a Canadian journalist.   A Canadian court last week barred the book's Canadianpublisher, Stoddart Publishing Co. of Toronto, fromcontinuing production or releasing the book before Sept. 17,when a hearing is expected to be held, a spokeswoman forStoddart said.   Roy Gainsburg, president of St. Martin's, said he believedthis was the first time that a foreign government hadsuccessfully enjoined publication of a book in the U.S.   Jonathan J. Lerner, a lawyer representing the Israeligovernment, said the book's author had violated aconfidentiality agreement not to divulge any secrets. &quot;If aCIA agent were seeking to publish vital U.S. secrets inIsrael, wouldn't we expect the Israeli courts to protectthose secrets?&quot; said Mr. Lerner, a lawyer with the New Yorkfirm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom.   First Amendment lawyers said courts won't restrain thepublication of a book except in extraordinary situations.These experts said the Israeli government's fears that thebook might endanger lives may have persuaded the judge toissue the order.   But P. Cameron DeVore, a First Amendment lawyer with theSeattle firm Davis Wright Tremaine, said the U.S. SupremeCourt has held that such orders are unconstitutional unlessan immediate and direct threat to U.S. security -- not thatof a foreign government -- exists.   &quot;Even if this book is published, as I think it will be,it's a setback that a restraint order was entered at all,&quot;said Floyd Abrams of the New York firm Cahill, Gordon andamp;Reindel, a First Amendment expert.   Israeli media reports indicated the book containsallegations that the Mossad knew in advance about theterrorist attack that killed 240 U.S. Marines in Beirut in1983 and also includes information about Mossad espionageactivity inside the U.S.   Justice Dontzin has scheduled a hearing for tomorrow toreview evidence to determine whether the ban should becontinued. But the appellate court is expected to considertoday St. Martin's request that the order be overturnedimmediately.   ---   CAMERAS IN FEDERAL COURTS are approved as a limitedexperiment.   The Judicial Conference, the policy-making arm of thefederal courts, voted to allow a three-year experimentallowing the use of cameras and broadcasting equipment incivil trials in two federal appeals courts and six federaldistrict courts. The broadcasting experiment won't involvecriminal trials because rules of procedure prohibit it.   The experiment, which begins in July 1991, will mark thefirst time television or still cameras or radio broadcastingequipment have been allowed in the federal courts in at least50 years. In the past decade, most state court systems haveexperimented with allowing cameras in courtrooms, and 44states now allow broadcast of some trials.   But the trend in the states was never matched in thefederal courts, due to the skepticism of many judges and theadamant opposition of Chief Justice Warren Burger, whoretired in 1986. Chief Justice William Rehnquist, althoughfirmly opposed to televising Supreme Court sessions,appointed a committee in 1988 to study the use of cameras inother federal courts.   Last month, the committee recommended the three-yearexperiment, and yesterday the 27-judge Judicial Conferencegave its permission. A conference spokesman said the approvalwas on a voice vote, but that a few judges expressedobjections at the closed-door session.   Once the participating courts are chosen, the experimentwill be conducted under restrictions set by the JudicialConference. News media wishing to televise a trial mustnotify the judge in advance; the request may be refused atthe judge's discretion.   The experiment will be evaluated by the Federal JudicialCenter, the judiciary's research arm, after it is concludedin June 1994. Any decision to open the federal courts furtherfor broadcasting will depend on the evaluation.   The experiment doesn't include the Supreme Court, whichisn't covered by the Judicial Conference's action. It is upto the nine justices to decide whether to allow televisioncoverage, and they repeatedly have rejected requests bylopsided votes.   ---   FTC INVESTIGATES recruiting by law firms.   The Federal Trade Commission is looking into whether majorlaw firms are violating antitrust laws by cooperating witheach other in their recruiting and hiring of law students.   The investigation, believed to be the first of its kind,focuses on agreements among big law firms to limit expensesrelated to recruiting, such as airline tickets, hotelaccommodations and restaurant meals, according to peoplefamiliar with the inquiry.   The FTC has targeted law firms based in Cleveland. Itisn't known how many firms are under scrutiny or whetherfirms from other cities also are involved.   In the annual competition for top graduating law students,large firms routinely coordinate and share expensesassociated with interviewing and wooing potential associates.The FTC apparently believes that such coordination mayinclude illegal collusion to limit costs and restraincompetition for sought-after recruits.   Without &quot;confirming or denying&quot; any specificinvestigation, FTC official Michael McNeely said that &quot;if thefirms agree on the level of wining and dining people,&quot; theymay be violating federal antitrust laws.   Employees with three Cleveland firms -- Arter andamp; Hadden,Baker andamp; Hostetler and Squire, Sanders andamp; Dempsey -- confirmedthat they were under investigation. Another firm underscrutiny is Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue, according to peoplefamiliar with the FTC action. The FTC's investigation wasfirst reported this week by Legal Times, a Washington tradepaper.   If the commission determines that antitrust laws have beenviolated, it could seek to impose fines on the law firms andrequest a court order barring anti-competitive recruitingpractices.   Arter andamp; Hadden's managing partner, Robert Glaser, calledthe investigation &quot;ludicrous&quot; and denied any wrongdoing byhis firm or the others under scrutiny.   Mr. Glaser acknowledged that law firms coordinate studentinterview trips, and that this cooperation saves costs forthe firms. But he insisted that coordination takes placeprimarily for students' benefit and only when requested bystudents. &quot;We aren't limiting our recruiting,&quot; he said. &quot;Wearen't colluding on who we invite. We hire independently.&quot;   Employees with Baker andamp; Hostetler and Squire Sandersconfirmed that the firms are being investigated but declinedto elaborate. An employee with Jones Day said the firm'smanaging partner, Richard Pogue, wasn't available to comment.   ---   INVESTORS SUING DREXEL seek relief from court stay.   The judge overseeing Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc.'sbankruptcy case has been asked to allow six lawsuits to goforward accusing Drexel, its former junk-bond chief MichaelMilken and others of a massive conspiracy to rig thejunk-bond market.   The federal and state civil lawsuits are class actionsfiled by investors who allege an intertwined scheme ofsecurities-law violations, racketeering and other wrongdoing.In the alleged scheme, sometimes referred to as a daisychain, Mr. Milken, Drexel and several corporate raiders areaccused of creating a false market for the securities throughsham transactions and price manipulation.   Some of the suits also blame the alleged scheme forexacerbating the crisis in the savings and loan industry.Federal regulators and Congress have begun their owninvestigations into possible criminal activity in the allegedscheme.   Although trial dates have already been set for some of thelawsuits, the cases can't go forward because of an automaticstay that goes into effect when a company files forbankruptcy-law protection. Drexel filed under Chapter 11 ofthe federal Bankruptcy Code on Feb. 13.   &quot;The public interest demands that there be a full publicairing and fair prosecution of all civil claims relating toDrexel's notorious operations, and that the bankruptcy lawsnot be used as an offensive weapon to shield the responsiblewrongdoers,&quot; the plaintiffs said in a motion filed in federalbankruptcy court in Manhattan. The motion was filed byMilberg Weiss Bershad Specthrie andamp; Lerach, which representsthe securities class-action group.   The motion argues that it will be impossible for Drexel tocome up with a feasible bankruptcy reorganization planwithout getting a better handle on the damages it will facefrom the litigation. U.S. Bankruptcy Court Judge HowardBuschman III set a hearing for Oct. 2 on the request.   A spokesman for Drexel said the company will file itsresponse to the motion later this month. He said, &quot;The reasonfor a stay in bankruptcy proceedings is, among other things,to allow the debtor to develop a comprehensive plan in anorganized way without the need to attend to a multitude ofseparate claims.&quot;   Under the plaintiffs' proposal, the court would allow thecases to continue until damages, if any, are determined, butit wouldn't allow the plaintiffs to try to collect the money.   ---   FORMER HUGHES AIRCRAFT employee wins whistle-blower suit.   A state Superior Court jury in Los Angeles awarded $1.95million to a former Hughes Aircraft Co. employee whocontended he was fired after accusing the company ofovercharging the government on defense contracts.   After five days of deliberations, the jury upheld claimsmade by Bobby Coffey, 55 years old, who had worked at Hughesfor more than two decades. As a program-cost analyst atHughes's missile division, Mr. Coffey pointed out allegedlyfraudulent practices in which the company overcharged thegovernment for labor and materials. Melanie Lomax, Mr.Coffey's attorney, alleged yesterday that the overchargingamounted to &quot;hundreds of thousands, if not millions&quot; ofdollars.   Mr. Coffey also claimed age discrimination, but the jurydidn't uphold that particular claim, said Hughes, a unit ofGeneral Motors Corp.   The company, which is planning to appeal, has denied thatit ever overcharged the government and maintains that Mr.Coffey was dismissed because he had falsified a time card.&quot;We feel the verdict was not consistent with the evidencethat was presented,&quot; said a spokesman for Hughes.   ---   FORMER TAKEOVER LAWYER at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp;Flom pleaded guilty to three insider-trading counts. StevenGlauberman, a former Skadden Arps associate, pleaded guiltyto two counts of disclosing confidential information that helearned at the firm and one count of trading on suchinformation. Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum in federal courtin Manhattan set sentencing for Dec. 21. Mr. Glauberman iscooperating with prosecutors in the case, in which threeother defendants have been named.   ---   Paul M. Barrett and Wade Lambert contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>