<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900924-0035</DOCNO><DOCID>900924-0035.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Illinois Court Ruling Could Limit   Damages in Product Liability Suits   ----   By Ann Hagedorn and Wayne E. Green   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   DD FLFE</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC (FIS)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)ACCOUNTING (ACC)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)EDUCATION DEPARTMENT (EDN)</GV><LP>   The Illinois Supreme Court issued a decision that couldmake it tougher for consumers to collect punitive damages inproduct liability cases.   In the decision last week, which legal experts sayprobably will have an impact on other states, the courtreversed a $1.6 million punitive damage award against gunmanufacturer Remington Arms Co., a division of Du Pont Co.,Wilmington, Del.</LP><TEXT>   The court said, among other things, that a manufacturer isnot liable for punitive damages if it has investigated prioraccidents involving a product and concluded that the productis not defective. The company, in this way, would havedemonstrated its good faith in making a safe product.   The court also said, in essence, that to win punitivedamages the consumer must prove that the product in questionwas defective. It isn't enough to argue that the company isculpable because it did not use the best possible design ormaterial.   Mark I. Levy, who filed a friend-of-the-court brief onbehalf of the Product Liability Advisory Council, said thedecision might be followed by other state courts. The opinion&quot;sends a clear message that the standard for punitive damagesshould be stringent,&quot; said Mr. Levy, an attorney with theChicago law firm Mayer, Brown andamp; Platt. &quot;The opinion makes itclear that such damages are available only in cases ofexceptional wrongdoing on the part of companies.&quot;   But Minneapolis attorney Roger P. Brosnahan, a partner atRobins, Kaplan, Miller andamp; Ciresi, said the opinion indicates&quot;a conservative trend to narrow the responsibility ofcompanies toward the public. It sends a message that peoplecannot rely on a company that has been informed about aproduct's problems to either correct the product or warn thepublic about it.&quot;   In the case, a marksman was injured when the barrel of hisRemington 12-gauge shotgun, Model 1100, exploded during atrapshooting contest in 1983. Claiming that the company knewabout the potential dangers of the gun, the marksman, RobertLoitz, charged Remington with negligence and misconduct.   At the trial, testimony disclosed that prior to Mr.Loitz's accident, the company had received 94 reports ofother barrel explosions involving the same model thatresulted in injuries. The company argued that afterinvestigating those accidents, it determined that the causeof the explosions was the type of shell the shooters used,not an inherent problem in the gun. The company's records ofthose investigations had been destroyed, but two longtimeemployees testified about the results of the probes.   A state jury had awarded Mr. Loitz $75,000 in compensatorydamages in addition to the $1.6 million punitive damage awardand an intermediate appellate court upheld the awards.   Mr. Loitz's attorney, Jon B. Robinson of the Decatur,Ill., law firm Hull, Campbell andamp; Robinson, could not bereached.   William E. Kelly, a lawyer at the Chicago law firm Pope,Ballard, Shepard andamp; Fowle representing the company, said thathe was pleased with the decision but was &quot;disappointed thatthe court didn't also reverse the compensatory damages.&quot;   ---   JUDGE SETS CAP on attorneys' fees in racketeering case.   A federal judge in Chicago set a $150,000 limit onattorneys' fees for each of six defendants named in anindictment charging members of the On Leong Chinese MerchantsAssociation with operating an illegal gambling business.   The defendants were among 29 members of the nationalassociation and chapters in Chicago, Houston and New Yorkcharged last month with operating casino-style centers. Thegovernment is seeking $11.5 million in proceeds from thealleged gambling operations.   The six defendants are under a court-imposed restrainingorder limiting their personal expenditures, because if theyare found guilty their assets are subject to governmentforfeiture.   U.S. District Judge John A. Nordberg modified therestraining order to exempt attorneys' fees from the$5,000-a-month limit on spending. Federal prosecutors soughta cap of $100,000 on attorneys' fees, but the judge ruled infavor of defense attorneys, who argued that a $150,000 limitwould be reasonable.   The cap will apply unless the trial, set for April 1,lasts more than three weeks. Judge Nordberg cautioned defenseattorneys to limit the number of hours they spend on pretrialmatters that can be handled by more junior lawyers andparalegals.   Attorneys' fees have become an issue in some racketeeringcases in light of two 1989 U.S. Supreme Court rulings thatforfeiture of the fees is constitutional.   ---   TEXAS ATTORNEY wins reversal of napping conviction.   The federal appeals court in New Orleans overturned aruling that had found prominent Houston attorney John O'Quinnguilty of criminal contempt for taking a nap in a jury roomlast Nov. 30.   Mr. O'Quinn took the siesta during a break in a lengthyand acrimonious case he was trying before U.S. District JudgeDavid Hittner in Houston. The judge said the nap violated hisNov. 22 order barring attorneys in the trial from usingcourthouse facilities without his permission. He imposed a10-day jail sentence to be served on weekends, although heoffered to set aside the jail time if Mr. O'Quinn paid a $500fine and performed 60 hours of community service.   But last week, a three-judge appeals court panel overruledJudge Hittner, saying his original order banning the use ofcourt facilities had been &quot;too vague and overbroad&quot; tosupport a criminal contempt conviction. Although Mr. O'Quinnhad exhibited &quot;less than professional conduct&quot; in his dozing,the panel said, the judge had left &quot;too much doubt&quot; about hisintentions.   John Braddock, an assistant U.S. attorney who won theconviction, said he was disappointed by the reversal, but hedidn't expect any further action in the case. Mr. O'Quinndidn't return telephone calls.   ---   NEW JERSEY SETTLES sex bias dispute between two judges.   Elinor Reiner, an administrative law judge in New Jersey,was paid $220,000 to settle a sex discrimination and sexualharassment suit she brought against her ex-boss, RonaldParker, a judge who formerly ran the state's Office ofAdministrative Law. The office was also a defendant.   As part of the terms of the settlement, neither defendantadmitted wrongdoing. Jerry Fischer, a senior deputy attorneygeneral with the state, said, &quot;We strongly dispute each andevery one of the claims.&quot;   Ms. Reiner's suit was filed in federal court in Newark,N.J., in 1988. The suit alleged that Judge Parker, the formeracting director and chief administrative law judge,repeatedly suggested they have sex and made other sexualstatements.   As punishment for rejecting his advances, Judge Parkerassigned Judge Reiner dull cases and wrote a job performancereview that led to her getting a small raise in salary, thesuit alleged. Judge Reiner also charged that male judges werepaid substantially more than their female counterparts.   An attorney for Judge Parker couldn't be reached. Anattorney for Judge Reiner declined to comment.   ---   STUDENT-LOAN INQUIRY leads to conviction of ex-official atFlorida thrift.   A federal jury in Tampa, Fla., convicted Jeffrey A.Flatten of conspiring to defraud the U.S. Department ofEducation in connection with its Guaranteed Student LoanProgram. The program makes low-interest loans available tostudents for college expenses.   Mr. Flatten, who headed Florida Federal Savings Bank'sstudent-loan division, first came under scrutiny in 1988 whenthe thrift was investigated for allegedly filing as many as17,000 fraudulent insurance claims to the government on $35million in student loans.   Federal officials in Florida characterized the case as thelargest student-loan fraud ever prosecuted. Mr. Flattencouldn't be reached for comment.   ---   GASTON andamp; SNOW, a 270-lawyer Boston law firm, iscollaborating with accounting firm Ernst andamp; Young to providecounseling on environmental issues. The firms are offeringwhat they call &quot;environmental opportunities assessment&quot;services. The goal, according to Gaston andamp; Snow partnerMichael P. Last, is to &quot;systematically look at economicopportunities that you may be able to take advantage of whenyou try to seek environmental compliance or, better yet,environmental excellence.&quot; Ernst andamp; Young will provideaccounting and environmental consulting expertise and Gastonandamp; Snow will advise clients on legal and management issues.   ---   Arthur S. Hayes and Ellen Joan Pollock contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>