<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900810-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>900810-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Saddam Was in Desperate Trouble...   ----   By Laurie Mylroie</HL><DATE>08/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   Behind the facade of confidence, Saddam Hussein's invasionof Kuwait was the act of a desperate man. After all, even ifSaddam underestimated the international response to hisseizure of Kuwait, the act could not have been risk-free. Whytake that risk?   Saddam has big problems at home. The Iraqi population didnot feel victorious in its war with Iran, which concluded twoyears ago. To be sure, people were giddy and elated with thewar's end. But as time passed and they looked to their peacedividend, they didn't find much.</LP><TEXT>   There was no prosperity. Even the limited demobilizationof Iraq's million-man army brought significant unemployment.Egyptians working in Iraq were murdered for their jobs.Iraq's immense foreign debt continued to rise after thecease-fire, by $10 billion to its current $80 billion or so.In the same period, the Iraqi dinar fell 25% and is now worthone-twelfth its official value ($3). Inflation runs more than40% annually. Last year public-sector employees, the bulk ofthe labor force, received their first pay hike since the warbegan -- 20%. The rank-and-file of the ruling Baath Partygrumbled along with everyone else.   The war also created pressures for popular participationin government, and the regime knew it. One month after thecease-fire, when the population was still elated by the war'send, Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz told a visiting delegationof Arab professors that there would have to be politicalchange in Iraq or else there would be political turmoil.Indeed, Saddam was quick to promise the country &quot;moredemocracy.&quot; He even stuck his toe in the waters of politicalreform with fairly honest balloting for Iraq's NationalAssembly, although among carefully screened candidates. Inthe March 1989 elections the Baath Party won only 40% of theseats.   But nothing else happened. As one Iraqi explained to me inBaghdad last July, &quot;You Westerners think everything is undercontrol. But you don't see beneath the surface. People arefed up. The regime fears an explosion.&quot;   The explosion came at year's end -- in Eastern Europe. Theoverthrow of one-party regimes there seems to have convincedSaddam that his position was untenable. In late January theIraqi regime made its only significant gesture to popularexpectations by lifting a wartime travel ban -- adding,incidentally, to the hard currency crunch.   Saddam apparently came to realize that he needed cash in abig way -- as an end in itself and for the support it buys.In February, he struck out on a new course. Publicly he beganraising the old demons, &quot;Zionism&quot; and &quot;imperialism.&quot;Privately, he made exorbitant demands for money. When theleaders of Iraq, Egypt, Jordan and Yemen met for an ArabCooperation Council summit, Saddam called for the liberationof Jerusalem (about which he had previously been silent) andfor U.S. ships to leave the Persian Gulf.   But his real agenda emerged behind closed doors, where hedismissed as insufficient the notion that the Gulf statesmight forgive their wartime loans to Iraq. He warned Jordan'sKing Hussein and Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak &quot;Go and tellthose people in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf, I need $30 billionin fresh money. If they don't give it to me, I will know howto get it.&quot; Last month, as an Iraqi envoy toured the Gulfostensibly to press adherence to OPEC quotas, he demanded $10billion from each state he visited. Kuwait offered severalbillion.   In retrospect, many of the dramatic events surroundingIraq since February, including Saddam's execution of theLondon-based journalist Farzad Bazoft and the threat to burnhalf of Israel, can be seen as an effort to raise tensionswith the West in order to create the environment in which tointimidate the Gulf states into paying up. And when thatfailed, to take what was not given.   The first flush of victory in Kuwait may have alleviatedtemporarily many of Saddam's problems. An idle army is busyagain and unemployment has disappeared. Above all, there isnow an answer to the question -- what did we get out of thewar with Iran? Kuwait. The conquest of Kuwait represents therealization of longstanding and widely held irredentistambitions among the Iraqi population. And there is privateprofit as well. The army has engaged in widespread looting --of banks, the money exchanges, the gold market, the cardealers.   But sobriety is likely to set in quickly. The UnitedNations sanctions essentially prohibit all internationaltrade with Iraq, including foodstuffs. Iraq spends $4 billiona year on food imports, relying heavily on them for meat andits two staple foods, wheat and rice. Supplies were alreadyspotty before sanctions existed.   Iraq's generals cannot view lightly the prospect of warwith the U.S. Tension has always existed between them andSaddam. The cease-fire increased the opportunities for idleand dissatisfied officers to move against him. BetweenDecember 1988 and March 1989, hundreds of officers werearrested and many executed. (There have been reports that 100officers were executed last week after refusing toparticipate in the Kuwaiti invasion.) Iraq's most celebratedwar hero, Lt. Gen. Maher Abdul Rashid, disappeared frompublic view. Saddam's failure to hold the January 1989 ArmyDay parade, remarkable in light of his claim to have achieveda military victory over Iran, gave credence to reports ofwidespread plotting against him. Since the beginning of thisyear, there have been no less than four credible reports ofcoup and assassination attempts. Last month Saddam closeddown the officers' clubs.   Iraq's government is essentially a family affair and armypolitics became bizarrely entwined with family politics withthe death last year of longtime Defense Minister AdnanKhayrallah. Saddam's cousin, and the brother of his wife,Khayrallah was killed in a May 1989 helicopter crash. Reportsemerged of strains between Saddam and his wife's relatives,including Khayrallah, after Saddam took a second wife.Saddam's eldest son by his first wife bludgeoned to death abodyguard deemed responsible for introducing Saddam to hisnew bride. Significant segments of the army blame Saddam forthe death of Khayrallah and resent the executions of theofficers.   Problems exist elsewhere in the repressive apparatus thatkeeps the regime in power. At the end of last year --coincident with the overthrow of the East Europeangovernments -- Saddam brought two of his half-brothers backinto key security positions. One brother, Sabawi Ibrahim, wasmade head of the Mukhabarat, the General IntelligenceDirectorate, and another, Wathban Ibrahim, was put in chargeof internal security.   All this reflects the precariousness of Saddam's position.His vulnerability to international sanctions, vigorouslymonitored, should not be underestimated. But what happenswhen those sanctions begin to bite? The very effectiveness ofthe sanctions may lead to conflict.   Saddam is unlikely to go quietly. If he withdraws fromKuwait, he will be even more vulnerable domestically thanbefore the invasion; he would be unlikely to survive. As hecomes to realize the dangers sanctions pose for him, he mayrespond by taking action aimed at reversing them. He willprobably be calculating and rational, but unrestrained by anymoral scruple.   Hints have already emerged. Besides those foreigners thatIraqi forces have taken from Kuwait to Baghdad, the entirenon-Iraqi population of Kuwait and Iraq are potentialhostages. Not only are they subject to the same abuses wehave witnessed in other hostage situations, those in Kuwaitare vulnerable en masse. For example, as Iraqi suppliesbecome tight, Kuwait may be denied food and water. Willsanctions survive if the lives of hundreds of thousands ofpeople in Kuwait, mostly non-Americans, are at risk? Is theU.S. prepared to fight on their account?   Or Saddam may look further afield. He probably does notwant a real war with Israel. But what about a phony war?Israel has repeatedly warned that the entry of Iraqi troopsinto Jordan is a &quot;casus belli.&quot; The Iraqi army has 50divisions. Suppose Saddam took 10 divisions and marched themwestward, calculating that Jordan would be unable to stophim. Israel would have to attack the Iraqi forces. Saddamwouldn't mind the loss of his 10 divisions if he succeeded insecuring the war that would rally Arab support to his side.Is there sufficient coordination between Israel and the U.S.to ensure that Saddam will not profit from such an action?   Saddam faces real dangers if he withdraws from Kuwait andthe temptation for schemes like these are great. Perhaps itwould be best to let him know now that any brutalities he maycontemplate aimed at undoing the sanctions will bring afull-scale war. Only such a perception may cause him toconsider that it is better to go back home and take hischances with the byzantine world of Iraqi politics than torun the risk of war with the U.S.   ---   Miss Mylroie is a fellow at Harvard's Center for MiddleEast Studies.   (See related story: &quot;...And If the West Shames Him, HeWill Fall -- WSJ August 10, 1990)</TEXT></DOC>