<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910426-0119</DOCNO><DOCID>910426-0119.</DOCID><HL>   Fizzling Out:   Even After Fires Die,   Kuwait's Oil Fields   Will Never Be the Same   ---   Disrupted Geologic Balance   Will Be Hard to Restore;   So Too Production Prices   ---   Like a Soda That Goes Flat   ----   By Allanna Sullivan   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)</NS><GV>ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)</RE><LP>   In Kuwait, it is said, Allah pumps the oil.   The sheikdom's 95 billion barrels of oil are in hugesandstone formations at fairly shallow depths, where just theright amount of effervescent gas commingles with the crude.For decades, such heaven-sent geology made Kuwaiti oilproduction cost not much more than $1 a barrel. It was nearlyas simple as punching a hole in the sand and letting the oilbubble up.</LP><TEXT>   But that was before Iraqi troops sabotaged Kuwait's oilfields while fleeing allied forces at the end of the PersianGulf war in February.   With more than 500 wells spewing as much as six milliongallons of oil a day, the fields are losing too much pressuretoo fast. The acrid, billowing black smoke is quite aspectacle. But the real economic devastation is taking placea mile beneath the desert. Geologic formations have beenbreached, with water from aquifers rushing into the oilreservoirs. Natural gas is escaping. The net result: Kuwait'soil fields are losing some of their providential fizz.   &quot;Saddam Hussein has done irreparable harm to {Kuwait's}oil reserves,&quot; says James Hartsock, a petroleum engineer inHouston who has experience in Kuwait.   Kuwaiti oil will never be as easy or as cheap to produceagain. Production costs may well triple, to $3 a barrel, ifit takes the full two years some say it will to put out thefires and cap the wells. And the pre-invasion projection of a100-year life for the fields, such as the prolific Burganfield, may be cut short by as much as one-third.   If the fields burn for months, or even years as somebelieve they will, the quality of exported oil may bediminished. If too much gas is lost, the crude might thicken,says a Kuwaiti oil man. He adds: &quot;Preserving the fields isthe real war -- and it is a disaster.&quot;   Painfully aware that the longer it takes to snuff thefires, the worse the long-term damage will be, Kuwaiti oilofficials earlier this month said they planned to addfirefighting teams to those already battling the flames.Firefighters say that what really is needed is basicequipment.   &quot;The slow pace {of the firefighting} is disheartening towatch,&quot; says James Plack, a consultant with Cambridge EnergyResearch Associates who has just returned from the MiddleEast. The oil-field fires are costing Kuwait about $5 millionan hour on the surface and untold billions underground.   All of which means that Saddam Hussein may have lost thewar but won his point.   The Iraqi leader invaded Kuwait last August in large partbecause he was fed up with Kuwait's freewheeling oil policy,which always tugged oil prices lower. In the months precedinghis invasion, Saddam Hussein charged Kuwait with trying topressure oil prices lower to keep Iraq and its former enemyIran from rebuilding their war-ravaged economies andregaining their power in the Middle East.   Though driven from Kuwait, Saddam Hussein did great harmto Kuwait's ability to play its traditional role as the voicefor lower oil prices within the Organization of PetroleumExporting Countries.   &quot;Kuwait will become more reluctant to advocate lower oilprices if its producing costs go up,&quot; says Calvin Kent, aU.S. Energy Department official.   As other students of the oil market point out, Kuwait hasbeen hit with a double whammy: Not only will its crude-oilprofit margins be smaller, but its financial needs also haveincreased many times over.   &quot;If Kuwait becomes a price hawk, it wouldn't be justbecause of higher producing costs,&quot; says Lawrence Goldstein,president of Petroleum Industry Research Foundation. &quot;Itwould be because of the whole rebuilding effort.&quot;   Estimates are that 20% to 30% of Kuwait's 95billion-barrel oil reserves may be lost, including oil thatwill be irretrievable because of the damage to the reservoir.The trade publication OPEC Listener (and Kuwaiti oil menspeaking privately) puts future Kuwaiti production costs atthree times what they were, because of geologic damage thatwill probably dictate the drilling of new wells and, as alast resort, the use of artificial means to bring oil to thesurface -- pumping or procedures known in the trade assecondary and tertiary recovery.   Pricier Kuwaiti crude and diminished reserves will havefar-reaching consequences, especially to Kuwait's influencewithin OPEC. &quot;Kuwait may be forced to play a game offollow-the-leader rather than be a leader itself,&quot; suggestsMr. Kent of the Energy Department. Kuwaiti oil officials seemfor the moment resigned to their new status. At OPEC's firstpostwar meeting in March, a dour Kuwaiti delegate was askedabout the pace of negotiations. &quot;We have nothing to say,&quot; hesaid. &quot;We have no oil.&quot;   As a force within OPEC, Kuwait had been second only toSaudi Arabia. Oil prices rose or fell depending on whetherKuwait was in the mood to live by the production quotaassigned it by OPEC. Usually, it wasn't. Just before Iraqinvaded, Kuwait was exceeding its 1.5 million barrel-a-dayquota by almost 500,000 barrels.   Kuwait was better able to withstand lower oil prices thanother, larger OPEC producers were because it had significantnonenergy investments and a strong refining and marketingbusiness with which to offset an earnings decline inproduction. In that sense, Kuwait operates much like anintegrated oil company. Indeed, any nascent desire on thepart of the Kuwaitis for higher oil prices now may betempered by the need its downstream businesses have to remainprofitable. &quot;Kuwait's Q-8 gasoline stations in Europe are avery important investment for them,&quot; says Cyrus Tahmassebi,chief economist for Ashland Oil Inc. and a former executivein the Iranian oil and gas industry.   Kuwait's most likely approach to pricing will be to mimicSaudi Arabia's longstanding moderate role. &quot;The Kuwaitis maymove their oil pricing policy more into line with SaudiArabia because the Saudis have helped them out&quot; by taking alead role in the war, says Mr. Tahmassebi of Ashland. At $3 abarrel, Kuwait's oil production costs would be twice theSaudis' (but, interestingly, still just half those of theU.S.).   There is no way yet to accurately measure the long-termdamage done to Kuwait's oil fields. Mines planted byretreating Iraqi forces and undetonated cluster bombs droppedby U.S.-led allied forces are still scattered about, so it ishard for oil reservoir specialists to gain access. Helicopterfly-bys are the main source of information from some spots.Oil experts, for instance, have been able to drive throughonly 30% of the Al-Wafra oil field in the neutral zoneoperated jointly by Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Most evaluationshave been based on aerial photographs.   But evidence gathered from such photos as well as fromvisits to certain wellheads suggests that the damagethroughout the oil fields is extensive. Steam has beenobserved, suggesting that water is mixing with undergroundoil at some locations. The unchecked gush of oil is the mostdisturbing sign.   A theoretical examination of Kuwait's Burgan field, piecedtogether from conversations with petroleum geologists andengineers who have had experience there, suggests the extentof recent, cataclysmic geologic changes.   Several thousand feet below the desert sand, oil residesin reservoirs between an aquifer of water below and a cap ofshale rock above, and the oil is held in place by the two.Several such reservoirs sit one atop another. Within thereservoir, elongated domes of porous sandstone and limestoneallow the oil to move easily to the wells.   Oil wells in Burgan, drilled to depths of between 4,000and 6,000 feet, slice through the shale and through thereservoirs. Pipe is run into the wells -- with holessubsequently punched into the piping at certain points -- toact as a conduit for the oil flow. The holes are punched injust those sections of pipe traversing the oil reservoirs,thus allowing oil and the gas dissolved in it to flow to thesurface.   It's a finely balanced system. As the oil flows into thewell, the water from below pushes upward. The gas dissolvedin the oil helps to carry the oil upward as well. And as longas certain rates of flow are maintained, all of these forcesstay in balance.   But it is that balance that has shifted in the silentdarkness deep below the ground. With more than 500 wellsexploded by the Iraqis, it is as though the top of the oilfield has been ripped away in more than 500 places. Wellsthat had been choked back by machinery at the surface to keepflow rates no greater than 5,000 barrels a day now arespewing out much more than that. In the center of the Burgan,some wells were producing a regulated flow of 12,000 barrelsa day. Now, more than 20,000 barrels may be spewing forth.   Iraqi petroleum engineers took pains to set the explosivesdeep within some wells, so the damage couldn't be easilyundone once the fires are out. New valves on the surfacewon't do the trick. &quot;The destruction is aestheticallydisgusting to an engineer,&quot; says James McGinnis, an officialwith the Society of Petroleum Engineers in Dallas.   Water is flooding the wells. Natural gas is escaping, andthe heavier oil is being left behind.   &quot;It's like when you open a bottle of soda water,&quot; saysPhilip Brennan, once a petroleum geologist in the Burganfields. With so much pressure released, the fields are indanger of going flat, like an uncapped carbonated soft drink.   The pressure is now uneven over the entire Burgan Field.In some places, water levels are higher than in others andgas levels are lower. The water has risen up around theuncapped wells in what is known as &quot;coning,&quot; a developmentpotentially fatal to an oil well.   Some wells may of course be salvageable. Holes in thecasings that might now be drawing in water from the aquiferwill be plugged. That could re-establish proper oil flow, butmany wells probably will have to be plugged and abandoned.Then a number of so-called infill wells will have to bedrilled between existing wells, many of which already are asclose as half a mile from one another. The new wells wouldperforate sections of the oil formation that are water-free.   If such measures fail, the Kuwaitis might have to considerusing secondary recovery techniques in the Burgan field forthe first time ever. For instance, wells could be drilled toinject gas back into the oil reservoir in order toartificially increase pressure. Or, pumps could be placed inthe bottom of the wells to draw the oil upward.   Mr. Hartsock, the petroleum engineer and executive vicepresident of Gruy Engineering Corp., says he has advisedKuwaiti oil executives to drop a pressure gauge into eachwell as it is capped. Monitoring wells in that way mightproduce a picture of the problem -- and strategies fordealing with disparities in pressure.   Kuwait may also have to embrace higher oil prices if itfollows the advice of some petroleum engineers that it goslow in bringing production back, in order to see whether theporous sandstone allows the oil to naturally push the waterback down into the aquifer where it belongs. But anoil-company executive who knows the Kuwaiti oil fields sayssuch self-healing &quot;could take eons.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>