<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910522-0058</DOCNO><DOCID>910522-0058.</DOCID><HL>   Bush's Effort   On Bank Laws   Clears a Hurdle   ---   House Panel Votes Down   Limits Strongly Backed   By Securities Industry   ----   By Kenneth H. Bacon   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)INSURANCE (INS)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- A House banking subcommittee defeated aproposal, strongly backed by the securities industry, thatcould have crippled the Bush administration's effort tooverhaul banking laws.   The vote, which came during a long day of trying tobalance the interests of the banks against those ofsecurities firms and insurance companies, sharply increasesthe chances that the Financial Institutions Subcommittee willpass a bill containing central elements of theadministration's proposal to restructure the financial systemand allow banks to affiliate with brokerage firms.</LP><TEXT>   However, there are still significant legislative hurdlesfacing the administration's proposal to allow banks to joinfinancial-services holding companies, which could offer abroader range of services through affiliates.   By a vote of 25-8, the panel rejected a proposal thatwould have prevented these securities affiliates fromoffering credit and investment banking services to the samecustomers. The amendment, offered by Rep. James Moran (D.,Va.), a former investment banker, was strongly supported bythe Securities Industry Association.   The SIA argues that banks that affiliate with securitiesfirms will be able to combine credit and investment bankingservices in ways that will put traditional securities firmsat a disadvantage. Opponents to the Moran amendment arguedthat it would prevent the very banking efficiencies andprofit opportunities that the administration proposal seeksto promote. &quot;This amendment is simply a roadblock thrown upby an industry that opposes it,&quot; charged Rep. Peter Hoagland(D., Neb.).   The vote was a big step forward for the administration'seffort to scale back a Depression era banking law thatseparates banks from securities firms. But the panel was morecautious in dealing with insurance. It rejected anadministration proposal to allow banks to affiliate withinsurance companies in a financial-services holding companyformat.   Instead, the subcommittee adopted a compromise proposalpromoted by the Independent Insurance Agents of America,which wants to restrict the ability of banks to sellinsurance. Under the compromise, insurance companies andother commercial concerns would be allowed to own banks andsecurities firms in a new legal structure called adiversified holding company.   The administration is proposing to eliminate the currentban on the combination of banking and commerce. This is oneof the more controversial proposals in the administrationplan, however, and few believe Congress will pass a law thisyear that allows commercial companies to own banks.   Yesterday, Rep. Jim Leach (R., Iowa) had planned tointroduce an amendment that would have continued theseparation of commerce and banking. But he withdrew theproposal at the request of the Treasury Department, whichwants to hold together a coalition in favor of the bill thatincludes banks and insurance companies, as well as industrialcompanies such as Ford Motor Co. and General Electric Co.,which want the option to expand their existing financialservices into banking.   Mr. Leach said, however, that he continues to believe thatthe combination of commerce and banking is too risky a stepto take now, and vowed to introduce his amendment later.   The insurance amendment passed by the panel also wouldrepeal an existing practice that allows state banks to sellinsurance nationwide out of offices in small towns. Under theamendment, only state-chartered banks in towns with 5,000people or less would be able to sell insurance in theirmarket areas.   Although the panel is willing to allow banks to expandtheir services through affiliates, members adopted conditionsdesigned to protect consumers. One provision would preventbanks from using confidential financial information to targetcustomers for insurance or securities sales, unless customersallow such information to be shared with bank affiliates.Another measure would require banks and their affiliates tomake it clear to customers which products are covered byfederal deposit insurance and which aren't.   The panel also adopted several restrictions, called firewalls, on lending agreements between affiliated banks andsecurities firms. The amendment, proposed by Rep. GaryKleczka (D., Wis.) and supported by the securities industry,would, among other things, prevent banks from financingcertain activities by securities affiliates.   An amendment adopted at the suggestion of Rep. JohnLaFalce (D., N.Y.) would require bank regulators to come upwith uniform standards for real-estate lending. The idea,proposed by Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Chairman WilliamSeidman, is to prevent the type of excesses that have hurtmany banks over the last two years.   The panel discussed, but didn't vote on, several importantproposals that will reappear at a later stage. One is aprovision that would impose new organizational and capitalrequirements on foreign banks operating in the U.S. Foreignbanks, state and local governments, some of which rely onforeign banks for financing, and some international U.S.banks oppose this part of the administration proposal. Rep.Floyd Flake (D., N.Y.) withdrew his amendment to strike thissection of the administration's bill, saying he would bringit up after the panel had more time to consider it.   For the same reason, Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.)withdrew two far-reaching proposals to restructure thebanking industry. One, which would apply to the largest 2,000of the nation's 12,000 commercial banks, would sharply limitthe investments these banks could make with federally insureddeposits. The plan would limit the interest rates that bankscould pay on insured deposits and limit the amount of moneythey could lend to any one customer. Mr. Schumer said thiswould keep big banks from using insured deposits to makerisky loans to Third World borrowers, large real estatedevelopers and mergers and acquisitions.   The other Schumer proposal would give some largeinvestment banks access to the Federal Reserve Board'spayments system and discount window to fund their operations.This step, which the securities industry has favored foryears, would enable investment banks to operate more likebanks, although without insured deposits.   Although members seemed intrigued by the Schumerproposals, Democrats and Republicans said the ideas are toosweeping and untested to become law this year.</TEXT></DOC>