<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900402-0033</DOCNO><DOCID>900402-0033.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Plan to Settle Maryland Asbestos Claims May Be Model   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   ACK GAF</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A court-appointed arbitrator has devised an innovativeplan that may resolve as many as 9,000 asbestos claims inMaryland's courts -- and could serve as a model for futuresettlements elsewhere.   The plan, which has been tentatively approved by two dozenof the defendants in the cases and a plaintiff's lawyer forall the claims, would settle the suits with each of thedefendants making a &quot;blind contribution&quot; to an overallsettlement fund.</LP><TEXT>   This means that none of the defendant companies -- whichinclude GAF Corp., Armstrong World Industries Inc. and KeeneCorp.would know what any of the others has contributed, orthe total amount.   The proposal aims to solve a thorny problem in such cases:Since many companies manufactured the product, it isimpossible to tell which company's product caused whichinjuries. Thus, manufacturers and distributors typicallydisagree bitterly over how much of the total liability eachis responsible for.   By keeping the contributions secret, the idea is toprevent the defendants from backing out after comparing thesize of their contributions against their estimates of theirown liability. Securities laws allow publicly held companiesto disclose aggregate numbers only for all legal costs topreserve the confidentiality of individual settlements.   &quot;I am increasingly optimistic that what we have here inMaryland is going to be a model nationwide,&quot; said Kenneth R.Feinberg, a Washington lawyer who was appointed specialmaster in the cases in October. Mr. Feinberg, a partner atKaye, Scholar, Fierman, Hays andamp; Handler, was assigned toconstruct an out-of-court system to compensate victims ofexposure to asbestos, a widely used fire-resistant fiber thatcan cause various lung diseases, including cancer.   Keeping the individual contributions and the aggregatefund &quot;blind,&quot; said Mr. Feinberg, is the glue holding thepackage together: &quot;That's the only way you can get theseparties to cooperate.&quot;   Other states -- including New York, California, Floridaand Texas -- have been looking to Maryland for a potentialsolution to backlogs of asbestos litigation. Because federalcourts and most state courts don't permit asbestos injurysuits to proceed as so-called class actions, tens ofthousands of cases nationwide must proceed individually or insmall groups, eating up already burdened court time andresources.   The plan, which hasn't been approved by all of the 85defendants facing asbestos claims in Maryland, offers severaladvantages for plaintiffs and defendants, said Edward Houff,an asbestos defense lawyer in Baltimore who represents 22defendants. It provides predictability and consistency in thesettlement amounts while avoiding delay and risk of jurytrials.   Mr. Feinberg, who helped engineer settlements for massclaims in litigation over the Agent Orange defoliant and theDalkon Shield birth-control device, said he will recommendsettlement amounts for specific illnesses from exposure toasbestos, but that the final decision will be up to BaltimoreCity Circuit Judge Marshall A. Levin, who appointed Mr.Feinberg.   If the plan proceeds, each defendant company will make acontribution to Peter Angelos, the Baltimore plaintiff'slawyer who is handling 90% of the claims. Mr. Angelos, inturn, will administer the fund and make payments to hisclients. All clients, said Mr. Angelos, have the option ofpursuing their suits in court rather than claiming a share ofthe fund.   Mr. Feinberg said a final agreement for the plan, whichwould compensate all asbestos claims filed up to Sept. 1,1990, requires the defendants to pay the amounts they haveagreed to and the plaintiffs to accept the settlementamounts. For future claims, an effort would be made to changeMaryland court rules to require new asbestos claimants to tryarbitration before litigating their claims. The latter pointcould prove difficult.   Said Mr. Angelos: &quot;We will not agree to anything thaterects a barricade between a plaintiff and a courthouse.&quot;   ---   GAF SENTENCE includes prison time for Vice Chairman JamesT. Sherwin.   A federal judge in New York sentenced Mr. Sherwin to sixmonths in prison and fined the company $2 million forconvictions of criminal stock manipulation and securitiesfraud.   On Friday U.S. District Judge Mary Johnson Lowe, whopresided over the GAF trial last year, said it was her dutyto sentence the GAF executive to a prison term &quot;as a lessonto others who may be tempted to violate the laws that dealwith the {financial} markets.&quot; The judge also sentenced Mr.Sherwin to one year of probation following his time behindbars.   Stephen E. Kaufman, one of Mr. Sherwin's lawyers, urgedthe judge to sentence his client to community servicebecause, &quot;This was an aberrational act, an isolated act, anact totally out of character with anything he's done in hislife.&quot; The government didn't recommend a specific jail termfor Mr. Sherwin but said a &quot;substantial sentence&quot; waswarranted. Lawyers for Mr. Sherwin and GAF said they willappeal the sentences.   In the case, the government charged that Mr. Sherwin askedthe Los Angeles brokerage firm Jefferies andamp; Co. to purchaseshares of Union Carbide Corp. in October 1986 at a certainprice. The request, prosecutors claimed, was part of a schemeto push up the stock price just as GAF was preparing to selloff millions of Carbide shares. Last December jurors returneda verdict of guilty on all counts against Mr. Sherwin andGAF.   After the sentencing, Mr. Sherwin, a 56-year-old lawyerwho was once the nation's third ranking chess player,declined to comment. Looking somber, he embraced his tearfulwife and five of his children. He will remain free, pendingthe appeal of the sentence.   The sentencing of Mr. Sherwin and GAF effectively marksthe end of the cases brought to the government's door byformer brokerage chief Boyd L. Jefferies. Mr. Jefferies, whowas implicated by former arbitrageur Ivan F. Boesky, in turnpointed the finger at Mr. Sherwin and GAF, as well ascorporate takeover specialist Paul A. Bilzerian and formerstock speculator Salim B. Lewis.   Early in the summer, the government won a criminalsecurities conviction against Mr. Bilzerian, who was latersentenced to four years in prison. In August, Mr. Lewispleaded guilty to three felony counts and was sentenced tothree years' probation and $250,000 in fines.   Last month, GAF agreed to settle a related civil suitfiled by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Under thesettlement, the firm will pay the government $1,250,000 aswell as interest in excess of $400,000.   ---   LISA JONES'S CONVICTION is upheld, but appeals courtorders new sentencing.   Ms. Jones, 27, was convicted last year of five counts ofperjury and two counts of obstruction of justice for lying toa federal grand jury in Manhattan, N.Y. The grand jury waslooking into allegations of illegal trades between DrexelBurnham Lambert Inc. and Princeton/Newport LimitedPartnership. Ms. Jones, a former assistant trader at Drexel,denied in her testimony that she knew about the transactions.   The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals rejected Ms.Jones's claims that her convictions should be overturnedbecause of alleged conflicts of interest by her trial lawyer,who also represented other Drexel employees. But the appealspanel said the trial judge, Leonard Sand, improperlyincreased Ms. Jones's sentence under federal sentencingguidelines.   At the prosecutors' request, Judge Sand boosted Ms. Jonesto a higher penalty level under the guidelines because herperjury allegedly caused the government to spend more moneythan it otherwise would have in its investigation ofPrinceton/ Newport. As a result, Ms. Jones faced a sentenceof 18 to 24 months, instead of 10 to 16 months. The appealscourt said the judge should have stuck to the lowersentencing level, and it sent the case back to Judge Sand forresentencing. No date has been set for the new sentencing.   &quot;Apparently it was the view of the district court thatthese instances of perjury resulted in substantialexpenditures of governmental resources,&quot; the appeals courtwrote. &quot;No such expenditures have been demonstrated.&quot; Thecourt said Ms. Jones's perjury didn't deprive the governmentof any information it didn't already have from other sources.   Daniel Bookin, an attorney for Ms. Jones, declined tocomment. He said no decision has been made on whether toappeal the conviction further.   At the resentencing, the government could again ask forthe tougher sentence if it presented evidence that theperjury resulted in substantial additional costs. Aspokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office said, &quot;It'sinappropriate at this time to discuss what the governmentwill do at the time of sentencing.&quot;   ---   FORMER DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION CHIEF didn't haveconflict of interest in Eastern Airlines case, court rules.   A federal appeals court rejected a pilots union claim thatJames H. Burnley, former DOT secretary, violated conflict ofinterest laws in Eastern's labor-management struggle.   A three-member panel of the federal appeals court inWashington, D.C., declined to review Mr. Burnley's December1988 decision against conducting a broad-based investigationof Eastern's operations. The Air Line Pilots Associationcharged that Mr. Burnley ruled against the inquiry, whichwould have been Eastern's second that year, as he was beingcourted by a law firm that represents the carrier on othermatters.   Mr. Burnley left his post as DOT secretary to become apartner at the Washington law firm of Shaw, Pittman, Potts andamp;Trowbridge in January 1989. Although Mr. Burnley wasnegotiating for the partnership while deciding the Easternmatter, a department ethics official said Mr. Burnley couldrule on the matter because Shaw Pittman wasn't representingEastern during that proceeding. A second review by Mr.Burnley's successor as transportation secretary, SamuelSkinner, also concluded Mr. Burnley had violated no laws orregulations.   A spokesman for the pilots' association said he wasn'tsure if the union would seek a further appeal. Mr. Burnleycouldn't be reached.   ---   ATTORNEY-CLIENT SECRECY is protected in fees case.   A federal appellate court panel upheld a ruling in favorof a Chicago lawyer who fought a grand-jury subpoenarequesting the source of his fees, on the basis that suchinformation represents privileged attorney-clientcommunications.   U.S. District Judge Joel M. Flaum, writing the opinion forthe Seventh U.S. Court of Appeals in Chicago, emphasized thatthe decision isn't meant to broaden the attorney-clientprivilege. But when communications are confidential, theprivilege is essential &quot;to the proper functioning of ouradversary system,&quot; Judge Flaum said.   The case involved David Cherney, who was subpoenaed totestify before a federal grand jury and identify the personwho paid him the legal fees of another individual, who hadbeen named in a federal drug-conspiracy indictment. Theunidentified third-party fee payer also consulted Mr. Cherneyinvolving the fee payer's own possible involvement in theconspiracy.   &quot;It is quite obvious that the government wants to learnthe identity of the feepayer so that it can bring a suspecteddrug felon to justice,&quot; Judge Flaum said. &quot;Nevertheless, thegovernment's interests in this instance must give way tothose served by the attorney-client privilege.&quot;   Last week's unanimous ruling by the three-member appealscourt panel drew praise from the National Association ofCriminal Defense Lawyers, which has battled what it views asattempts by the government to erode that privilege.</TEXT></DOC>