<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900508-0045</DOCNO><DOCID>900508-0045.</DOCID><HL>   Big Thinking:   Santa Fe Institute   Engages in Research   With Profit Potential   ---   Patrons and Clients Bankroll   Work That Might Explain   Why It Is Success Succeeds   ---   Mr. Reed's Hopes for Citicorp   ----   By Bernard Wysocki Jr.   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/08/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   SANTA FE, N.M. -- Even in this city of artists, New Agersand freethinkers, the Santa Fe Institute ranks as an oddity.   The headquarters of this private think tank is a convertedconvent built of adobe. Inside are Ph.D.s with ponytails whowander the halls talking about Boolean algebra and artificiallife. Biologists rub shoulders with computer jocks.Economists argue with physicists. No idea is too crazy.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I can come here and be totally outrageous for a while,say things that are off the wall, and still get a hearing,&quot;says W. Brian Arthur, a Stanford University economist.   Yet the Santa Fe Institute isn't just another kooky littleoutfit. To begin with, four Nobel laureates in physics andeconomics are actively involved in what goes on here. SantaFe's chairman is Robert O. Anderson, the retired head of Arcoand of the Aspen Institute. The president of the organizationis a noted scientist, George Cowan, from Los Alamos NationalLaboratory.   Ideas bandied about here have aroused the interest of thecommercial world, from Wall Streeters, to California venturecapitalists, to Citicorp's chairman, John Reed. A visit hemade here in 1986 triggered a big effort to develop asophisticated model of the global economy.   One idea that came out of that: &quot;the law of increasingreturns.&quot; Once things get rolling, they keep rolling and feedon themselves, up to a point. Hence, mudslides andavalanches, real-estate booms and stock-market crashes. (Mostacademics had been focusing mainly on a world in equilibriumand on the law of diminishing returns.)   Unlocking the secrets of complex phenomena is the statedpurpose of the handful of full-timers, as well as thehundreds of transient thinkers who are here for a week or amonth or a year. Some of the work falls into thescientifically fashionable category of &quot;chaos theory,&quot; whichholds that certain events are neither strictly predictablenor random.   But the real world's interest in this place has little todo with intellectual fashion and a lot to do with makingmoney.   And so it came to pass that the Santa Fe crowd is tryingto figure out how the price of gold fluctuates and whatpushes IBM stock up and down. Researchers are puttingtogether computer models that they hope might explain, forinstance, what is not already known about why Taiwan isbooming and the Philippines is an economic mess. Economistshere think they already know that the &quot;law of increasingreturns&quot; explains why the Betamax videocassette format wasoverwhelmed by VHS.   Wall Street investment houses, such as Morgan Stanley andamp;Co., have sent emissaries to sniff around. Their curiositywas piqued by a &quot;double auction&quot; market developed here.Computer-driven trading strategies pretend to buy and sellsecurities, and the Santa Fe researchers record and analyzethe results. Among other things, they want to know ifcomputers can be programmed to &quot;learn&quot; from tradingexperience.   Santa Fe's computer work has drawn attention fromresearchers in biology and medicine. George Sugihara ofScripps Institution, in La Jolla, Calif., says that SantaFe's theories offer superior ways to predict measlesepidemics. And now he is using the models to explore thebaffling changes in body temperature found in malariapatients.   &quot;This is important,&quot; Mr. Sugihara says, &quot;because there's apoint when the temperature returns to near normal, and that'swhen there's great danger of death. So if you could predictthat, you could make sure the patient is under intensive careat that time.&quot;   The Santa Fe Institute has a chronic problem of its own: alack of money. And that, in turn, isn't helped by the aurathe place has of detached otherworldliness.   The institute has been short of cash ever since it wasfounded in 1984 by a group of scientists -- mostly physicists-- from nearby Los Alamos. When the organization began, itsgoal was to become a facsimile of Rockefeller University -- alarge, prestigious center for advanced research.   Today, its budget is still rather piddling, just $2million a year. The biggest chunks of money come from theNational Science Foundation, the Department of Energy and theMacArthur Foundation. The rest comes from private outfits andindividuals. Robert Noyce, the founder of Intel Corp.,recently anted up $50,000.   At least one board member complains that the institute isfar too shy about hitting up rich people for money. ArthurSpiegel, an Albuquerque fund raiser and the think tank'sfirst benefactor, claims to be very unhappy and to haveresigned from the board over its unaggressive approach toraising money. He has since rejoined the board, however, andhas high praise for the institute's purposes.   Mr. Anderson, the chairman, says money is a problembecause the institute appeals to a &quot;narrow audience.&quot; Butbecause he has connections, he continues to bring inwell-heeled potential donors for casual visits. One morningrecently, Mr. Anderson appeared at the door in his cowboy hatand bandanna, with David Rockefeller and his wife in tow. TheRockefellers spent maybe 45 minutes talking, about populationgrowth, global warming and such with institute personnel.   And that suggests the second problem: the abstract natureof what people here are thinking. Mostly, people at theinstitute are building computer models of complex phenomena.The models are supposed to show how molecules, markets ornational economies evolve. &quot;We give you movies, instead ofjust a snapshot,&quot; says Mr. Cowan, the institute's president.&quot;We think it's the next big thing.&quot;   Nobody questions the Santa Fe crowd's blue-ribboncredentials, but some critics don't expect much in the way ofresults from such a theoretical pursuit. They find it faintlyamusing that Citicorp's Mr. Reed would hire the institute tomix math and physics in hopes of averting some future LatinAmerican debt fiasco.   When Mr. Reed visited Santa Fe, he brought along threesenior assistants. The Santa Fe people assembled a handful ofphysicists, computer scientists and economists. They tookspace at a nearby resort for two days and tried to create aninformal, relaxed setting. But they recall Mr. Reed wasn't ingood humor.   Economists hadn't predicted the Latin American debtcrisis, Mr. Reed complained. The debtors' inability to repayhad created a gigantic problem for lenders like Citicorp.Econometric models hadn't anticipated the vicious combinationof lower rates of inflation and rising interest rates thathad devastated the economies of Mexico, Argentina and Brazil.So Mr. Reed, who is a metallurgical engineering graduate ofMassachusetts Institute of Technology, put up some money andasked the Santa Fe Institute to work on a new, improved modelof the world economy.   Two Nobel laureates led the effort -- Philip Anderson, aPrinceton University physicist, and Kenneth Arrow, a StanfordUniversity economist. The manifest result of this work inprogress was a 10-day meeting on markets and the globaleconomy in September 1987 for which Citicorp put up about$100,000.   Markets aren't perfectly rational, the participantsconcurred. Unsophisticated investors create &quot;noise&quot; and driveprices up or down, beyond rational expectations. Things thatstart rolling tend to snowball.   David Pines, a physicist at the University of Illinois,listened to all the talk, got to worrying about hisinvestments, and decided to bail out of the stock market. &quot;Icalled my financial adviser, but he persuaded me againstpulling out. So I didn't,&quot; Mr. Pines says. Five weeks later,the market crashed. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped508 points in a single day.   Today, more than two years later, the project on the worldeconomy is still going strong. And it is without conclusiveresults. Citicorp officials say they are patient and thatthey are continuing to pay for the work. &quot;If these guys atSanta Fe can't do it, nobody can,&quot; says Eugenia Singer, aCiticorp vice president. &quot;We knew they wouldn't solve theproblem {of modeling the global economy} in one or two years,maybe not even in 10 years. The problems are humongous.&quot;   Mr. Arthur, the Stanford economist who returned to theuniversity after a year in Santa Fe, thinks that moreeconomists might start to embrace ideas of the sort beinggenerated here. He sees a &quot;sea change in economics,&quot; forinstance, with more mainstream economists paying attention tosnowballing and the law of increasing returns.   The theory applies not only to markets but to businessstrategy, Mr. Arthur says. For example, once a product or atechnology starts to pull ahead of the pack, its successtends to bring more success, more market share, more salesvolume. The tendency is great for the &quot;winner to take most,&quot;as Mr. Arthur puts it.   Mr. Arthur says that economists have paid attention tosuch ideas in the past, including particularly the lateAlfred Marshall. &quot;But the prevalent view is still that thingshappen in equilibrium, and that there are constant ordiminishing returns.&quot;   In a world economy based on natural resources, maybe thelaw of diminishing returns had its utility, Mr. Arthur says,but no longer. &quot;A high-tech, high value-added world calls fora new kind of economics.&quot;   Seizing market share is crucial, he says, pointing to astrategy often used by Japanese companies. Often the mostsuccessful Japanese companies win by letting others doexpensive research; then they make a big push as the marketis building and cut prices to increase sales volume. Thatdrives down costs, which builds more volume. Gradually, thecompetitors are squeezed. Mr. Arthur points to the wayMatsushita Electric's VHS videocassette recorder trouncedSony's Betamax.   Windows of opportunity tend to close, so a tiny initialadvantage in business can be critical in determining theoutcome of a battle.   Another, related idea, much in vogue at Santa Fe, is thatsince small differences are important, precise measurementsare too, particularly when an enterprise is just gettingstarted. They help predict outcomes.   J. Doyne Farmer tried to apply that idea to roulette. Backin the late 1970s, Mr. Farmer was studying for a Ph.D. inphysics. In his spare time, he nursed a passion for roulette.And he worked up complex equations on a computer that wouldcalculate the croupier's toss, the spin of the wheel, thepath of the ball, and a rough estimate of where it wouldland.   Then he strapped on a little homemade computer and wentoff to Las Vegas. He made his calculations on the hoof,placed his bets and eventually won nearly $7,000.   Today, the tall, ponytailed Mr. Farmer divides his timebetween the Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Santa FeInstitute. Among other things, he is searching for deeppatterns of predictive value in the price of IBM shares, andin the gyrations of gold prices. Knowing &quot;what predictswhat,&quot; to use his phrase, could have money-makingpossibilities. So far, he has had little success, but hecommunicates with so-called black box researchers at WallStreet brokerage houses.   Mr. Farmer says he is ambivalent about trying to apply histheories solely to making money. &quot;I'm confused on the issue,&quot;he says. &quot;I'm a scientist, and I'm trying to have fun. Forme, that means doing something intellectually challenging andfundamental that touches on philosophy and religion as wellas physics.&quot; On the other hand, he is tired of applying forresearch grants. To be independently wealthy would make hisprofessional life easier. &quot;I really do think some of theideas we have could be used to make money.&quot;   So does James Pelkey, a California venture capitalist whorecently bought land in Santa Fe and is building a house. Hebelieves that some of the computer programs being developedat the institute could be turned into commercialcomputer-software for business. Sales forecasting is one ofthe applications he thinks is possible.   But anybody who thinks the city of Santa Fe is going tobecome another Silicon Valley because of the instituteprobably is misusing his powers of prediction. The city issmall, with just 55,000 people. It is isolated. Jets aren'tallowed to land at Santa Fe's little airport. Water isscarce, and so are skilled purchasing agents, personnelmanagers and technicians.   It is more likely, Mr. Pelkey believes, that somecompanies will incubate in Santa Fe, then move toAlbuquerque, 50 miles south.   Morton Meyerson, the former president of EDS Systems and apart-time resident of Santa Fe, also doubts that the city'sburgeoning development as a center of art, music and tourismwill be matched by a parallel, entrepreneurial boom.   He thinks that that is 10 times more likely to happen toAustin, Texas, five times as likely to happen to Phoenix. &quot;Onthe other hand,&quot; Mr. Meyerson says, given all the thinkersgathered hereabouts, it is likely that &quot;Santa Fe will becomea center for the exploration of the great unknown.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>