<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910423-0253</DOCNO><DOCID>910423-0253.</DOCID><HL>   Back to Biscuits:   Old Flamboyance Is   Out as Louis Gerstner   Remakes RJR Nabisco   ---   CEO Builds Efficiency, Ends   Infighting and Engineers   Quick Cuts in LBO Debt   ---   Can He Stop Winston's Slide?   ----   By George Anders   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   RN</CO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)</IN><LP>   IRVING, Texas -- Among the casual shoppers in Aisle 3 ofthe Tom Thumb supermarket one recent Thursday morning, LouisV. Gerstner Jr. stands out. He is wearing a suit. He isaccompanied by a young executive with a clipboard. And he isthinking of spending, say, $200 million.   Mr. Gerstner, chief executive officer of RJR NabiscoHoldings Inc., is scouting for small, food-companyacquisition candidates. Bread, cakes, cereals, spices and adozen other categories all draw a look.</LP><TEXT>   When Mr. Gerstner is intrigued by what he sees on theshelf, he lingers a moment to engage his strategy chief,Stephen Wilson, in rapid-fire dialogue about profit marginsand market share. When Mr. Gerstner is unimpressed, he walkson, forcing Mr. Wilson to abandon all talk of thatacquisition idea, flip ahead in his notes and start afresh.   This is the new RJR: A no-nonsense, impatient companywhere top-level strategy meetings are sometimes held on thelinoleum aisles of supermarkets. Bureaucracy, flamboyantspending and intra-company rivalries are out. Teamwork,urgency and a Japanese-style fixation on quality are in.   RJR Nabisco might not be quite as much fun or asinnovative as a few years ago, when it had far less debt andthe freewheeling F. Ross Johnson ran the show. He was willingto spend billions on new plant technology and a smokelesscigarette that flamed out. And in legendary style, Mr.Johnson put sports celebrities on the payroll for big bucksand little work and built up a fleet of 11 corporate jetsknown as the RJR Air Force.   But competitors, analysts and customers all say thattoday's RJR is a lot more efficient. Propelling all thesechanges is the 49-year-old Mr. Gerstner, a one-time McKinseyandamp; Co. management consultant and the former president ofAmerican Express Co. Selected in early 1989 to run RJRNabisco by its major shareholder, the buy-out firm ofKohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co., Mr. Gerstner instantly gotbroad authority. &quot;We're financial people,&quot; says KKR partnerHenry Kravis. &quot;Lou makes the long-run operating decisions.&quot;   Much more than most new guys, Mr. Gerstner finds himselfat a company whose ups and downs have become a subject ofnational fascination. The 1988 takeover battle for RJRproduced countless headlines and a best-selling book. Thecompany's new stock, recently listed on the New York StockExchange, regularly is among the most actively traded. Mr.Gerstner's $2.9 million salary, and his bountiful package ofRJR stock and options (worth $58 million at current prices)raise the question: Is he worth it?   For the moment, the financial markets' answer is yes.RJR's stock already has surged about 50% to $11 a share.Operating profit rose 31% last year, to $3.43 billion. Whilethe company posted a net loss of $480 million for 1990because of big interest bills, its giant LBO debt is beingpaid down ahead of schedule. Just this week, the companyformulated plans to retire yet another $1.5 billion of itsjunk bonds. Analysts expect RJR Nabisco to be back in theblack either this year or next.   Mr. Gerstner's style -- a mixture of charm and cajoling,broad strategic thoughts and sudden intrusions into thenitty-gritty of business -- holds lessons for almost any newmanager.   But after two years at RJR, he can't claim to be a heroyet. The company's biggest money-maker, the Winstoncigarette, has been losing market share for years. And RJR'sdebt burden doesn't allow it to make the kind of bigacquisitions in the food business being made by its majorrival, Philip Morris Inc. What's more, the company'sfree-spending bureaucratic culture has been so ingrained thatMr. Gerstner won't be rid of it anytime soon. Reshaping RJR,he told managers in a closed-door briefing last fall, &quot;islike crossing the Sahara. It just goes on and on and on.&quot;   When Mr. Gerstner took over RJR in March 1989, itsexecutive suite was desolate. A host of top managers had quitin the wake of the failed bid for the company by Mr. Johnson,who lost out to KKR. Since then, Mr. Gerstner has filledthese slots with his kind of people, bringing in a generalcounsel from American Express and a chief administrativeofficer from H.J. Heinz, and hiring as his head of tobaccooperations a former RJR hand who had left during themid-1980s for a post at Citicorp. Gone are the pranks andprofanity that caused the company's old Atlanta executiveoffices to be known as the Fraternity. People now start workat 8 a.m., show an occasional sparkle of dry wit, andotherwise favor such a serious, collegial tone thatexecutives now suggest that headquarters be known as theSeminary.   In two stages in 1989 and 1990, Mr. Gerstner moved RJR'sheadquarters out of Atlanta to four floors of unremarkablerented space in a midtown Manhattan bank building. Smallsigns of penny-pinching can be found. Paneling is mahoganywhere visitors might notice, stained hardwood where theywon't. Busy hallways are lined with cheap industrial greencarpeting. Walls are covered with rayon.   Gone are the elaborate printed reports operating divisionsonce sent to headquarters, such as one immense briefingensemble that Mr. Gerstner derisively calls &quot;the rainbow.&quot; Itcame in red, green and blue binders, telling the CEOeverything that had happened the previous month. &quot;If I'mdoing my job, I'm talking to division managers all the time,&quot;Mr. Gerstner says. &quot;I know what's in that book weeks beforeall the numbers are typed in.&quot;   Such headquarters triumphs are small stuff, though, in theoverall sweep of RJR. Even after some buyout-relateddivestitures, the company's sales exceed $13 billion a year,and its vast work force sprawls throughout the U.S., LatinAmerica, Canada and Western Europe. Drawing on his McKinseytraining, Mr. Gerstner spent much of his first year learningRJR Nabisco's business from the bottom up. He logged 250,000miles visiting bakeries from Chicago to Beijing, attendingsalesmen's conferences and eating dinner with low-levelmanagers.   Starting early last year, Mr. Gerstner pulled back andtried to develop a broad strategy for the company. The R.J.Reynolds tobacco business was hugely profitable but losingmarket share. The food company was a financial success, butshowed more in-fighting and complacency than Mr. Gerstnerwanted.   In speech after speech, Mr. Gerstner aired his strategicthoughts to groups of employees: Cut bureaucracy. Act with asense of urgency. Emphasize quality and teamwork. He printedup pale gray cards with eight such points and mailed them toall 64,000 employees. Partly because of the boss'spersonality and partly because of RJR's debt load, theGerstner agenda, at least for now, includes no big risks, nobig innovations: It centers on running the current operationsto maximum efficiency.   The full program isn't clicking yet. In Winston-Salem,N.C., for example, domestic tobacco chief James Johnston sayshe is &quot;disappointed&quot; at progress so far in changing hisunit's corporate culture. Mr. Johnston, the 44-year-oldGerstner hire from Citicorp who once ran Reynolds's Japaneseoperations, says he is eager to stir up creativeproblem-solving among all his employees. But he says manyemployees still seem most comfortable awaiting directivesfrom their boss, answering with a snappy &quot;Yes, sir,&quot; and thengoing off to do a task whether they believe in it or not.   The clearest collision between the strategies espoused byMessrs. Gerstner and Johnston and the time-honored practicesat Reynolds is to be found with Winston. America's No. 1brand until 1974, Winston finished last year with an 8.8%market share, a 1.9-point drop since the company's leveragedbuy-out and a huge distance behind Marlboro's industry --leading 26%.   The new managers have cut the Reynolds work force by 2,300employees, in RJR's only major job reduction, a moveexecutives say was related to shrinking cigarette demand andnot the LBO debt. Reynolds, which had been known as one ofNorth Carolina's most reliable employers, offered a minimumof eight months' pay, an unusually large severance package,to laid-off tobacco workers. Reynolds' biggest round oftobacco layoffs, in August 1989, was seen as a jolt inWinston-Salem at the time. But current and former workers sayanxieties about RJR's new direction subsided after a fewmonths.   While making job cutbacks, Reynolds executives have plowednearly half of the $115 million in annual labor-cost savingsback into trying to make Winston a better cigarette.   In the past year, RJR has spent $30 million on bettertobacco blends for Winston, bought brighter wrapping paperfor cigarettes and smoothed out the edges of cigarettecartons. It has packed more tobacco into each Winston so thatthe &quot;puff count&quot; -- a measure of how long a cigarette takesto be fully smoked -- has risen 10%.   Whether consumers care is an open question. Some marketingexperts regard the quality campaign as just a holding action,designed to slow the desertion from Winston but not reallywin new smokers. Mr. Johnston talks only about stabilizingthe brand rather than making a major run at Marlboro. In thepast 10 years, marketers have tried and failed with a lot ofideas for Winston, from slogans like &quot;Big Red&quot; and &quot;Realtaste&quot; to $1 million giveaways with cigarette packages.   Salomon Brothers Inc. analyst Diana Temple estimates thateven in Winston's current condition, its contribution toRJR's operating earnings -- or profit before interest, taxesand amortization -- is $700 million a year. That's nearly asmuch as the entire Nabisco food company contributes. Says Mr.Gerstner: &quot;Winston is very important for us to fix.&quot;   RJR is in much better shape on the food side, whichrequires, and wants, less redirection from Mr. Gerstner. Thefood division has raised operating profit about 50% since thebuy-out and held market share with brands that include Oreoand Chips Ahoy] cookies, Premium and Ritz crackers,Fleischmann's margarine and Grey Poupon mustard.   Mr. Gerstner has stepped carefully with Nabisco. He begana recent Dallas speech to Nabisco sales managers by saying:&quot;I'll go anywhere to be with salesmen.&quot; He praised the cookieoperation as &quot;a tower of strength&quot; and added: &quot;When I joinedthe company, I heard within 20 minutes that you guys werereally good. It's true.&quot;   Yet once he wins people's trust, Mr. Gerstner beginsgoading, prodding. When Dallas sales manager Wayne Yowellproudly mentioned that Nabisco's local market share had risen1.7 percentage points in the past year, to 49.7%, Mr.Gerstner quickly asked if that figure will top 50% this year.&quot;That's our goal,&quot; Mr. Yowell said, slightly taken aback.&quot;But it gets harder once you get near 50%.&quot;   &quot;No it doesn't,&quot; Mr. Gerstner calmly replied. &quot;It getseasier. Think how little the next guy has.&quot;   Again and again these days, Mr. Gerstner talks of hisbelief that Nabisco can pull further ahead of the competitionif it steps up its use of &quot;information technology,&quot; astrategy that draws heavily on his American Expressexperience. Computers and data bases, he argues, can tellNabisco a lot about what kinds of consumers buy its products,how to win their attention and how to focus marketing.Recently, RJR hired McKinsey consultants for a sixmonth studyof ways this might reshape Nabisco's business.   Nabisco executives are intrigued, but a little skeptical.Among them, ideas like electronic substitutes for &quot;cents-off&quot;coupons, which appeal to Mr. Gerstner, evoke shudders. Theyworry that such easy-touse coupons may just cut into profitswithout winning extra customers.   In marketing, too, Nabisco's executives have strong ideasabout what works. A clear example came last summer when topmanagement reviewed a potential new Fig Newton commercial. Inthe ad, an English boy named Randolph is upbraided by his momfor eating cookies in bed. &quot;It's not a cookie, Mother,&quot;Randolph replies, &quot;It's a Fig Newton.&quot;   Mr. Gerstner, who doesn't think that children should sasstheir parents, found the ad distasteful. He tried to talkNabisco executives out of airing it, to no avail. The childmay be a brat, says John Greeniaus, Nabisco's chiefexecutive, &quot;but he's sold a lot of Fig Newtons for us.&quot;   Whatever the minor jockeying between Nabisco andheadquarters, Mr. Gerstner appears to be making major headwayin getting the company's two big operating units, tobacco andfood, to work together for the first time since they werejoined in a 1985 merger. A few years ago, the tobaccooperations were &quot;the enemy,&quot; recalls Nabisco's Mr. Greeniaus.Tobacco and food executives competed for marketing andcapital-spending dollars and maligned each others' projects.   Now, Nabisco shares its expertise in 800 phone numberswith Reynolds executives who want to set up a toll-free linefor Winston customers. Reynolds, in turn, has let Nabisco tapinto sophisticated coupon-analysis models to figure out howmany cents off are needed to win customers for new cerealbrands.   The way the buy-out of RJR was structured, Messrs.Greeniaus and Johnston each control 1.5 million shares ofRJR. Each man's stake is now worth $16.5 million today, and alot more if the stock continues its rise. Little wonder thatMr. Greeniaus says: &quot;It's not a question of climbing the oldcorporate ladder. It's a question of having our equity beworth something.&quot;   Two years after taking on huge debt and going private inthe leveraged buy-out, RJR now is doing its best to positionitself to investors as a &quot;normal&quot; company. The publiccurrently owns about 18% of RJR's fully diluted stock, andwill own a further 7% if RJR completes a 75-million-shareequity offering it announced yesterday. RJR management ownsabout 5%, KKR's investment partnerships own 59%, and variousconvertible securities and warrants account for the rest ofthe stock. Debt has been cut to $17 billion from more than$25 billion.   Because of the remaining debt, however, acquisitions are aproblem. When Messrs. Gerstner and Wilson scouted targets inthe Texas grocery store, their spending limit was less than$1 billion and their likely timetable was two or three yearsin the future.   &quot;I don't think we're close to having a framework yet --for acquisitions -- that has me comfortable,&quot; Mr. Gerstnerconcedes. &quot;But we've got time to do it.&quot;   RJR also spends more cautiously in upgrading itsfactories. Mr. Gerstner, his lieutenants -- and especiallyhis KKR shareholders -- insist that's for the best. In itspre-buy-out days, RJR Nabisco was so awash in cash that itplanned to spend $2.4 billion on two entirely new bakeries,each known as Cookieville. Among the planned features was acomputerized system to pluck minor ingredients like onionflavor out of storage bins, convey them 100 feet across awarehouse area and dump them into giant mixing vats forcrackers. But that $10 million feature would have replacedonly only one worker and one forklift truck.   Cookieville got canceled right after the buy-out. In itsplace, Nabisco is spending about $1.4 billion over the nextseven years for much more modest upgrades of its bakeries.New, wider ovens will be installed. But there won't be anyoptical sensors or mechanical arms to pluck out theoccasional defective Oreo; two workers in hairnets will stilldo that.   A former Nabisco executive says the Cookieville projectmight have lowered Nabisco's operating costs considerablyover time. Mr. Gerstner and KKR's Mr. Kravis aren'tconvinced. &quot;This is a great example&quot; of smarter capitalspending in a buy-out, Mr. Kravis says. &quot;When management hasits own money at risk, people don't just spend it for thesake of spending.&quot;   Like most chief executives of financially successfulleveraged buy-outs, Mr. Gerstner now sits on a paper fortunefrom stock that he bought at cheap prices in the early daysof the buy-out. Yet he stubbornly refuses to count himself awinner yet. &quot;The way I look at it, I'm $6.5 million in thehole,&quot; he says, referring to the cash he spent for RJR stockin 1989. &quot;That money is spent. Gone. I haven't received onedollar back.&quot; Under agreements with the company, he can'tsell any of his RJR stock until 1994. &quot;In no way do I feelfinancially secure,&quot; Mr. Gerstner says.</TEXT></DOC>