<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910925-0082</DOCNO><DOCID>910925-0082.</DOCID><HL>   Soul Wars:   How MCA's Relations   With Motown Records   Went So Sour So Fast   ---   Cultures Clash and Egos, Too;   Even the Great Conciliator   Can't Stop a Nasty Blowup   ---   New Age Meets New Partner   ----   By Richard Turner   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MC PHG PLG</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)</IN><NS>JOINT VENTURES (JVN)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)NETHERLANDS (NL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   HOLLYWOOD -- The final blowup happened not at MotownRecords' digs at the funky corner of Sunset and Vine, nor inthe gleaming tower of MCA Inc.'s corporate headquarters inUniversal City. Nor did it occur in the cobbled alleyways ofBoston's financial district, where the investment firm ofBoston Ventures keeps its offices.   No, the summit meeting was called, by MCA's legendarychieftain Lew Wasserman, at a neutral site: the hushed,sylvan folds of the Hotel Bel-Air, where swans glide andtasteful elegance prevails.</LP><TEXT>   It was there, late last month, when hopes of a settlementwere highest, that things got really ugly.   Lionized for decades as Hollywood's greatest deal-maker,the 78-year-old Mr. Wasserman is a master at buildingbridges, at seeing the big picture. He can rise above thedust and flailing elbows of petty business disputes to bringpeople together.   But he couldn't save this meeting. It collapsed in a heapof tempers -- including a scene with his own longtimepresident, Sidney J. Sheinberg, angrily facing off againstMotown President Jheryl Busby. By the time Mr. Busby left themeeting, recalls one observer, &quot;he looked like he'd beenshot.&quot; MCA's break with the white-shoe Boston investmentfirm, with whom it had agreed just three years earlier toacquire and resurrect the famous black record label, seemedfinal.   This week, with lawsuits flying, Motown and its majorityowner Boston Ventures made good on its promise to defect fromthe arrangement under which MCA distributed Motown's records.Instead, Motown signed a deal with a rival company, PhilipsElectronics N.V.'s PolyGram. MCA vowed to fight.   The story of this long-simmering breakup is partly aclear-cut fight over money. But more than anything, thebattle for the soul of Motown is one of noisily clashingcultures, with insistent whispers of racial issues.   These racial undercurrents were probably unavoidable,because Motown Records is more than a musical shrine withicons like Diana Ross and Marvin Gaye. As a business foundedby a black man, Berry Gordy, it's an important symbol ofblack enterprise. &quot;Motown is like Muhammad Ali,&quot; says Ruth A.Robinson, editor in chief of Black Radio Exclusive magazine,which has close ties to the company. &quot;You can go into darkestAfrica or Eastern Europe and people have heard of it. Itstands for the dream of black children.&quot;   It was also an attractive business proposition when MCARecords and Boston Ventures in 1988 happily paid $61 millionto buy Motown Records from Mr. Gordy, who'd founded the labelin Detroit in 1959. Boston Ventures got 70% of the equity andMCA 18%, along with a 10-year agreement to distributeMotown's records for a 25% fee. The term was longer thanusual, and the fee was nearly twice the normal fee. But MCAwas to provide a host of back-office services to Motown,keeping Motown's overhead low and letting the labelconcentrate on finding and breaking new acts.   It was to prove to be a monumentally bad deal for BostonVentures.   The partners installed the most successful black executivein the music business, Mr. Busby, to be Motown's chiefexecutive. They also gave him a 10% stake in the venture, atMr. Gordy's insistence that the company be at least 10%black-owned. As head of MCA's own black music division, Mr.Busby, who had come up from the streets of Los Angeles, hadin four years turned a moribund money-loser into a unit with$90 million in sales, and helped bring black music -- inretreat since the disco era -- back into the &quot;crossover&quot;mainstream of Top 40 hits.   Mr. Busby's new charge was to restore Motown to its formerglory, when in the 1960s it delivered black culture to whiteAmerica -- the Supremes, the Temptations, Stevie Wonder,Lionel Richie, the Jackson Five and more.   But Motown Records had been in decline since it had movedto Los Angeles in 1972. Mr. Gordy had almost sold it to MCAfor $40 million in late 1986, but couldn't let go at the lastminute. A year and a half later, MCA Records Chairman IrvingAzoff wanted to buy Motown again. But the price had risen,and his MCA bosses, feeling burned by some non-musicinvestments, weren't in an expansive mood.   Moreover, tension in the relationship between Mr. Azoffand the top MCA executives in &quot;the Tower&quot; was beginning toshow: Mr. Azoff, former manager of the Eagles, was a boywonder who had successfully built the record division. But hewas also a flamboyant, freewheeling entrepreneur who enjoyedthe limelight. MCA's corporate culture was much morebuttoned-down.   So Mr. Azoff brought in Boston Ventures. Its principal,William Thompson, is one of Hollywood's least-knownpowerbrokers, a former executive vice president at FirstNational Bank of Boston who invests millions for a closelyguarded group of wealthy investors including Hollywoodbigwigs like Norman Lear and also Rupert Murdoch's NewsCorp., Marvin Davis, and Time Warner Inc.   Mr. Thompson and his five partners, all former Bank ofBoston bankers, had made many entertainment investments overthe years, hanging onto some, reaping handsome profits onothers. They had acquired Billboard magazine's parent in 1984for $40 million and sold it three years later for $100million; they profited similarly with USA Cinemas. To theamusement of some, this staid firm with investments frommajor studios also owns a large stake in those scourges ofstudio stars, the National Enquirer and the Star.   Even so, these New Englanders like to glide as quietly asthe swans at the Bel-Air: They'd never even been in a majorlawsuit before. They never talked to the press or fought apublic relations war. And they were basically new to themusic business.   In Motown, they liked what they saw. Their instinct --that asset values of music companies were about to explode --was correct. Motown had one of the great catalogs of alltime, which they felt was badly underexploited. Theyenvisioned a gold mine when the next format, after cassettesand compact disks, came along. Also unexploited was the brandname -- it meant something. Mr. Busby says he has beenapproached about everything from Motown theme parks tosuggestions of a &quot;Chrysler LeBaron, Motown Edition.&quot;   With Mr. Azoff's charm assuring everyone it would all workout, they made a deal, and by Labor Day 1988 the new Motownwas in business. Boston Ventures went back to Massachusettsand let Mr. Busby run the company.   Sparks started flying almost immediately. Mr. Busby wasknown throughout the industry as a superb marketer and askilled developer of talent, but as an administrator he wasdisorganized, and his staff was young and inexperienced. Theblack music field had gotten more competitive -- ironically,reflecting what Mr. Busby had accomplished at MCA.   Furthermore, Mr. Busby had an ambivalent relationship withMCA: After all he'd done for them, he told people close tohim, he felt unappreciated and undercompensated. He alsocouldn't tell if his new job at Motown was a reward or abanishment, because MCA was targeting him with an internalaudit involving financial malfeasance. (MCA was investigatinga number of its executives at the time in connection with afederal probe of MCA's record division.) &quot;It could haveruined my career,&quot; he has said. Nothing came of it, butfriends say Mr. Busby felt the mixed messages typified theplight of black businessmen in America.   When the records Motown released didn't cross over to thepop stations, Mr. Busby blamed MCA, saying it wasn'tpromoting his records or responding to his marketingsuggestions.   MCA says the records -- by artists such as Joyce Irby,Gerald Alston, Desiree Coleman and Giorgio El DeBarge --simply weren't pop hits, and that Mr. Busby was toodistracted trying to run the company to develop new acts.Lionel Richie and Stevie Wonder weren't deliveringlong-promised albums, and efforts by Smokey Robinson (&quot;Love,Smokey&quot;) and Diana Ross (&quot;Workin' Overtime&quot;) bombed.   Mr. Busby was feeling frustrated. He would prowl thecorridors of MCA, trying to rustle up help from his formercolleagues. They wanted to help him -- everyone liked Mr.Busby -- but often they didn't have the time or theresources, employees say.   Mr. Busby says he kept asking for &quot;transition meetings,&quot;at which he could discuss how Motown and MCA could worktogether, and kept being turned down. Later, when MCAacquired Geffen Records, he watched bitterly as they heldtransition meeting after transition meeting, friends say. MCAofficials say Mr. Busby simply wanted to run a stand-alonecompany, and was blaming them for his failures.   In an operations committee meeting among the partners asearly as April 1989, Boston Ventures and MCA were alreadysquabbling about the Motown catalog inventory, which wasn'tselling as fast as everyone had hoped. Mr. Azoff, who mighthave smoothed things over, was distracted, preparing to leavethe company to start Giant Records.   Finally, that fall, Mr. Busby flew to Boston seeking helpfrom Boston Ventures in presenting a new business plan toMCA.   Many observers believe things were destined to fall apartafter Mr. Azoff, who had put the deal together and believedin Motown, left MCA in September 1989. MCA disputes this,saying that the rest of the MCA team was still in place afterMr. Azoff left and was replaced by Al Teller, a corporateveteran of CBS Records.   Boston Ventures and MCA exchanged proposals andcounterproposals -- Motown and Boston Ventures wanted torenegotiate the contract, with a shorter term and a lower fee-- but negotiations went nowhere. In fact, the partners werespeaking different languages. Boston Ventures's style wasdeliberate and methodical. These former bankers were alwayscoming up with flow charts and statistical analyses. At MCA,on the other hand, &quot;we schmooze,&quot; says an MCA official.&quot;We're renegotiating all the time with artists. But BostonVentures was -- well, strange.&quot;   MCA became convinced that Boston Ventures had an &quot;agenda,&quot;which was to find an &quot;exit strategy&quot; for their investment.&quot;They tried to finesse us,&quot; says one MCA executive. With a10-year distribution deal with MCA, selling out to anotherrecord company was out of the question. In materials sent toinvestors, Boston Ventures mentions an &quot;exit multiple in yearseven,&quot; and one Bostonian says, &quot;Of course we wanted to flipit -- we're investment bankers.&quot; The plan had been to spinoff the company to the public, or perhaps sell to MCA itself,he adds.   Motown's asset value was rising, but as the partnersbickered and initial public offerings in the entertainmentfield faltered, Boston Ventures realized it had to find a wayto break the distribution deal.   MCA may be flexible when it negotiates with actors andsingers, but on a corporate level, it's known as the mostintractable company in Hollywood. At MCA, a deal's a deal,and it's considered dishonorable to try to wiggle out. Thesanctity of contracts is reinforced by the abundance oflawyers at the company. It's a cliche in Hollywood that atMCA, &quot;litigation is a profit center.&quot;   As a partner MCA was furious that it was being cut out ofthe loop. Executives of the entertainment company say Motownand Boston Ventures hired a headhunter, then a chiefoperating officer, without consulting MCA, and then presentedthe moves to it for approval at an operations committeemeeting. MCA also thought Boston Ventures was secretlyconniving to acquire another jazz label, called GRP. (BostonVentures accuses MCA -- which eventually did acquire GRP --of the same thing.)   Finally, last May, Motown sued MCA, and two weeks later,MCA sued back in an action that named Boston Ventures aswell. Then, at an operations committee meeting at the poshSt. James Club on the Sunset Strip, with three MCA committeemembers in attendance, Boston Ventures and Motown staged akind of Boston Tea party. Mr. Busby read a resolution thatsince MCA hadn't cured breaches of the distributionagreement, Motown considered itself free to seek a newdistributor. MCA loudly denounced the move, declaring that itwould fight.   In a press release, Motown accused MCA of treating it likea &quot;Third World country,&quot; and Black Radio Exclusive magazineeditorialized that MCA was &quot;tarnishing the image&quot; of animportant black symbol. Matters like this were particularlysensitive since Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.had acquired MCA last January for more than $6 billion. Somenational black leaders had attacked the Japanese as racist,and Matsushita didn't want any trouble. Motown hiredWashington lobbyists to approach Matsushita directly,infuriating MCA.   Meantime, Mr. Busby, listening to MCA's refrain that thiswas a matter between MCA and Boston Ventures -- that the beefwasn't with Motown -- was angry. He felt like an invisibleman, and sent out a statement saying he felt &quot;disrespected.&quot;   Boston Ventures says it often heard MCA executives denyrequests by pointing helplessly to &quot;the Tower.&quot; Finally, lastmonth, the Tower got involved. Mr. Wasserman wrote a letterto Boston Ventures's Mr. Thompson, saying he wanted to workthings out. Mr. Thompson agreed, but cautioned that the finaldecision rested with Motown.   Mr. Busby told friends he was so nervous before themeeting that he paced the Bel-Air gardens for a half hour,wondering what he was going to say.   There were eight people in the luxury suite on Aug. 27including Messrs. Wasserman, Sheinberg, Teller and Busby.When Mr. Wasserman stood up, he was statesmanlike. He saidthat even the worst of marriages can be repaired, thateveryone had made mistakes -- including MCA -- and that theywere all there to work things out.   Mr. Busby took the floor. A man who doesn't hide hisemotions and uses New Age terms like &quot;the next millennium,&quot;Mr. Busby talked about his vision for Motown, and how MCA hadlet him down. MCA had realized its dream when it haddelivered the company to the Japanese for the shareholders --why wouldn't they let him accomplish his? He didn't think thesituation was resolvable. The MCA executives thought he wasgetting long-winded.   Mr. Sheinberg interrupted.   &quot;Okay, you're a dreamer,&quot; Mr. Sheinberg told Mr. Busby,according to people who were there. &quot;You're a visionary. Butlet me give you a dose of reality.&quot; Then, according toparticipants at the meeting, Mr. Sheinberg spoke in coldanger for 10 minutes, saying that MCA had put in more moneythan Boston Ventures had -- deferring payments, transferringthe contracts of artists, lending money -- so how could hetalk about Boston Ventures financing his dream? He said thatMCA had released Mr. Busby from his contract to go to Motownin the first place, that if the parties didn't settle nowthey never would, that they would go to court and fight along and expensive battle.   Visibly upset, Mr. Busby said he guessed there was nothingto talk about and walked out onto the garden patio. Mr.Wasserman closed the meeting, and everyone filed out instunned silence.   So Motown and Boston Ventures went back to finding a newdistributor and PolyGram finally signed on despite the risks.One MCA insider, in fact, suggested this week that the newPolyGram contract with Motown could harm the world-widerelationship between MCA's and PolyGram's powerful parents:Matsushita and Philips. &quot;Anyone who signs with Motown,&quot; warnsan MCA official, &quot;is jumping on a ticking time bomb.&quot;   The irony is that Motown Records, despite everything, issuddenly doing fine. It has become one of the hottest labelsaround this year, with platinum acts like Boyz II Men andAnother Bad Creation.   But MCA and Motown even disagree about that. Motown saysit's successful now because it's handling its own promotionand other services itself, avoiding MCA.   MCA says Motown's management has simply matured and foundthe right musicians.</TEXT></DOC>