<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920108-0174</DOCNO><DOCID>920108-0174.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Iowa State University Files Suit   Against Fax Firms in Patent Fight   ----   By Arthur S. Hayes and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/08/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B3</SO><CO>   CANNY CMAFC F.LAF J.MUR LABOR NG NIPNY T.CMP</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BUILDING MATERIALS, CONCRETE, GLASS, PAINT (BLD)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY andamp; PRODUCTION, QUALITY CONTROL (ITC)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PATENTS (PAT)RESTRUCTURINGS, RECAPITALIZATION (RCN)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>CANADA (CN)FAR EAST (FE)IOWA (IA)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Iowa State University, which has long claimed it owns thepatent to a key process in the modern facsimile machine, isseeking to compel major manufacturers to pay it millions ofdollars in royalties.   The Iowa State University Research Foundation, a nonprofitcompany that obtains and holds patents for the school, hassued Murata Manufacturing Co. and NEC Corp., both based inJapan, for allegedly infringing on a patent that covers anelectronic encoding process.</LP><TEXT>   Steven Price, a director of the research foundation, saidthe process was devised by David Nicholas in 1971 as part ofhis doctoral thesis in electrical engineering. Mr Nicholas,47, an engineer employed by a unit of Rockwell InternationalCorp. in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, was awarded a patent in 1973,Mr. Price said, and stands to net a percentage of royaltiespaid to the university, which owns the patent.   Mr. Price said that Mr. Nicholas's encoding process wasn'tdesigned specifically for fax machines. But it has beenadapted to accelerate the transmission and improve thelegibility of the printed message.   The suits against the two manufacturers -- filed beforeJudge Harold Vietor of the federal district court in DesMoines, Iowa, on Dec. 31 -- are the latest maneuvers in auniversity campaign that targets 39 makers and retailers offax machines. Joseph Grear of the law office of Rolf Stadheimin Chicago, which represents the university, said his clientstands to reap big payments from settlements and manymillions more from jury awards that could result in trebledamages.   Mr. Grear said the university is asking for compensatorydamages for royalties from sales from May 1985 to December1990, when the patent expired. The defendants, Mr. Pricesaid, either knowingly infringed on the patent or developedthe process independently after Mr. Nicholas was awarded hispatent. In the latter case, he added, they would still haveto pay royalties to the patent holder, Mr. Price added.   Mr. Price said the university attempted to reachsettlements with Murata and NEC and sued only after it becameconfident no settlement could be reached. He said theuniversity has settled with 11 other companies, includingCanon Inc., that require the companies to pay the university$8 for every $1,000 in sales of fax machines using theprocess from 1985 to 1990. Jack O'Brien, an attorney withFitzpatrick, Cella, Harper andamp; Scinto in New York, whichrepresents Canon, confirmed the existence of the agreementbut declined to comment on the amount of payment.   According to Keith Kuzmin, an analyst with VentureDevelopment Corp. in Natick, Mass., faxes weren't in wide useuntil the early 1980s, when transmission time accelerated toless than a minute a page. Previously, transmission had takenthree times as long. The speed-up, which Iowa Stateattributes to its patented process, sparked the boom in salesof fax machines for everyday office use, Mr. Kuzmin said.Now, with prices falling to below $500, customers are buyingthem for home-office use.   Evan Finkel, an attorney with Spensley Horn Jubas andamp; Lubitzin Los Angeles, which represents Murata, said the companydeclined to comment. NEC also declined to comment on thesuit, said Lourdes Cogswell, a company spokeswoman.   ---   PSYCHIATRIST in stock case gets probation, so he can stilltreat patients.   Robert H. Willis pleaded guilty to trading on confidentialinformation he learned during the therapy sessions of apatient, Joan Weill, wife of financier Sanford Weill. Dr.Willis bought stock in BankAmerica Corp. in early 1986 afterMs. Weill told him that her husband was seeking to becomechief executive officer of BankAmerica. He also passed theinformation on to his broker.   Although U.S. Judge Miriam Cedarbaum called Dr. Willis'sconduct &quot;reprehensible,&quot; she said she decided not to send himto prison partly out of concern for the continued treatmentof his other long-term patients. Instead, Judge Cedarbaum, offederal court in Manhattan, sentenced Dr. Willis to fiveyears probation and ordered him to pay a fine of $150,000.Dr. Willis, of Tenafly, N.J., has agreed to pay an additional$136,580 to settle a related suit brought by the Securitiesand Exchange Commission.   Judge Cedarbaum said, &quot;It is with misgiving that I do notsentence you to imprisonment.&quot; Citing letters of praise shehad received from many of Dr. Willis's patients, she added,&quot;I sincerely hope the letters from your patients reflect yourtrue character.&quot;   She also ordered Dr. Willis to perform 600 hours ofcommunity service each year while he is on probation. Dr.Willis's attorney, Edward Brodsky, said his client willprovide couseling to the homeless and people with AIDS.   Dr. Willis, 52 years old, could face additional penalties,however, from state medical regulators and the AmericanPsychiatric Association. In criminal cases involving doctorsand psychiatrists, New York state regulators typically reviewthe case after sentencing to decide whether the doctor shouldbe punished with a reprimand or even the loss of a medicallicense. A spokesman for the state health department saidthat no action has begun in Dr. Willis's case, but that it islikely to be reviewed for medical misconduct.   The American Psychiatric Association also could reprimandor suspend the doctor for violations of the profession's codeof ethics. The code says that psychiatrists &quot;shoulddiligently guard against exploiting information furnished&quot; bya patient.   A malpractice suit brought by Ms. Weill against Dr. Willisis pending.   ---   DISPUTE WITH RETIREES resolved in Federated-Alliedbankruptcy case.   The fight over health benefits had threatened to derailthe reorganization of Federated Department Stores Inc. andAllied Stores Corp., which filed for bankruptcy-courtprotection in January 1990. The companies and the OfficialRetirees' Committee have been bickering for more than a yearover medical and dental benefits for nonunion employees whoretired before the bankruptcy filing.   Under the terms of a settlement submitted to U.S.Bankruptcy Judge J. Vincent Aug Jr. on Monday, a trust willbe set up to cover the health benefits of some 6,400 retireesand about 2,500 of their spouses and dependents. Thereorganized company will fund the trust with quarterlypayments that are expected to total about $80 million on apresent-value basis. Retirees will also make contributions tothe trust, a so-called voluntary employee benefitsassociation.   VEBAs, as they are known, are a common vehicle forsupplying nontaxable benefits to employees. But VEBAs seldom,if ever, have been used to resolve a benefits dispute underthe bankruptcy code, according to Glen D. Nager, a partner atthe Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue, whichrepresents the debtors.   Robert Usadi, a partner at the New York law firm CahillGordon andamp; Reindel, which represents the retirees, said theplan &quot;gives to representatives of the retirees . . . theability to make decisions in the future as to benefits and tocontribution levels independent of what Federated might do in{its} own interests.&quot;   The companies and retirees have requested that Judge Aughold a hearing on the settlement and their lawyers expect himto approve the trust arrangement.   ---   ASBESTOS MAKER wins a round in insurance-coverage case.   The issue before a U.S. magistrate judge in New York waswhether a company could be insured against lawsuits that itanticipated when it purchased the insurance policy.   While the usual rule is that a company can't claimcoverage for losses it was aware of at the time coveragebegan, this case involved the more complex issue of whetheranticipated lawsuits constituted such &quot;known losses.&quot;   Magistrate Judge Leonard Bernikow, in deciding thatNational Gypsum Co. might be entitled to coverage, found thatthe expected lawsuits represented only &quot;known risks,&quot; ratherthan sure losses. The magistrate judge's recommendation issubject to approval by a U.S. district judge.   The finding last week came in an insurance-coverage suitstemming from cases brought by school districts around thecountry in which National Gypsum faces asbestos-relatedproperty damage claims. The school districts, which filed thesuits in the early to mid-1980s, are seeking reimbursementfor the money they spent in encapsulating and removingasbestos.   The magistrate judge's recommendation involves a pre-trialissue and doesn't necessarily mean that the insurancecompanies will have to provide National Gypsum with coverage.But lawyers said it is significant because it attempts toresolve a growing legal question as to when knowledge of arisk precludes coverage.   Lawyers for National Gypsum said that $400 million ofcoverage is at stake in this particular insurance dispute.More than a dozen other asbestos manufacturers face similarclaims.   (National Gypsum Co. vs. International Insurance Co. etal., 86 Civ 9671, U.S. District Court, Manhattan)   ---   CHARGES DROPPED against former Drexel trader in Milkencase.   Bruce Newberg, who worked for Michael Milken in DrexelBunrham Lambert Inc.'s junk-bond department, had been namedas a defendant in the criminal case against Mr. Milken. Mr.Milken, former head of the junk-bond department, pleadedguilty in 1990 to six securities-related felonies.   The U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan said it droppedthe charges against Mr. Newberg because he already has beenconvicted and sentenced to three months in prison onessentially the same allegations in a case involvingPrinceton/Newport L.P. An appeals court reversed some of thecharges against Mr. Newberg in the Princeton/Newport caselast year but affirmed the securities-fraud convictions. Anyfurther prosecution could have raised double-jeopardyproblems, lawyers said.</TEXT></DOC>