<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900510-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>900510-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Investors Hindered in Fights With Brokers   ----   By Wade Lambert and Christi Harlan   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal appeals court narrowed the choices manyinvestors have when their disputes with brokers go toarbitration.   The U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruled thatinvestors nationwide can be required to arbitrate in NewYork, rather than in the city in which they live or dobusiness. The decision -- which involves cases with AmericanStock Exchange members before the American ArbitrationAssociation -- is at odds with the exchange's and thearbitrators' own policy.</LP><TEXT>   In a related case, the court also ruled that a customer'sindividual brokerage contract takes precedence over Amex'smore general rules about arbitration. The court said that bysigning an individual contract, the customer gives up theright to arbitrate before the American ArbitrationAssociation. Instead, investors must use securities-industryarbitration proceedings specified in the contract. Manyshareholder attorneys consider AAA proceedings to be morefair to investors.   Previously, Amex and AAA have allowed investors' cases tobe handled in cities that are convenient for them. But thefederal appeals court in Manhattan, N.Y., said the wording inthe Amex constitution requires that cases before thearbitration group be handled in New York.   The Amex provision says that cases can be taken &quot;beforethe American Arbitration Association in the city of NewYork.&quot; The Amex and the arbitrators say the wording merelydescribes where the association is based, but the court saidthe language of the rule compels that arbitration be held inNew York.   &quot;The argument that `in the city of New York' isdescriptive is undermined by the fact that, at all relevanttimes, there was only one American Arbitration Association,&quot;the court said in its opinion earlier this week. &quot;Thegeographic reference is superfluous if not a forum selectionclause.&quot; The panel of appellate judges said the Amex wouldhave to change the language of the provision if it disagreedwith the court's interpretation.   The case before the court involves investors who claimPaineWebber Inc. employees misled them into buying securitiesbefore the price collapsed. The investors wanted to arbitratethe case in Orlando, Fla., where they live. They were doingbusiness through PaineWebber's Orlando office.   Robert Coulson, president of the arbitration association,said the decision poses an inconvenience for many investors.&quot;We're sorry that the court seems to have foreclosed accessof the investor to AAA procedures,&quot; Mr. Coulson said. &quot;We tryto keep our procedures open to anyone who wants to use them.&quot;The association is a nonprofit public-service group thatarbitrates a wide range of cases, from brokerage disputes tolabor issues.   Neal Blaher, a lawyer for the investors, said, &quot;It's areal blow to any fairness for customers.&quot; He said manyinvestors in such proceeding can't afford to take their casesto New York. Under the decision, arbitration before asecurities-industry proceeding could be held in variouscities -- only investors going before AAA would be requiredto arbitrate in New York.   Scott Noah, an assistant vice president and associategeneral counsel for Amex, said the exchange last Novemberproposed a change in its constitution to make it clear thatit didn't intend to require that AAA cases be arbitrated inNew York. He said the Securities and Exchange Commission hastaken no action on the proposal.   In the other case, an investor in a dispute with MerrillLynch, Pierce, Fenner andamp; Smith Inc. claimed that when it comesto arbitration, the Amex constitution should preemptindividual brokerage contracts. In affirming a lower courtjudge, the appeals court said the investor had agreed tonarrow his arbitration choices by signing the brokeragecontract.   ---   GEORGIA ELECTION LAW is challenged as discriminatory.   A class-action suit filed Tuesday in U.S. District Courtin Atlanta alleges that a 1964 state law requiring candidatesin a primary election to receive more than 50% of the votescast to secure their party's nomination dilutes black votingstrength. The plaintiffs, a group of 27 black legislators andcivil-rights leaders, want a candidate to be able to winprimary and general elections with a plurality.   The suit could affect the 1990 governor's race in Georgia.The plaintiffs said they intend to seek a preliminaryinjunction to prevent a runoff in the July 17 Democraticgubernatorial primary. No runoff is expected in theRepublican primary.   The suit is the second major challenge to Georgia'selection laws in federal court. A related case involvesallegations that the state's method of electing superiorcourt judges from multi-county circuits dilutes black votingstrength. In these wide geographic areas, voters select morethan one judge for the region. Such elections can dilute avoting group's power if that group is a minority within thecircuit.   In contrast, single-judge districts give neighborhoodssole power to select the judge for that district.   ---   HOSPITAL'S FIRING of therapist turned photographer isupheld.   The case involved photographs of toddler Jessica McClure,the Midland, Texas, girl who captured national attention inOctober 1987 when she was trapped in an abandoned well for 58hours.   A respiratory therapist working at Midland MemorialHospital shot photographs of Jessica as she was brought intothe hospital's emergency room after her rescue and sold thephotos to the New York Times.   The hospital fired the therapist, John Brennan, forviolating hospital policy governing the release ofinformation about patients. The therapist, who argued that hehad the permission of Jessica's mother to shoot thephotographs, filed suit in state district court in Midland,alleging that he was deprived of property and libertyguaranteed in the U.S. Constitution. The original suit alsoalleged wrongful discharge and breach of contract, but thoseclaims were later withdrawn.   State District Judge Vann Culp of Midland granted thehospital's motion for summary judgment on the constitutionalquestion and dismissed the therapist's suit last week.   The hospital was represented by labor law specialistsChristopher Knepp and Grace Renbarger of the Austin office ofDallas-based Hughes andamp; Luce.   Barry L. Hart, the Odessa, Texas, lawyer representing thetherapist, said his client hasn't decided whether to appealJudge Culp's decision.   ---   FOOTBALL PLAYERS gain support of state officials in highcourt.   The attorneys general of eight states, including New York,Texas, Michigan and Utah, asked the U.S. Supreme Court tohear an appeal by National Football League players in anantitrust suit against the league. The players are objectingto NFL rules restricting player movement among teams.   Last November, the Eighth U.S. Court of Appeals in St.Louis ruled that federal labor law made the NFL immune fromthe players' antitrust suit as long as the players' unionremained as a collective-bargaining agent. In response to thedecision, the union ended its status as a bargaining agent.   In a brief filed this week, the states argued that theappeals court decision narrows the reach of the antitrustlaws and could extend to other industries.   &quot;The Court of Appeals has imposed on employees a choicebetween the right to bargain collectively and the protectionof the antitrust laws,&quot; the attorneys general wrote.   &quot;We're not saying the players should win {the underlyingdispute} or management should win. But we believe the playershave a right to go forward and try to prove . . . that therehas been a restraint of trade,&quot; said Lloyd Constantine, chiefof the antitrust bureau in the New York attorney general'soffice.   A spokesman for the NFL Management Council said hecouldn't comment on the filing because he hadn't seen it. Thecouncil has argued that the Supreme Court shouldn't hear thecase because the ruling doesn't have a widespread effect, asthe players have claimed.   Friend-of-the-court briefs on behalf of the players havealso been filed by the players' associations of the NationalHockey League and the National Basketball Association.   ---   Glenn Ruffenach contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>