<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900619-0064</DOCNO><DOCID>900619-0064.</DOCID><HL>   12 is Enough]   Each State Can Limit Re-Election to Congress   ----   By Stephen Glazier</HL><DATE>06/19/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   The grass-roots campaign to limit congressional termswould have a better chance of deserved success if it shiftedits focus from trying to obtain a constitutional amendment topersuading individual states to limit the number ofconsecutive terms a senator or representative from that statecan serve in Congress. Contrary to popular misconception, italready is in each state's power to take this unilateralaction to restore responsive democracy to its owncongressional elections.   In recent elections, a trend has been established; in the1988 elections, 98.5% of all House and 85.7% of all Senateincumbents who chose to run again were re-elected. As aresult, congressional incumbents increasingly run unopposed.This year four U.S. senators have no major-party opponent. Asa practical matter nowadays, once an individual entersCongress, he obtains a lifetime appointment and is insulatedfrom the electorate. Recent polls show that voters are morethan 2-to-1 in favor of limiting congressional tenure by law.(Not surprisingly, members of Congress are more than 2-to-1opposed to the idea.)</LP><TEXT>   Responding to this erosion of competitive democracy byCongress, a movement has begun in many states to adopt aconstitutional amendment to limit the tenure of U.S. senatorsand representatives to 12 years. The goal is admirable, butgetting an amendment passed would be very difficult. Sincemembers of Congress obviously will not propose an amendmentto fire themselves every 12 years, two-thirds of the stateswould have to call for a constitutional convention to writethe amendment without congressional approval, and thenthree-quarters of the states would have to approve it.Obviously, these supermajorities are hard to achieve intheory, and in practice the Constitution has never beenamended in this manner.   However, a little-known alternative already exists in theConstitution and is now being promoted by Terry Considine, aColorado state senator. Article I, Section 4, reprintednearby, has never been used by the states to limit the rightof a congressional incumbent to stand for re-election, whichmay be the reason that some mistakenly assume that suchlimitations can be enacted only by constitutional amendment(see accompanying blurb -- WSJ June 19, 1990). But thisprovision has been extensively used by the states to regulatecongressional elections, and its breadth has been clearlyestablished by an extensive array of Supreme Court cases.   State laws regulating elections have been challenged onthe grounds that they violate either of two constitutionalrights. That is, if they violate either the First Amendmentguarantee of freedom of speech or the 14th Amendmentguarantee of equal protection, then the election regulationsare open to attack. State election laws have fallen on thesegrounds when they are shown to be tools of racism,suppressive of minority political views, discriminatoryagainst poor people, or just contrary to a fair and opendemocracy.   Therefore, state election laws have been defeated thatrequire voters to pay poll taxes, pass literacy tests, or ownproperty. Also, various schemes for drawing electiondistricts have been defeated on these grounds, includingdistricting that fails the &quot;one-person-one-vote&quot; test, andat-large districting for city councils. Also, efforts torestrict candidates, as opposed to voters, have been defeatedwhere they require filing fees for candidates, since thatprejudices poor candidates.   More to the point, however, state laws restrictingcandidates from standing for election have withstoodconstitutional challenge under the First and 14th amendments.The Supreme Court has ruled that independent and minor-partycandidates can be kept off the ballot under certaincircumstances, and that minimum residency requirements forcandidates are permissible. Most important, in a 1982 SupremeCourt case, Clements v. Fashing, it was held that individualscan be prevented from running for office if they areincumbents in certain other elected offices.   The facts of Clements are a bit different than restrictingincumbents in Congress from running for re-election, but thecase establishes the constitutional analysis foranti-incumbent laws. In Clements, Texas laws prohibitedincumbents in certain state offices from running for certainother state offices. An incumbent challenged the laws on thegrounds that they violated the First and 14th amendments.   The Supreme Court upheld the state laws. It believed thatthe voters' freedom of speech was not denied because theycould vote for another candidate of the same mind, and thatthe candidate's freedom of speech was not denied because hecould speak, vote and act politically in any way, exceptrunning for the proscribed offices at that time. On theequal-protection issue, the court believed that the state hada legitimate interest in regulating the integrity of itselections and representation, and that no heightened scrutinywas required because no fundamental right was denied. Thatis, the court believed there is no inherent individual rightin the Constitution to stand as a candidate.   The best legal attack on state limits to congressionalelections appears to be by Article I, Sections 2 and 3 of theConstitution. These two sections set out qualifications forrepresentatives and senators, respectively. State lawsrestricting candidates for congressional elections have beenattacked from time to time on the ground that they actuallyset out additional qualifications for such candidates,improperly adding to these two sections of the Constitution.State courts have sometimes agreed with such arguments, butthe leading federal cases reject the argument.   In 1974, in Storer v. Brown, the Supreme Court upheld aCalifornia law that prohibited independent candidates incongressional races who had changed to independent statusfrom a party affiliation within 11 months of the election.This was found not to be a void additional qualificationbecause a valid state interest was pursued. In explainingthis state interest, the court said that &quot;there must be asubstantial regulation {by the states} of elections if theyare to be fair and honest&quot; and that the states' regulationunder the Constitution of &quot;the times, places, and manner&quot; oftheir congressional elections may include &quot;the qualificationsof candidates.&quot; This is necessary to pursue &quot;the variousroutes {of candidates} to the ballot.&quot;   Furthermore, this electoral process, if properly regulatedmust have competition of ideas, parties and individualcandidates. It is only by this process that &quot;the winner inthe general election . . . {earns} sufficient support togovern effectively.&quot; Obviously, where the incumbent is thepre-ordained winner in congressional elections, there is nosuch competition, earned support and effective government.   The ruling in Storer as applied in a 1974 case in federaldistrict court in Pennsylvania to keep a congressionalincumbent off the general ballot. In Williams v. Tucker, aHouse incumbent was defeated for re-election in a partyprimary, and then was prevented by state law from running onthe general ballot for re-election as an independent. Thecourt found that states can restrict access of congressionalincumbents to the ballot, by using one-year waiting periodsbefore running for re-election, in order to pursue the Storerstate interest in an effective election process.   Two later federal cases get even more to the point inreviewing state laws that prohibit certain incumbents fromrunning for Congress. In the 1980 case, Signorelli v. Evans,the U.S. Court of Appeals in New York found that a New Yorklaw requiring any state judge to resign before running forCongress was not an additional qualification because of thestate interest in protecting the integrity of its ownrepresentation. In the 1983 case, Joyner v. Mofford, the U.S.Court of Appeals in Arizona upheld a law that provided thatno state-office incumbent could run for Congress. This wasfound not to be an additional qualification because the stateincumbent was not barred from running for Congress (he onlyhad to resign from his current state office to run, or hecould just wait for the next congressional election). TheSupreme Court refused to hear an appeal.   The thrust of these cases is that the actions of ademocratically elected state government will not befrustrated by the &quot;no additional qualifications&quot; clauses, ifthe state limits candidates for its congressional races in away that does not offend freedom of speech or equalprotection and that pursues some state interest.   A state law restricting an incumbent in Congress frommerely succeeding himself in that office after a number ofyears would pass these tests.   The cases about Article I, Section 4 and state regulationof congressional elections present a consistent philosophy.To paraphrase Harvard law professor Lawrence Tribe in hisbook on constitutional law, candidate restrictions are notreviewed as strictly as voter registration restrictions,because most candidate restrictions are designed largely toprotect the electorate from its own shortsightedness.Furthermore, the capacity to displace incumbents seekingre-election in favor of the new representatives of a recentlycoalesced majority is essential to a democratic system.   Few prospects are more antithetical to rule by the peoplethan a temporary majority entrenching itself by cleverlymanipulating the system through which voters, in theory, canregister their dissatisfaction by choosing new leaders.Hence, the rigor of judicial review of election laws isproportional to their potential for insulating the currentleadership from attack. Thus, courts have reviewed rathersummarily laws that specify requirements for individualcandidates. Indeed, limits on re-election to Congress wouldspecifically promote these democratic principles.   If a state unilaterally limits the tenure of itscongressional delegation, Congress may be able under theConstitution to override this restriction by a majority voteof both houses of Congress. However, to do this, a majorityof the members of Congress would have to go on record asputting their own self-interest before a provision favored bytwo-thirds of their constituency. A clearer statement of&quot;Congress vs. the People&quot; could not be made.   ---   Mr. Glazier is a lawyer in New York and Washington, D.C.</TEXT></DOC>