<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900510-0120</DOCNO><DOCID>900510-0120.</DOCID><HL>   Getting Tough:   SEC Under Breeden   Takes a Harder Line   On Securities Crime   ---   Publicity-Hungry Chairman   Litigates More and Makes   Settling a Painful Option   ---   Is `King Richard' Overzealous?   ----   By Kevin G. Salwen and Laurie P. Cohen   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><GV>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Back in January, the Securities and ExchangeCommission met to consider the fate of one James O'Hagan, arespected Minneapolis lawyer who allegedly had run afoul ofsecurities laws. The commission's investigators insisted hewas an insider trader who bought Pillsbury Co. stock on thesecret knowledge that his firm's client, Grand MetropolitanPLC, planned to bid for the company.   Now, SEC attorneys were trying to persuade thecommissioners to let them file charges against Mr. O'Hagan.An easy decision, concluded the commission's new chairman,Richard Breeden. &quot;This man,&quot; he said sternly to his staff,&quot;should be left naked, homeless and without wheels.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Insider-trading charges were soon filed. A lawyer for Mr.O'Hagan says his client is innocent, and the case is stillpending. But one thing is certain: Guilty or not, Mr. O'Haganis dealing with a new -- and tougher -- SEC.   Spurred by a growing national call for a crackdown onwhite-collar crime, and led by an ambitious, publicity-hungrychairman, the SEC has suddenly gotten more hard-line withpeople suspected of violating securities laws. It is chargingnot just brokers and traders but their supervisors,accountants and lawyers. And it is taking more securitiescases to trial.   The harder line is in keeping with the Bushadministration's style of deregulation: Ease the rules, butcome down hard on those who violate them. &quot;I tend to besomewhat skeptical that some of our traditional remedies areadequate to prevent improper conduct,&quot; says Mr. Breeden, aslim, intense 40-year-old.   Mr. Breeden has been at the SEC less than eight months,but his attitude already has trickled down. Carmen Lawrence,the enforcement chief for the SEC's largest regional officein New York, says that, looking back over recent years andthe many wrist-slappings the SEC handed out, it is clear that&quot;the deterrent effect of what we were doing wasn't great.&quot;So, she says, &quot;the view now is to make it cost.&quot;   According to defense lawyers and SEC staff members, thecommission under Mr. Breeden is rejecting settlementsnegotiated by its staff that it previously would haverubber-stamped. The pacts it does approve tend to be stifferthan in the past. Five years ago, for example, a broker whopeddled unregistered securities -- a typical problem inpenny-stock cases -- could have expected to settle for a30-day suspension from the securities industry. Now, the normis six months. Repeat offenders are likely to be barred fromthe securities business for life.   &quot;We see it every day in our negotiating,&quot; says ArthurMathews, a prominent defense lawyer at Wilmer, Cutler andamp;Pickering in Washington. &quot;The staff demands more in sanctionsbecause the commission is demanding more. I've seen thecommission turn down settlements negotiated with the staffthat the staff certainly would have taken.&quot;   Some say the SEC is making up for the weaker enforcementprogram of the early 1980s, when Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken,Dennis Levine and others made Wall Street a playground forlawbreakers. Others contend that the SEC simply is respondingto a surge in financial crime. &quot;The 1980s were such a boom inthe financial markets that the stock market becameeverybody's opportunity,&quot; says Commissioner Mary Schapiro.&quot;That kind of opportunity breeds fraudsters.&quot;   The SEC has cracked down in the past, but never appearedso eager to litigate, even in the days of legendaryenforcement chief Stanley Sporkin. Back then, in the 1970s,the SEC was inclined to initiate many cases, but husband itsresources by settling virtually all of them.   SEC staffers now say that, over the years, the agency mayhave become too eager to settle. &quot;We probably let ourselvesgo down a road of lesser settlements,&quot; says currentenforcement director William McLucas. &quot;Now we are moving backup the ladder.&quot; To prove it isn't bluffing, and ensure itsown effectiveness, the agency &quot;has to be willing to litigatea case to conclusion,&quot; adds Mr. Breeden.   This latest swing toward severity began in the mid-1980s,when the SEC finally began cracking down on big insidertraders such as Messrs. Levine and Boesky. Mr. Breeden hasgiven that drive a big push. These days, his SEC rarelysettles a case without full repayment of ill-gotten gains.Not having the money isn't a defense any longer; the SECencourages defendants to take out loans to pay back thegains.   If a defendant says he can't afford full reimbursement, hemust produce financial statements proving his case. Severaltimes in the past few months, insiders say, Mr. Breeden hasargued against leniency and insisted defendants seek theprotection of bankruptcy laws if they need to. It isn't clearwhether any defendants actually have been pushed that far.   The uncompromising posture isn't without costs. A growingnumber of defendants are balking at the tougher terms, andlitigation has ballooned, pushing the SEC's pending caseloadto 70 cases from 18 just four years ago. The caseload now isnear capacity, and is eating up limited resources.   And the more SEC cases that go to litigation, the greaterrisk the agency runs of significant reversals. Just lastweek, the agency lost an insider-trading conviction on anappeal by former stockbroker Robert Chestman. The appellatedecision undercut a major SEC rule on insider trading.   Moreover, not everybody is convinced that Mr. Breedenreally is a tougher cop. Some wonder whether the commissionis just jawboning to cast itself as a more formidablenegotiator in settlement talks. &quot;To me it's business asusual,&quot; scoffs Washington securities lawyer Wallace Timmeny.&quot;I don't see anything except tough talk.&quot;   But others in the front lines unhappily report that Mr.Breeden is acting as well as talking. Recalls one individualclose to deposed junk-bond king Michael Milken: &quot;Breedenwanted to boil Michael in oil.&quot;   Even relatively small-potatoes cases are coming under thehot spotlight. On Tuesday, for example, the SEC charged infederal court in Chicago that the son of B.F. Saul II, thechairman of a big Maryland thrift institution, passed alonginside information about his father's acquisition in 1988 ofa real-estate investment trust. The 28-year-old son, Frank,didn't make any money on the alleged violation, the SEC says,but violated a supposed duty to his father by tipping off hisroommate, who made a $38,000 profit by buying shares in thetrust before the takeover.   The elder Mr. Saul says that, under oath, the roommateswore he &quot;didn't get anything from my son.&quot; Frank Saulindependently took a lie detector test, passed that, andoffered to take another from the SEC, the senior Mr. Saulsays. The SEC rejected that offer, he adds.   &quot;I think it's just the bureaucracy run wild,&quot; he says.&quot;The charges are untrue, and we're not about to cop a plea.Who would want that blemish on their record?&quot;   But the SEC is adamant. &quot;A lot of people come in and saytheir dog ate their homework,&quot; says Thomas Newkirk, theagency's chief litigator. The Sauls' explanation, hecontends, &quot;just doesn't hold up.&quot;   Some attorneys worry that this new inclination to take noprisoners may lead the agency to act overzealously. Take, forexample, the commission's decision in January to chargeseveral foreign firms with insider trading in Rorer GroupInc. securities. The charge stirred plenty of negativepublicity for the defendants but, so far, hasn't gotten veryfar in court. Late last month, a federal judge in Manhattandenied the SEC a preliminary injunction it sought against twoof the defendants to prevent their selling of their Rorersecurities. After that decision, the SEC, citing a lack ofevidence, voluntarily dismissed its case against one of them,Fondation Hai, a Lichtenstein-based foundation.   &quot;The filing of this complaint without any investigationwas unduly hasty, if not irresponsible,&quot; contends AndrewLevander, a New York attorney representing Fondation Hai.   Clearly, Chairman Breeden, who joined the commission lastOctober, has brought a fresh eye to enforcement decisions. Heisn't an alumnus of the SEC, and isn't a member of theunofficial club of securities lawyers who take a proprietaryview of the agency. The son of a greeting-card salesman, hegraduated from Harvard Law School and then practiced law inNew York and Washington, D.C. In 1980, he worked in theReagan campaign. After holding several White House posts, hehelped Mr. Bush prepare for the 1988 primaries by playingJack Kemp in practice debates.   President Bush rewarded Mr. Breeden with the chairmanshipof the SEC. Called savvy by some and arrogant by others, Mr.Breeden moved quickly to reshape the commission in his image.He is pushing hard in Congress for broader SEC enforcementpowers and is fighting to steal oversight authority from acousin of the SEC, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.He has positioned himself as an ambassador of capitalism,advising Soviet and Eastern European officials onestablishing or expanding their stock exchanges. Stafferscomplain he is more inclined to spend four hours with theHungarian finance minister than 20 minutes on importantagency issues.   Mr. Breeden's domineering approach -- some at the SECprivately call him King Richard -- sharply contrasts withthat of his immediate predecessor, the professorial DavidRuder, who allowed his staff to run the show, deferring toits expertise. Unlike most of his predecessors, for whom theSEC job was generally the culmination of a career insecurities law, Mr. Breeden is said to long for higheroffice. He is mentioned as a future candidate for Treasurysecretary, and is said by some to have designs on the SupremeCourt. Indeed, some Washington insiders say his tough stancereflects his ambition as much as his conviction. &quot;Everybodywho comes in wants to put on his or her brand,&quot; shrugs Mr.Timmeny, a former SEC enforcement attorney. &quot;The guy's justtrying to make his mark.&quot;   Mr. Breeden says his experience as Mr. Bush's point man onthe savings and loan crisis shaped his views on financialcrime. He believes inadequate federal oversight, shadydealings and incompetent management almost destroyed thatindustry.   So, when Mr. Breeden took over at the SEC last October,one of his first moves was to create two task forces: One toscrutinize public filings of banks and thrift institutions,the other to bring cases against wrongdoers at thoseinstitutions. He also enlarged his office, had additionalphone lines installed, and brought together market-watchingcomputers to create a &quot;command center&quot; for times of crisis.He ordered key aides to wear beepers or carry cordlessphones.   At the commission table, he immediately started makingchanges, too. His first demand: Violators must pay intereston all illegal gains. &quot;On virtually Day One, Case One, hesaid: `Where is the interest?'&quot; recalls Commissioner EdwardFleischman. &quot;Now it's not even something you think abouttwice. It must be in there.&quot; If the government doesn't chargeinterest, the chairman argues, it's essentially makinginterest-free loans to crooks.   Mr. Breeden can be hard on his own people, too. One agencyofficial recounts a meeting at which the SEC staff didn'thave clear proof that a defendant truly needed the drawn-outrepayment schedule his lawyers had proposed. Mr. Breedenglared at the staffers. &quot;Woe to the next person who comesbefore this commission with this kind of settlement,&quot; hewarned.   The staff is getting the message. Ms. Lawrence saysdefendants have made settlement offers on about half thelitigation pending in the New York office. But the offershave been rejected. &quot;They aren't acceptable under the newguidelines,&quot; she says.   One SEC lawyer describes a pending case in which a formerbroker embezzled as much as $500,000 from customers. Thebroker offered to settle by disgorging the amount. The agencyrefused, insisting on collecting full interest and barringthe broker from the industry. &quot;We didn't even bring the caseto the commission,&quot; the lawyer says. &quot;It's clear to us thatthere are certain components to settlements now.&quot;   The Chestman case notwithstanding, the SEC isn't havingmuch trouble winning when it goes to court. Mr. Newkirk, theagency's chief litigator, estimates the SEC wins roughlytwo-thirds of its trial cases.   That is partly because federal courts are turning thescrews on defendants by broadening securities laws. In 1987,for example, the agency decided to make a test case out ofFirst City Financial Corp. and its vice president, MarcBelzberg. First City had acquired more than 5% of the stockof Ashland Oil Co., but waited 13 days longer than permittedto file the required disclosure documents with the SEC.During those 13 days, First City loaded up on additionalAshland shares. It eventually sold the entire stake back toAshland for a hefty profit. The SEC sued the firm and Mr.Belzberg, contending that they wouldn't have profited as muchif they had properly disclosed the stake.   For the first time in a disclosure case, the SEC soughtdisgorgement of profit, a penalty previously imposed only foregregious violations such as insider trading. &quot;It was thetype of case we would have settled five years ago for nomoney,&quot; Mr. Newkirk says.   The SEC won the case last year, forcing First City to giveup $2.7 million. &quot;It has become a landmark case,&quot; Mr. Newkirksays. Now, the SEC routinely forces firms and individuals whosettle to pay back funds gained from disclosure violations.   Then came the Milken case, the first big-leagueenforcement test for the new chairman. He bruised more than afew egos, nearly scuttled the settlement -- and wound upwinning a tougher set of terms than Mr. Milken had expected,according to lawyers familiar with the case.   By the time the SEC got into the act, attorneys for Mr.Milken already had agreed with Justice Department prosecutorsthat, if Mr. Milken chose to plead guilty, it would be to sixfelony counts. Still left undecided, among other things, wasthe size of his fine.   Mr. Milken's attorneys were stunned by Mr. Breeden'sinitial demands. He is understood to have asked that Mr.Milken pay back nearly $1 billion. Mr. Milken's attorneysthreatened to break off negotiations. &quot;There was no reason tosettle if he {Milken} could get the same deal by going totrial,&quot; says one individual close to the Milken defense team.The SEC, he says, &quot;demanded total capitulation.&quot; Mr. Milkenultimately settled for $600 million in fines and restitution.   Mr. Milken's lawyers had also sought assurances fromJustice Department prosecutors that they would recommendconcurrent five-year sentences for all the counts Mr. Milkenpleaded to. But SEC officials, led by Mr. Breeden, demanded-- and received -- a promise that prosecutors wouldn'trecommend any specific sentence, leaving open the possibilitythat Mr. Milken could receive consecutive, and hence longer,sentences for his crimes.   In an interview, Mr. Breeden insists he wasn't intimatelyinvolved in the Milken deliberations and that his enforcementstaff led the way. Nonetheless, sounding a refrain that's nowvery familiar around the SEC, he added that the commissionhad to be tough with Mr. Milken, that the punishment fit thecrime.   Consider, he says, the part of the guilty plea in whichMr. Milken acknowledged cheating investors of Finsbury FundLtd., a mutual fund, by falsely reporting the prices oftrades and pocketing the difference. &quot;If someone walked intoa hotel where Finsbury shareholders were staying, pulled outa machine gun and robbed them, everyone would regard that asa serious event,&quot; he says. &quot;I regard this as equallyserious.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>