<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911029-0073</DOCNO><DOCID>911029-0073.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   A Bad Idea, Whose Time Has Come   ----   By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.</HL><DATE>10/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Those last hearings before the confirmation of JusticeThomas were a sordid spectacle. It may not be entirelyPollyannaish, however, to note certain useful byproducts. Thenation's consciousness on the subject of sexual harassmentwas significantly raised; about time, too. Moreover, thetelevision audience saw a succession of competent, posed,well-spoken black witnesses who disagreed among themselves;this should undermine the David Duke impression that blackleaders all dress up in African costumes and spout a racialparty line while the rank and file mug people in the streets.   That about exhausts the good news. The hearings provokedwidespread titillation and disgust. Our nationalself-righteousness demands a scapegoat, anyone but ourselves,and is finding it in Congress. The Thomas confirmationhearings come as a culmination of a series of scandals on theHill -- overdrafts at the House bank, unpaid bills at theHouse restaurant, free massages in the House gym, fixedparking tickets, junkets abroad, wine, women and song --practices in which the rest of the population of course neverindulges. According to the New York Times/CBS News Poll, asizable number of Americans now see their nationallegislators as generally pampered, arrogant and crooked.</LP><TEXT>   Most of the practices under criticism are indeedobjectionable; and it is quite reasonable to hold members ofCongress to higher standards than we hold investment bankers,stock manipulators, savings and loan operators and otheremblems of the private sector. Certainly the Senate JudiciaryCommittee did not distinguish itself in the Thomas hearings.   Yet it is a little hard, it seems to me, to place all theblame for the mess on the Senate. Surely a considerable sharemust go to the man who presented the Senate with such adubious nomination. The Supreme Court today is the mostundistinguished in my lifetime. In the past, presidents havesought out people of national experience and distinction forelevation to the court -- cabinet members, senators,governors, eminent jurists, leaders of the bar, great legalscholars. Even the reactionary justices who tried to kill theNew Deal half a century ago included men of intellectualforce like George Sutherland, Willis Vandevanter and OwenRoberts. Today dimness seems almost a prerequisite forappointment.   Clarence Thomas is the third mediocrity in a row. It was acynical choice. The president called him &quot;the best man forthe job on the merits&quot; and denied that his race was aconsideration. But had Clarence Thomas been a white man withthe same qualifications, it is not very likely that he wouldhave been appointed. The opponent of affirmative actionironically became the beneficiary of affirmative action.   All presidents naturally enough appoint justices who theybelieve will give their own views of public policy asympathetic hearing. But responsible presidents also havesome regard for the Supreme Court as an institution. Whentheir own predilections command a safe majority, theysometimes take care to preserve the court's appearance ofimpartiality by providing for other viewpoints. A rigidlyideological and partisan Supreme Court loses credibility andfalls into discredit. That is what happened to the &quot;nine oldmen&quot; in the 1930s. Balance is a reasonable consideration inmaking appointments for life to the highest court in theland.   Thus Herbert Hoover, even if with reluctance, appointedthe great liberal justice Benjamin Cardozo. FranklinRoosevelt made Calvin Coolidge's attorney general his chiefjustice. Harry Truman appointed Harold Burton, a Republican.Dwight Eisenhower appointed William Brennan, a Democrat. ButMr. Bush is not a lawyer and does not perhaps fullyappreciate the role of the court. One fears that he regardsjudicial appointments as a convenient way of getting the hardright off his back and thereby gaining a free hand on mattersthat really interest him, like foreign policy. Had henominated someone like John Harlan or Lewis Powell or hisgood friend Potter Stewart, none of this mess would havehappened.   In the meantime, everyone is mad at Congress; and theremedy of choice these days is term limitation. A number ofstates have already adopted term limitation for their ownlegislatures. Some states seek to impose limitations on theirrepresentatives in Congress as well -- a proposal of highlydubious constitutionality, even given the present court.According to the Gallup Poll, 70% of American voters wish tolimit congressional terms.   The argument is that limitation to a maximum 12 years ofservice in either house would end the seniority system, shiftCongress from constituent service to policy-making,revitalize party competition, ensure a constant influx of newlegislators with new ideas and force legislators to payattention to the national interest rather than to their ownre-election.   Well, perhaps. But the most certain result would be totilt the balance of the constitutional system even more infavor of the executive. It is hard to imagine a greater boonfor the Imperial Presidency than to purge Congress ofexperienced legislators who are specialists in issues, whoknow the workings of government and who remember where bodiesare buried. What president would not prefer a revolving-doorCongress filled with amateurs learning the ropes from scratchand condemned to vanish when they have gained the experienceto be effective? Alas, it is not true, as William JenningsBryan is supposed to have said, that any man with sufficientgoodness of heart can write a currency bill.   The Founding Fathers considered and rejected proposals ofterm limitation. They were right to do so. It would have madequite a difference to American history if such limitationshad ended after 12 years the careers of such illustriouslegislators as Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun,Thomas Hart Benton, Charles Sumner, James G. Blaine, HenryCabot Lodge, Robert M. LaFollette, George W. Norris, SamRayburn, Robert P. Wagner, William E. Borah, ArthurVandenberg, George Aiken, Robert A. Taft, Jacob Javits and somany others.   Term limitations would bounce from our present CongressTom Foley, Lee Hamilton, Sam Nunn, Daniel Patrick Moynihan,Richard Lugar, Bill Bradley, Stephen Solarz, Bill Green,Charles Rangel, Tom Downey, Bob Michel, Dick Gephardt, LesAspin and other skilled legislators. Their replacement byfresh-faced and untutored novices would unquestionablyincrease presidential power, but would it really improve theperformance of the American government?   One hears that the automatic return of incumbents is ahorrid new phenomenon. But recall the election of 1790, where38 out of 41 incumbent congressmen were reelected; or 1792,when all 45 incumbents were re-elected; or 1866, when 85% ofthe incumbents seeking re-election made it; or 1934, when 388members ran and 325 were re-elected.   Throughout American history, according to theauthoritative study by David Huckabee, the proportion ofHouse incumbents running for re-election who were returned tooffice has dropped below 70% only seven times and hasexceeded 80% most of the time. As Mr. Huckabee concludes,&quot;Incumbents who have sought reelection apparently have alwaysbeen relatively successful.&quot; As for the alleged tyranny ofincumbency today, hardly half of today's senators weresenators 10 years ago, and less than half the members of theHouse were members 10 years ago.   When you think about it, the whole idea of termlimitations is profoundly anti-democratic. It assumes thatthe quest for reelection corrupts legislators and that theywill better serve the national interest when they ignore thewishes of their constituents. It assumes that the lessaccountable a member of Congress is to popular desires andneeds, the better legislator he will be. It assumes, inshort, that the democratic process itself is the enemy of thepublic interest.   Surely a democracy requires a legislature that listens tothe people, not a legislature that couldn't care less aboutthe people. The desire to be re-elected, as AlexanderHamilton wrote in the 72nd Federalist, gives the electedofficial &quot;the inclination and the resolution to act his partwell&quot; and gives the voters opportunity to assess hisperformance. When they approve his conduct, they can&quot;continue him in his office, in order to prolong the utilityof his talents and virtues, and to secure to the governmentthe advantage of permanency in a wise system ofadministration.&quot; Term limitation, Hamilton said, &quot;would be adiminution of the inducements to good behavior.&quot; It wouldincrease &quot;the temptation to sordid view, to peculation, and,in some instances, to usurpation.&quot;   If democratic government is about anything, it is aboutthe unfettered right of the voters to choose those who governthem. Term limitation, by assuming that voters are too dumbto choose wisely, is an insult to the people. Termlimitation, by weakening the power of the legislative branchto counterbalance the executive branch, would be an injury tothe republic. And term limitation distracts attention fromthe search for answers to the very grave substantive problemsthat afflict and enfeeble the nation.   ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of thehumanities at the City University of New York and a winner ofPulitzer Prizes in history and biography.</TEXT></DOC>