<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920316-0060</DOCNO><DOCID>920316-0060.</DOCID><HL>   Full Circle:   Ex-Official of Drexel   Restructures Firms It   Loaded Up With Debt   ---   Leon Black Buys Junk Bonds   Cheaply and Swaps Them   For Big Equity Stakes   ---   Happy to Be of Assistance   ----   By George Anders   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/16/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   F.CLC FEXC ISS MEMXY X.GLT EII RDS</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)BUYBACKS, REDEMPTIONS, SWAP OFFERS (BBK)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)FOOTWARE MANUFACTURERS (FOT)LIFE INSURANCE (INL)INSURANCE (INS)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)</IN><NS>BUYBACKS (BBK)BANKRUPTCY (BCY)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)RESTRUCTURINGS, RECAPITALIZATION (RCN)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)MISSOURI (MO)NETHERLANDS (NL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   NEW YORK -- When Fred Carr lost his job last April aschief executive officer of First Executive Corp., one of thefirst sympathy calls came from Leon Black.   Both men had bet their careers on high-risk junk bonds inthe 1980s -- and got hammered. Mr. Carr had bought billionsof dollars of the speculative corporate bonds for the bigCalifornia insurance company, only to see First Executive endup in bankruptcy when many of the bonds defaulted. Mr. Blackhad engineered a lot of junk-bond deals as head of mergersand acquisitions at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., then thejunk-bond powerhouse. He lost his job when Drexel collapsedin early 1990.</LP><TEXT>   Now, though, Mr. Black has rebounded. On March 3, he and afew former Drexel colleagues completed the purchase of thejunk-bond portfolio of First Executive's largest subsidiaryfor about $3 billion. The actual owner will be Altus Finance,which is a finance-company affiliate of Credit Lyonnais, oneof France's largest banks, and which has bankrolled Mr.Black's charge back into junk bonds. But Mr. Black and histeam are assuming day-to-day control of the First Executiveunit's portfolio.   Already, their firm, Apollo Investment Fund L.P., hasnegotiated to swap defaulted bonds for controlling ownershipstakes in four sizable companies -- Memorex Telex N.V., ColeNational Corp., Gillett Holdings Inc. and Interco Inc. Bysome estimates, the Black team could collect at least $200million in fees and profits over the next five years frommanaging junk-bond portfolios.   Many investors see immense irony in former Drexelexecutives' standing to profit from the wreckage of thejunk-bond era. &quot;First they created the mess, and now they'regoing to fix it up,&quot; says Jeremy Bloomer, head of research atCredit Research andamp; Trading Corp., a small firm specializing injunk bonds.   Mr. Black's rebound especially fascinates Wall Streeters.Earlier this month, some 200 former Drexel executives agreedto pay $300 million to help settle lawsuits brought byinvestors who contended they were defrauded by means ofDrexel-underwritten junk bonds. Mr. Black is making one ofthe largest payments in that settlement, chipping in anestimated $18 million. (He won't comment on the amount.)   Yet Mr. Black says it's &quot;absurd&quot; to think that his Drexelpast taints his current work. Most of his own Drexel deals,he contends, &quot;worked out excellently for bondholders.&quot; Headds: &quot;Do I feel bad, being involved in a market that fellapart for reasons beyond my control? No. In fact, if I canhelp make part of what's out there viable again, I thinkthat's terrific.&quot;   Indeed, in the rough-and-tumble world of restructuringdebt-laden companies, Mr. Black's controversial past is anasset. Few people know the ins and outs of such companies aswell as do former Drexel executives who helped pile on thedebt in the first place. And despite Mr. Black's involvementin junk bonds, he was never implicated in any of the criminalactivities to which Drexel pleaded guilty in 1988.   Mr. Black, a stocky 40-year-old with a mop of black hair,seldom charms people on first impression. Even friends say hetends to be painfully shy. And he has trouble with basicoffice etiquette, such as tucking in his shirt or coming tomeetings on time. His obsession about his own pay also hasbecome legendary, thanks partly to an oft-told story abouthis final bonus payment from Drexel in January 1990. Told hewould get $13 million, he sputtered with indignation untilDrexel relented -- and raised it to $16 million.   Whatever his quirks, Mr. Black has long shown a remarkableknack for focusing on Wall Street opportunities before otherpeople discern them. As a young investment banker at Drexelin 1981, he chose to specialize in cable television, wellbefore it became an established industry. In the mid-1980s,he was a dominant figure in leveraged buy-outs. And now, he'sthe kingpin of restructurings.   &quot;He has the insight to know where the next game is and theability to play it,&quot; says Mark Utay, a former Drexel officialnow at Bankers Trust Co.   In recent months, Apollo has stormed into the affairs ofone debt-troubled company after another -- occasionally twoin a single week. About half of Apollo's targets are formerDrexel clients; the others are companies that dealt withother Wall Street advisers in the 1980s. In each case, Apolloarms itself beforehand with a commanding position in thecompany's defaulted bonds or bank debt, snapped up at a bigdiscount to face value.   Among Apollo's holdings: $200 million face value ofInterco bank debt; at least $300 million face value of E-IIHoldings Inc. bonds, and big blocks of Price CommunicationsInc. and Revco D.S. Inc. debt. In each case, Apollo isoffering to swap defaulted debt for something else: cash, newbonds, a stake in the business or ownership of some of thedebtor's best assets.   Other restructuring specialists, though, express someunease about Apollo. &quot;They can be very piggy in what theywant,&quot; says Tally Embry, a specialist who jousted with Apolloover the Revco deal. Apollo is likely to end up with a biggain in that deal; Mr. Embry hopes to break even.   Some traders say Mr. Black's shrill, somewhat whinynegotiating style is well-suited to the protracted hagglingthat marks most restructurings. &quot;This business amounts todividing up the pain,&quot; says Robert Miller, a veteranbankruptcy attorney. Others say Mr. Black, a habitualworrier, often prevails by portraying himself as having beenmistreated by all parties.   But getting into the restructuring business in a big waywasn't easy for Mr. Black. After Drexel collapsed in February1990, he was adrift for several months. He rented a smalloffice at his brother-in-law's financial firm in Manhattanand told people he was thinking of cutting back his WallStreet ties and spending more time with his children.   Then, in the spring of 1990, Thierry de La Villehuchet,who heads Credit Lyonnais's New York securities unit, triedto recruit Mr. Black to set up a small U.S. mergers andacquisitions department for the French bank. Mr. de LaVillehuchet says he wasn't worried about Mr. Black's Drexelbackground; he simply wanted an aggressive, well-known mergerspecialist.   Mr. Black was initially so unimpressed by CreditLyonnais's stature in the U.S. that he didn't bother toreturn the Frenchman's first six phone calls. But Mr. de LaVillehuchet kept trying, and Mr. Black met with him overbreakfast. Mr. Black heard the French offer, then made acounterproposal. Rather than join Credit Lyonnais as anemployee, Mr. Black said, he would prefer to set up shop asan independent investor. Credit Lyonnais could be one of hismajor backers, providing a bankroll of $100 million or more.For that amount of money, Mr. de La Villehuchet replied, Mr.Black should fly to Paris and meet with Jean-Francois Henin,who heads the bank's Altus affiliate.   In late-April 1990, Messrs. Black and Henin held the firstof several meetings in Paris. They hit it off quickly. Mr.Black talked about the investment opportunities he saw in thejunk-bond market, which had been plunging for nearly a year.   &quot;It wasn't a hard sell,&quot; Mr. Black recalls. &quot;I told him Ithought the pendulum had swung to an extreme. Good-qualityjunk bonds were yielding 20%. Contracyclical thinkers coulddo very well at a time like that.&quot; Within two months of thatfirst meeting, Altus turned over to Mr. Black $400 million tobe invested in junk bonds. By the end of 1990, Altus'scontribution had swelled to nearly $1 billion.   Mr. Henin, who oversees a $20 billion portfolio, declinesto be interviewed, but people who have worked with him termsuch giant, rapid bets totally in keeping with his style. Thebalding, unassuming Mr. Henin also is an avowed contrarian,willing to make investments that fly in the face ofconventional market wisdom.   Even before Mr. Black signed on, Mr. Henin, largely as acustomer of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., had invested about $500million in high-yield junk bonds as that market collapsed in1989 and early 1990. &quot;High yield was definitely somethingthat he wanted to aggressively pursue,&quot; says one bond traderwho dealt frequently with Mr. Henin. Evidently, Mr. Heninanticipated a rebound and wanted a much more direct pipelineinto the market -- exactly what Mr. Black provided.   For Mr. Black, the French alliance swiftly revitalized hiscareer. He agreed to make trans-Atlantic phone calls two orthree times a week to Mr. Henin, who insisted on approvingany bond purchases over $20 million. Mr. Black left hisbrother-in-law's building and moved into much smarter officesin Credit Lyonnais's Sixth Avenue headquarters in Manhattan.He also recruited about a dozen former Drexel people, led byCraig Cogut, John Hannon and Arthur Bilger. They named theirfirm Apollo Investment, after the Greek god of healing, andset out to make money.   Apollo started quietly buying big blocks of defaultedbonds at cut-rate prices, including the remnants of someill-fated Drexel underwritings. Apollo also launched hardballnegotiations with beleaguered corporate executives to swapthose bonds for cash or major equity stakes.   With its first big investment, Apollo headed straight intocontroversy -- and profits. In late 1990, the firm bought$200 million face value of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc.'s13 3/4% bonds even though the publishing company wasstruggling to cope with too much debt. Because otherinvestors were glum about its prospects, Apollo was able tobuy the HBJ bonds for just 65 cents on the dollar.   In January 1991, the value of those bonds soared whenGeneral Cinema Corp. proposed to acquire HBJ for $1.4billion. But Mr. Black disliked the proposed terms. GeneralCinema wanted to buy Apollo's bonds for 77 cents on thedollar, and Mr. Black was sure they were worth more. Herefused to sell his bonds, despite repeated phone calls fromGeneral Cinema Chairman Richard Smith.   Last June, Messrs. Black and Smith met in Boston to thrashout their differences. Both men say Mr. Black pressed for abetter deal, arguing that his bonds were so wellcollateralized that he would collect nearly full value evenif HBJ was forced into bankruptcy. Soon after the meeting,Mr. Smith -- who seldom budges in negotiations -- raised histotal offer for HBJ by $100 million, which included an extra$28 million for Mr. Black's bonds.   &quot;Leon didn't save us any money,&quot; Mr. Smith comments.&quot;Buying HBJ cost us top dollar. But without him, nothingwould have got done. The company would have disintegrated.&quot;   Strengthened by that coup, Mr. Black won much widerlatitude from his French patrons to pick his junk-bondinvestments. Part way through 1991, Mr. Black and Mr. Cogutfound their next big deal: an audacious plan to gain controlof the ski and broadcasting empire of a Colorado businessman,George Gillett.   Mr. Gillett, a major Drexel client in the 1980s, hadborrowed too much and couldn't pay interest on his junkbonds. Angry creditors, including financier Carl Icahn andthe Fidelity Investments mutual-fund group, were pressing Mr.Gillett to give up ownership of his company entirely and pushthe company into bankruptcy proceedings. That way, creditorscould take over the Vail ski resort and other prized Gillettproperties.   Messrs. Black and Cogut positioned themselves artfully.They quietly bought about $200 million face value of GillettHoldings bonds at a big discount to face value. Then they satdown with Mr. Gillett and devised a tough restructuring plan.Apollo would pump a fresh $40 million into the company andarrange to trim its $1 billion of debt to $600 million. Mr.Gillett could keep his title of chairman but would have tocede about 90% ownership of Gillett Holdings to creditors,with more than 50% going to Apollo.   &quot;This was not an easy process for me,&quot; Mr. Gillett latersaid. The restructuring nearly wiped out his own fortune,once estimated at $500 million. But he had little choice.Last summer, Gillett Holdings filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcyprotection and embraced the Apollo plan. Trying to save face,Mr. Gillett told reporters that he had &quot;invited&quot; Mr. Black tobecome the company's biggest shareholder.   Now, Apollo's pace of restructurings is likely to pick upconsiderably. On March 10, Apollo and Altus announced theyhad converted defaulted bonds in Memorex Telex into a 25.2%stake in the computer-services company, and turned defaultedbonds in Cole National into a 40% stake in the retailer. Bothbondholdings came from Executive Life Insurance Co. ofCalifornia, First Executive's main unit.   Analysts say the Executive Life junk-bond portfoliocontains at least 20 major positions in troubled companiesthat could turn into reprises of the HBJ or Gillett battles.It also includes smaller bondholdings in some 300 othercompanies.   In April 1991, California's insurance commissioner, JohnGaramendi, seized control of Executive Life, saying it was onthe brink of insolvency. At first he appeared eager to sellmost of the junk-bond portfolio to the Altus/Apollo team forabout $2.7 billion. But, worried that Mr. Black's team mighthave an unfair edge because of Drexel's intimate knowledge ofmost junk-bond deals in which First Executive had invested,Mr. Garamendi staged a series of auctions for the portfolio.He got about a half-dozen other offers. Altus, after raisingits bid several times, was ultimately declared the winner,although the deal wasn't closed for nearly four more months.   Apollo executives won't say how profits from the ExecutiveLife portfolio will be divided. But people involved in thedeal say Altus put up all the capital for the acquisition andwill keep approximately the first eight percentage points ofannual income from the portfolio. Additional gains will bedivided up on the basis of 10% to 20% for Apollo and 80% to90% for Altus. On that basis, if the portfolio produces $1billion to $1.5 billion in gains over the next five years --as is widely expected on Wall Street -- Apollo's fees and cutof the profits might be about $200 million.   Some former Drexel executives speculate that if Drexel'sformer junk-bond chief, Michael Milken, weren't in prison forbreaking securities laws, he would be pursuing deals muchlike Mr. Black's. In any event, Mr. Black, who never quitemade it into Mr. Milken's inner circle at Drexel, now is inthe curious position of being the standard-bearer of theex-Drexel community. Mr. Black insists he isn't driven by anydesire to emulate or supplant Mr. Milken. But longtimecolleagues of both argue otherwise. Says one Drexel alumnus,Jay Bloom: &quot;Leon's desire is to be what Mike Milken was: thefinancier of last resort.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>