<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900911-0023</DOCNO><DOCID>900911-0023.</DOCID><HL>   Lithuania to U.S.: Don't Sell Us Out   ----   By Peter Keresztes</HL><DATE>09/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST</CO><LP>   VILNIUS, Lithuania -- The final round of the so-called 4 +2 talks on German unification is scheduled to get under waytomorrow in Moscow. After 45 years, the end of the postwardivision of that nation and of Europe is at hand. Yet thefact that the session could set down some of the essentialconditions for a long-delayed World War II peace treaty hasalarmed the recently elected leaders of the Baltic states.They fear nothing less than a second Molotov-Ribbentropsell-out.   The Council of the Baltic States, comprising the heads ofthe Baltic governments and parliaments, will hold a newsconference in Moscow today at which it will express a &quot;deepconcern that the resolution of the German question may beheld to be the final step in the liquidation of theconsequences of World War II, and that the fate of theRepublic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia, and the Republicof Lithuania will once again be decided without the knowledgeof our Peoples.&quot; If that should happen, of course, the U.S.would be a party to it, as would Britain and France.</LP><TEXT>   Vytautas Landsbergis, president of Lithuania's SupremeCouncil, told me in an interview a few days ago that from thepoint of view of the Baltic states, a formal reunification ofGermany is by no means the end of the World War II story.&quot;Three countries are still the victims of that war,&quot; Mr.Landsbergis asserts. &quot;The Baltic countries have not regainedtheir independence as promised in the Atlantic Charter.&quot;   While he doesn't think the Moscow meeting is likely toproduce a final peace treaty, Mr. Landsbergis fearsagreements that might involve &quot;the principle of not changingborders between Germany and Eastern countries, including theSoviet Union. If these statements would purport to fix theSoviet Union's borders, it would be a new Munich. It wouldnot necessarily have to be recognition of the annexation --that would be inconceivable. But it could be done in someindirect way, and this is our problem.&quot;   Mr. Landsbergis worries that the U.S. in its desire to getSoviet cooperation in the Gulf crisis could overlook theinterests of the Baltic states. In fact, he is concerned thatSunday's meeting between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev mayhave already prepared the ground for such a deal. The Baltstake little comfort from the lukewarm support of the West fortheir sovereignty drives. They are sure of one thing only,that the Kremlin will try to derail their efforts.   The West's attitude nevertheless could be critical. Mr.Landsbergis believes that when Western governments sternlywarned Mr. Gorbachev not to use force in his showdown withLithuania earlier this year, they tipped the scale in therepublic's favor. But Mr. Landsbergis doesn't disguise hisdisappointment that the West fails to use its leverage more.   &quot;Western recognition of our governments and theestablishment of diplomatic contacts is what we wouldprefer,&quot; he says. &quot;That could worsen the West's diplomaticcontacts with the Soviet Union a little. But we think thatthe West is too careful; too careful, not to risk anycomplications with the Soviets. They could push the Sovietsback more strongly, because the Soviets are collapsing andare pulling back from all conquests and this pull-back couldinclude the Baltics.&quot;   The Kremlin has called off its economic blockade, whichhad turned out to be at least seven times as costly for theSoviet Union as for Lithuania in ruble terms. But it hasresorted to more subtle tactics to prevent Balticindependence. There is much evidence of attempts at delaying,distracting and dividing the states in their determinedcampaign for independence.   Lithuania agreed to defuse the crisis with the Kremlin byaccepting a moratorium on its March 11 declaration ofsovereignty, for example. But the moratorium was linked tothe start of negotiations on sovereignty. A deadline for thetalks has passed, and the Baltic states are waiting, perhapsin vain, for the Soviet side to respond to an initialprotocol for negotiations delivered to the Kremlin a monthago. Amid growing opposition in the republics by those whofear that their leaders may accept less than fullindependence, the Baltic Council last week asked for ameeting between Baltic leaders and Mr. Gorbachev.   Overt blackmail is again part of the Soviet strategy.&quot;They are threatening us,&quot; Mr. Landsbergis says. &quot;Either weaccept the central government's proposals on a union treatyor we can look forward to a winter without supplies of energyand fuel.&quot; The proposed treaty, which is purported to makesecession possible, is really a trap in that it setsobstacles in the way of secession; the only way to escape thetrap is not to sign the treaty at all. That, according toLithuanian parliamentarians, is the intention of the Balticstates.   The Kremlin's economic blackmail is combined with someapparently artificial shortages of consumer products.Gasoline supplies are spotty. Sugar is limited to one kilo amonth per person, soap to one cake and wine to one liter.Such products, made and distributed by the state, are turningup on black markets at sharply higher prices.   The KGB and Moscow have attempted to establish alternativegovernment institutions in Lithuania, Mr. Landsbergis says,&quot;especially at the prosecutorial level. But they don'tsucceed. The so-called general prosecutor sent by Moscow isentirely isolated. And, Moscow's attempt to present theLithuanian Communist Party as a real political force issimply not serious -- without monetary and political supportfrom Moscow it would just disappear.&quot;   &quot;The KGB and central institutions are very much interestedin destabilizing the situation in Lithuania,&quot; Mr. Landsbergisbelieves. &quot;They are trying to sharpen national differencesamong the Baltic peoples and among Russians, Poles andUkrainians. The official press and radio broadcasts frommilitary bases disseminate much disinformation.&quot; They are notso successful here as they have been in areas such as theSouth Central republics, he says, and the new governmentshave much support among non-Baltic residents.   As examples of disinformation, Mr. Landsbergis showsnewspaper clippings that paint even czarist Russia as havingbeen kind to non-Russian peoples in the empire, without atrace of attempts at Russification in the Baltics. But evenyoung Lithuanians know better. A 21-year-old cites aninfamous and failed attempt in czarist times to force the useof the Cyrillic alphabet in Lithuanian literature. Allrecognize the cynicism of communists who turned a VilniusRoman Catholic church into a museum for atheism while theyallowed the communist-controlled Russian Orthodox Church tobuild new churches.   Cultures seldom succumb to persecution; indeed, they areoften fortified by the attempt. Lithuanian partisans were thelast to give up armed resistance to Stalin's domination,fighting into the 1950s. The family history of almost everyliving Lithuanian includes imprisonment, deportation ormurder at the hands of communists.   Balts are not asking the West to do their fighting forthem today, either. They are simply demanding that the WorldWar II Allies cut no deals over their heads. As the BalticCouncil's statement argues, the fate of the three republics&quot;is not an internal matter of the U.S.S.R.&quot;   ---   Mr. Keresztes is deputy editorial page editor of The WallStreet Journal Europe.</TEXT></DOC>