<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910807-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>910807-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Through the Cracks:   Bureaucratic Bungling   Helps Drug Fugitives   Evade Capture by Feds   ---   Pot Smuggler Pat Waldrop,   Snared After 6-Year Hunt,   Still Remains Outside U.S.   ---   A Passport for a Dead Man   ----   By Paul M. Barrett   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)POSTAL SERVICE (POS)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>ALABAMA (AL)AUSTRALIA (ASA)CALIFORNIA (CA)CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)COSTA RICA (CS)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Federal lawmen like to point to the tale ofPatrick Waldrop as a model of their skill in tracking drugkingpins around the globe. A convicted drug runner who longeluded the law, Mr. Waldrop was arrested in Costa Rica lastyear at U.S. behest and now faces extradition.   &quot;Catching this guy means a lot to us,&quot; says Michael Moore,head of the U.S. Marshals Service, who as a young prosecutorpersuaded a jury to convict Mr. Waldrop.</LP><TEXT>   The Waldrop case does say a lot about the federalgovernment's ability to crack down on big-time drug dealers-- but not quite what the government claims it does. Pull atthe loose threads of the Waldrop story and theself-congratulation quickly unravels. Revealed is a series ofmishaps and official bungling that continually put theoft-arrested, twice-convicted Mr. Waldrop back on the streetdespite his being sentenced to 40 years in the very casehandled by Mr. Moore.   Even the nabbing of Mr. Waldrop in Costa Rica isn't whatit seems. Far from putting him on a quick road back to theU.S., the Costa Rican extradition proceedings probably meanhe will be beyond the reach of American justice for years tocome.   Such cases are all too common as the nation attempts tomarshal massive resources for its war on drugs. &quot;It's a bigsystem; things fall through the cracks,&quot; says Stanley Morris,deputy White House drug czar and former director of theMarshals Service. Even some top-priority fugitives who arecaught end up back on the street because of oversights byprosecutors and judges, he says; as a result, federal agentshave to &quot;go out and arrest them over and over.&quot;   James Lynch, a criminologist at American University, addsthat with &quot;so many different agencies and jurisdictionsinvolved, there are actually disincentives to cooperation&quot;among the various bureaucracies. &quot;As long as the defendant isout of town or not `yours' for the moment, you don't carewhat he's up to.&quot;   That would seem to be the situation here. Patrick MorganWaldrop -- &quot;Alabama Pat&quot; he is called in the drug world -- is39 years old and has been slipping in and out of federalcustody for half his life. He grew up in a middle-classsection of Birmingham, the son of an insurance executive. Hisfavorite activities as a teen were hunting, drinking and&quot;having a wild time,&quot; says a former schoolmate, RayWillingham. In later years, his associates have toldgovernment investigators, he entertained a lady friend in thebasement of a safe house by cavorting in piles ofhundred-dollar bills, shouting, &quot;Look, I'm rolling in money]&quot;   As a criminal, Mr. Waldrop was nothing if not precocious.He graduated from high school in 1970; by 1972, Georgiaauthorities had arrested him twice on drug charges. One casewas dropped. The other was superseded by a federalprosecution for selling LSD. Mr. Waldrop served 11 months onthe federal charge. A prescient probation officer noted in acourt file that the 20-year-old had a &quot;personal ambition tobe criminally sophisticated.&quot;   He apparently began fulfilling that goal soon after hisparole. With the permission of the U.S. Probation Office, Mr.Waldrop began traveling repeatedly to Key West, Fla., to NewMexico and to New York City. Olbert Hiett, a deputy marshalwho later tracked him, says that with the government'sunwitting cooperation, Mr. Waldrop was busily setting up histrafficking business.   Joe Butler, a convicted marijuana smuggler who worked forMr. Waldrop in the 1970s, confirms Mr. Hiett's account. &quot;Weknew {the feds} were watching us, but we were smarter,&quot; saysMr. Butler.   Mr. Waldrop, a lanky six-footer, raced up the ladder of aFlorida-based group of marijuana smugglers calling themselves&quot;the corporation.&quot; He was, in effect, vice president fordistribution, and oversaw the shipping of hundreds of tons ofColombian grass a year to cities across the South.   After four years of investigation, authorities moved in onthe organization in 1981, saying then it was the biggest drugring ever broken up. Two dozen people were convicted,including Mr. Waldrop, who in April 1982 was sentenced in aPanama City, Fla., federal court to 40 years in prison. Heimmediately appealed, was released on $700,000 bond, and,according to federal authorities, went back to smuggling.This time he allegedly ran his own operation from Alabama.   Mr. Waldrop and his drug-smuggling buddies fanciedthemselves descendants of Confederate gunrunners:swashbuckling renegades who could sneak their contraband pastthe authorities and have fun doing it. &quot;These were good ol'Southern boys,&quot; says Mr. Butler. Alabama Pat, he recalls,enjoyed celebrating dope runs by feting his six or sevensweaty crew members at Mobile, Ala.'s premier seafoodrestaurant, Roussos, and paying with big wads of cash.   In August 1984, it looked as though the law was closing inon Mr. Waldrop again. The Internal Revenue Service filed acase against him, demanding $6.7 million in unpaid taxes andpenalties on drug profits from 1978 alone. Five days later hewas arrested in Mobile by Drug Enforcement Administrationagents who had caught his group bringing in a 25,000-poundshipload of Colombian marijuana.   What happened next prompts a flurry of officialfinger-pointing even today. Instead of ordering Mr. Waldropheld, U.S. Magistrate David Bagwell set bail at $100,000.Prosecutors didn't appeal. Mr. Waldrop paid the bond and,after seven days in jail, was freed.   Retired U.S. District Judge Lynn Higby, who had imposedthe long sentence on Mr. Waldrop two years earlier in theFlorida case, is still appalled. Mr. Waldrop &quot;clearly&quot; shouldhave been detained upon arrest in Mobile, the judge says. &quot;Hewas looking at 40 years on my sentence,&quot; and the prospect ofsuch a prison term surely &quot;made it likely&quot; he would flee.Records from the Mobile federal court show that at Mr.Waldrop's arraignment, an assistant U.S. Attorney, GinnyGranade, said she was unfamiliar with the case and asked thepresiding magistrate to set a &quot;substantial&quot; bond.   As Mr. Waldrop faced these new legal problems, his appealof his 1982 conviction was decided. On Oct. 1, 1984, thefederal appeals court in Atlanta upheld his conviction. &quot;Thatday, the U.S. marshals, if anyone had alerted us, could havetaken the man directly to the federal penitentiary,&quot; saysDeputy Marshal Hiett. But it wasn't until almost two monthslater, on Nov. 26, that U.S. Attorney Jefferson Sessionsfiled a motion in the Mobile court to have Mr. Waldrop takenback into custody.   Magistrate Bagwell, who has since left the bench, deniedthe motion, saying then, as he said again recently, that anyattempt to hold the defendant should have been made &quot;infederal court in Florida, which has had a good bit moreexperience with {the} defendant than this court.&quot; Despitethis suggestion, U.S. prosecutors in Panama City andTallahassee, Fla., deferred to their colleagues in Alabama.   The Marshals Service director, Mr. Moore, who was theprosecutor in the Florida case, admits he didn't follow theproceedings in Mobile. &quot;We were pretty much out of it,&quot; hesays. &quot;The concern over {Mr. Waldrop's} appearance was reallywith the court that had him under pending charges&quot; in Mobile.Mr. Sessions disagrees, saying that it was Mr. Moore'sobligation to get a federal judge in the original Floridajurisdiction to order the defendant's arrest.   Meanwhile, sometime in late 1984, Mr. Waldrop slipped away-- unnoticed until June the following year, when Mr. Moore,alerted by a routine piece of paper work, inquired of hiswhereabouts. He was clearly aided in his getaway by gaps inthe network of jurisdictions among various law enforcementagencies.   The Drug Enforcement Administration, which twice hadinvestigated and arrested Mr. Waldrop, generally doesn'tpursue its own convicted fugitives; the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, which then bore responsibility for chasing DEAfugitives, didn't bother to investigate the Waldrop case. Asfor the prosecutors, Mr. Moore says, &quot;It's not the U.S.Attorney's responsibility to initiate an investigation&quot; aftera convicted defendant runs. So, for more than three years, noone spent much time worrying about Patrick Waldrop.   In 1988, jurisdiction for hunting DEA fugitives was movedto the Marshals Service. Mr. Waldrop's case might havelanguished indefinitely, but a deputy marshal in theBirmingham office, James Alston, happened upon the file andbecame interested in the case; he had grown up in the sameBirmingham neighborhood as Mr. Waldrop, though they hadn'tmet. Mr. Alston, 31, was goaded by Mr. Waldrop's cockiness.&quot;He told everybody that he'd never go to prison again, thathe was too smart,&quot; says the deputy marshal.   Mr. Alston, aided by his colleague and fellow Alabamanative, Mr. Hiett, launched a textbook fugitive hunt. Theystarted with the target's family and friends in Birmingham,electronically tracing phone calls and, with permission fromthe Postal Service, monitoring mail. They used CustomsService records to check on international travel.   The marshals found high-school classmates thought to beWaldrop henchmen flying to such distant destinations asAustralia and Singapore. Calls and letters from Mr. Waldrop'sex-wife and parents went to the same spots. The family'sindignant refusal to cooperate spurred the investigators. Sodid Patrick Waldrop's audacity. Through 1989, he continued tovisit Birmingham, at least twice around his teenagedaughter's birthday. His father, Sidney, flew to Alaska underan alias to meet his son and go hunting, the marshals say.(Patrick Waldrop's father and ex-wife won't comment. Hismother, Jean Waldrop, says her son is innocent. PatrickWaldrop hasn't responded to interview requests relayed by hismother and also sent to him in prison via courier.)   The deputy marshals began narrowing their search for Mr.Waldrop with aid from foreign lawmen. Unaware he was afugitive, Australia's federal police observed Mr. Waldrop ona luxury yacht moored at Sydney. He was rigging the 50-footboat with long-range fuel tanks and radar often used by drugrunners. In the British Virgin Islands, Scotland Yard linkedhim to $2.5 million in bank accounts of shell companies onTortola. Searching Customs Service computerizeddrug-intelligence files, the marshals traced another Waldropboat to Costa Rica. (The U.S. is now investigating Mr.Waldrop's alleged role in a ring that ships marijuana andhashish to Australia and California.)   Even with these leads on Mr. Waldrop's ports of call, themarshals had trouble locating him because of his top-gradephony identity papers. In early 1990, though, an informanttold investigators that a globetrotter named Myron HenryJosephson might actually be Mr. Waldrop. The marshals learnedthat a Myron Henry Josephson who had died in Texas in 1986had somehow applied for a passport a year later. In fact, itwas Mr. Josephson's aunt who had applied for the passport onhis behalf, using his birth certificate and Patrick Waldrop'sphysical specifications and photograph. The aunt, LeeWilliams, a frail-looking 66-year-old drug trafficker nowserving a seven-year prison term, had also procured falsepassports for fellow criminals on the side.   The lucky tip about the passport allowed the marshals totrack Mr. Waldrop's hectic travels. On Jan. 12, 1990, forexample, Mr. Waldrop flew from Singapore to Australia, thenon to Costa Rica. But he stayed a step ahead of his pursuers.   In Costa Rica, officials confirmed that Mr. Waldrop,posing as Josephson, owned property. The Costa Ricans werealso willing to help the U.S. nab him.   But again, the feds fumbled.   The marshals plotted a two-track scheme for snaring Mr.Waldrop in Costa Rica. Plan A was a request that Costa Ricadeport him to the U.S. for carrying a false passport, thuscircumventing Costa Rica's byzantine extradition process. Incase this failed, the marshals suggested that extraditionpapers be prepared and held at the U.S. embassy in San Jose.   On July 23, 1990, the State Department's passport-fraudsection cabled the U.S. embassy, directing it to ask CostaRican immigration officials to arrest Mr. Waldrop and put himon the next plane to Miami, where marshals were waiting forhim.   But unknown to the marshals, the Justice Department'sinternational office had forwarded preliminary extraditiondocuments to the same embassy, through a different branch ofthe State Department. The embassy had already forwarded thepapers to the Costa Rican government; Mr. Waldrop had beenarrested July 22. Once the extradition process was begun,Costa Rican police were prohibited from deporting Mr.Waldrop, says Gonzalo Facio, a Costa Rican lawyer who is thatcountry's ambassador to the U.S.   &quot;Someone blew it,&quot; sighs Allen Trujillo, who at the timewas chief of the marshals' international desk. StateDepartment officials decline to comment.   Over the last 11 months, Mr. Waldrop's Costa Rican lawyershave succeeded in submerging his extradition case in a swampof international law and Costa Rican politics. Costa Ricahasn't extradited a drug fugitive to the U.S. since 1989, and&quot;it could be years&quot; before the Waldrop case is untangled,says Mr. Moore of the Marshals Service.   Or, something worse could happen. Mr. Waldrop wasmysteriously released from his San Jose prison last Nov. 8.U.S. officials fear corruption may have been involved, butthey can't prove it. A U.S. protest prompted Costa Ricanauthorities to rearrest Mr. Waldrop 24 hours later as he waspreparing to leave the country, but U.S. lawmen view theincident as a bad omen. Says Mr. Trujillo: &quot;We don't reallyknow what's going on down there.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>