<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910930-0020</DOCNO><DOCID>910930-0020.</DOCID><HL>   Salomon's Rocky Road: Survival, but as a Smaller Player   ----   By Michael Siconolfi   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1</SO><CO>   SB</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)RESTRUCTURINGS, RECAPITALIZATION (RCN)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)WORLD BANK (WLB)</NS><GV>FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   NEW YORK -- Salomon Brothers Inc., Wall Street's mostpowerful trading firm of the 1980s, is locked in battles onseveral fronts that will determine whether it survives in the'90s.   Reeling from the worst scandal in its 81-year history, thebig investment bank's most immediate challenge is trying tohead off a potential funding crisis -- Salomon needs toborrow an average of about $9 billion a day -- that couldcripple the firm.</LP><TEXT>   So far, an emergency funding plan has kept the SalomonInc. unit safely afloat. That has included the sale of nearly$50 billion of Salomon's assets, slashing its big balancesheet by one-third. But many foreign banks, concerned overSalomon's unknown liability, are reviewing their lines withthe firm. And Salomon has been unable to come to terms withJ.P. Morgan andamp; Co. and Citicorp yet over a new $3.5 billion to$4 billion bank loan that would give Salomon permanentfinancing, people familiar with the talks said.   Other battles loom. Salomon is scrambling to fend offdesertions by big corporate and public clients. And Salomon'sinterim Chairman Warren Buffett, though he has charmedWashington regulators, has alienated some Salomon executives.His efforts to sweep out Salomon's anything-goes culture hasangered some staffers, who privately deride him as &quot;JimmyStewart.&quot; Scores of Salomon's top traders and investmentbankers could leave as soon as skimpier bonuses are doled outin December.   Still, the betting on Wall Street is that Salomon willsurvive -- unlike Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., whichcollapsed into bankruptcy last year. Senior governmentofficials are hinting they could allow Salomon to retain itscoveted status as a primary dealer in government securities,albeit with some conditions attached. And Mr. Buffett -- thefamed stock investor who has stepped into the breach toprotect his $700 million investment in Salomon -- hasskillfully wooed regulators and politicians with pledges toweed out the firm's bad apples and macho culture. Last month,Salomon admitted it repeatedly violated Treasury-biddingrules, leading to the resignation of three top Salomonexecutives and major government criminal and civil probes ofthe firm.   But Salomon is likely to emerge from its crisis as a farweaker firm than the bawdy trading powerhouse depicted in thebest-selling book &quot;Liar's Poker.&quot; The new Salomon will be ascaled-down, more cautious securities firm with far lesstrading muscle -- and far less earnings potential.   A Salomon spokesman contends that the firm &quot;will be leanerand more efficient and, looking down the road, moreprofitable.&quot;   Already, E. Gerald Corrigan, the powerful president of theFederal Reserve Bank of New York, has privately told topSalomon officials the bank wants the investment bank toshrink; Mr. Corrigan has signaled his concern about Salomon'ssteep leverage. In frequent meetings with Salomon's new chiefoperating officer, Deryck Maughan, Mr. Corrigan hasrepeatedly grilled the top Salomon official on the firm'sbalance sheet, people familiar with the talks say.   The behind-the-scenes Fed directive is just one sign thatSalomon's shrinkage is far from temporary. Wall Streetexecutives predict that Salomon's world-wide staff of 8,000will be sliced by as much as 30% through departures andlayoffs before the scandal passes. Big trading profits --long Salomon's staple -- will be tougher with reducedleverage from a slimmer balance sheet. The problems couldseverely hurt the firm; at the least, they threaten to toppleSalomon from Wall Street's upper echelon.   &quot;We'll be like Oklahoma,&quot; says a senior Salomon executive,referring to the college football team tainted by scandal andbanned for two years from post-season play. &quot;We'll still beplaying ball, but there will be no bowl games.&quot;   Salomon is &quot;going to find it more difficult to return to apowerhouse than they may think,&quot; said Arthur S. Kirsch,president and chief executive of County NatWest SecuritiesUSA and former head of stock sales at Drexel.   Although Salomon officials recognize the problems, theysay the firm will emerge a healthy institution. With higherborrowing costs and narrowed funding access, &quot;revenues willbe impacted, and we're going to have to find a way toadjust,&quot; says John G. Macfarlane III, Salomon's treasurer.&quot;But we've always been a very resourceful firm,&quot; adding:&quot;We're pretty confident with where we are, and have a prettygood game plan for the future.&quot;   Salomon officials point to major franchises uninvolved inthe Treasury-bidding scandal. Salomon's Phibro Energy unitremains one of Wall Street's most powerful oil-trading firms;Phibro earned a record $492 million before taxes last year,more than any Salomon unit. Salomon's investment banking andmoney-management operations have grown in recent years. And abig chunk of Salomon's earnings comes from the firm'sbond-arbitrage group, where high-tech traders usesophisticated methods to make big bets on tiny pricediscrepancies between different types of bonds around theworld.   But first comes the hard part.   The ominous precedents are these: E.F. Hutton andamp; Co., whichadmitted felony check-kiting in 1985, was sold in 1987 -- twoyears after it pleaded guilty. And Drexel filed forbankruptcy in February 1990 -- over a year after pleadingguilty to six felonies.   What capsized these firms wasn't scandal itself. It wasthe aftermath of scandal, the inability to obtain the hugeloans routinely needed to run a big securities firm. Incrisis, neither firm had the kind of friends on Wall Street,among the big banks and, perhaps most importantly, inWashington or at the New York Fed, who might have saved them.Both firms added to their woes by failing to cooperate withregulators; in Drexel's case, the firm fought fiercely,deeply alienating officials at the Securities and ExchangeCommission and the Justice Department.   Salomon, by contrast, has cooperated with Washington. Butthe firm still faces skittish lenders that are key to itssurvival; like other big securities firms, Salomon depends onbillions of dollars in short-term loans to finance its dailytrading in securities markets.   Since the scandal broke, Salomon has quickly retreatedfrom the commercial paper market, where it had more than $8billion of its paper outstanding before the scandal broke. Byyear end, as these short-term IOUs mature, Salomon will beleft with less than $500 million of its paper outstanding.   Within the next six months, Salomon has a total of $9.5billion in borrowings coming due, including $3.6 billion inunsecured bank loans and letters of credit, $2.9 billion incommercial paper, $2.4 billion in corporate deposits and $616million in medium-term notes.   As part of an emergency funding plan, Salomon has replacedits maturing commercial paper largely with more-expensiverepurchase agreements, secured loans backed by governmentbonds Salomon owns. These so-called repos now account fornearly 70% of Salomon's financing.   The $50 billion in Salomon's asset sales -- includingcorporate bonds, mortgage loans, stocks and options -- havecut the firm's borrowing needs. Those sales still leaveSalomon, with assets of about $100 billion, with the biggestbalance sheet on Wall Street. And most of its assets,including about $25 billion of U.S. government and agencybonds, are highly liquid and can easily be sold -- a far cryfrom Drexel's junk-bond laden balance sheet. Salomon also hasabout $15 billion of other non-U.S. government obligationsand roughly $35 billion reverse repos, backed by governmentobligations.   But Salomon knows it can't continue to use its emergencyfunding plan forever; its top officials are hoping that thescandal will blow over in three to six months. Salomonofficials privately fret about how long the firm can continueto withstand the constant barrage of bad publicity. Theyworry that any additional disclosures of broader wrongdoingcould further unnerve Salomon's lenders.   So far, banks haven't been a big part of Salomon's fundingtactics, despite the fact that bank lenders were part ofSalomon's original emergency funding plans. Roughly $6billion in short-term bank lines Salomon uses for dailyoperations have temporarily been withdrawn from the $16billion it had in place before the scandal broke. And lendersto Salomon believe the firm doesn't want to test the bankmarket for fear of &quot;bank flight,&quot; says one of Salomon's banklenders. Salomon now has just $2.6 billion in actual bankloans outstanding, down from the $5.6 billion when the crisiserupted.   &quot;Rather than test the bank market, they want to avoid anyperception of bank flight,&quot; says one New York-based bankofficial at a Japanese bank that does business with Salomon.&quot;If they tapped it, they might find it's nervous,&quot; thisofficial said.   Salomon also has been scrambling to head off a pullback bybanks that are balking at renewing part of a $1.5 billioncommitted credit line. And J.P. Morgan and Citicorp, the twowould-be agent banks for the additional permanent bank line,are taking a cautious approach and don't want to get stuckholding billions of dollars of what could be risky loans.   &quot;I don't think a bank will come out and play macho,&quot; saysa member of the bank syndicate, referring to committingfunds. &quot;The stakes are too great.&quot;   So far, Salomon has maintained credit lines with about 110banks, the firm's executives say, down from 150 banks beforethe scandal broke. Some European and Japanese banks, inparticular, are reluctant to commit funds. One lender at aJapanese bank said all major questions have to be answeredbefore commitments are garnered. And that's Salomon'sdilemma, since it wants the funds to tide them over until thecrisis is resolved.   Mr. Macfarlane, Salomon's treasurer, said that &quot;the banksreviewing our lines are predominantly European and Asian. Thelarge majority of our domestic banks continue to lend to uson terms very similar to those before the crisis.&quot;   Besides repos and bank lines, Salomon can also borrowagainst unencumbered securities it currently owns, whichamount to roughly $11 billion in loan value, and $15.4=2billion in market value. &quot;The thing we're watching mostclosely now is their portfolio of unencumbered assets,&quot; saysMark Bachmann, a senior vice president at Standard andamp; Poor'sCorp., a major credit-rating agency. A problem will crop upif Salomon's liabilities start coming due faster than theassets the firm has to liquidate.   So far, Mr. Bachmann says, that hasn't happened. And hebelieves Salomon's confidence crisis will abate withinmonths. But the asset sales and alternate funding &quot;can't goon indefinitely,&quot; he warns. &quot;If it does, the firm is out ofbusiness -- it's as simple as that.&quot;   As a result of the government's investigation of thefirm's Treasury-bidding violations, Salomon is sure to facesteep fines. Liability from about three dozen investorlawsuits could eventually cost the firm tens of millions ofdollars more. Salomon will take a reserve againstthird-quarter earnings for the fines and civil liability ofabout $250 million, analysts predict.   But Salomon's new management team has moved aggressivelyto put the scandal behind it. Mr. Buffett kicked out oldmanagement, fired the two traders the firm says areresponsible for the violations, and vowed to stamp outSalomon's anything-goes culture. Said Mr. Maughan: &quot;The toneat the top has changed.&quot;   Mr. Buffett's masterful performance in Washington appearsto have saved the firm for now. But for all his savvy as astock market investor, Mr. Buffett has little experience onWall Street. The plain-talking Nebraskan -- who prefers hamsandwiches and potato chips over the veal paillard offered inSalomon's swank dining room -- recently conceded that heprobably wouldn't recognize a Treasury-bond bid sheet if hesaw one.   And even as Salomon executives praise Mr. Buffett'sintegrity and intelligence, some say his come-clean approachcould hurt the firm. Already, Mr. Buffett's pledge to rejectdeals or clients that he deems to be too &quot;close to the line&quot;has alienated some key Salomon employees. Earlier this month,Mr. Buffett stunned executives of Salomon's Phibro unit. At ameeting at Phibro's lush Connecticut offices overlooking LongIsland Sound, Phibro executives steamed as Mr. Buffettordered them to sever all ties with Marc Rich andamp; Co., one ofPhibro's biggest clients.   Mr. Buffett was brief. &quot;It's inappropriate for a Salomonaffiliate to be doing business with a fugitive,&quot; Mr. Buffettsaid, according to participants. (Marc Rich has been afugitive from the U.S. since 1983 over tax charges.) ButPhibro had a close relationship with the trading firm foryears, and Marc Rich bought a chunk of Salomon's commoditiesunit last year. Phibro's input at the meeting? &quot;Not a lot,&quot;bristled a seething Phibro executive.   Some top Salomon executives now grouse they are being shutout of strategic decisions. Before Mr. Buffett, formerSalomon Chairman John Gutfreund and former President ThomasStrauss -- who both resigned over the scandal -- metfrequently with the firm's executive committee to setstrategy. &quot;Now the major business decisions are being made byJimmy Stewart and the hero from the {Far} East,&quot; snickers aSalomon executive, referring to Mr. Buffett and Mr. Maughan,who previously headed Salomon's Japanese operations. &quot;A lotof senior people are feeling pretty lonely,&quot; the executivesays.   However, a Salomon spokesman says Messrs. Buffett andMaughan involve the firm's top executives in major decisions.The spokesman adds that &quot;strong management, like any goodtonic, can be bracing at first.&quot;   Mr. Buffett, head of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., has raised afew skeptical eyebrows with a story about weeding outwrongdoing. Mr. Buffett recounts with satisfaction how anundercover sting operation in Berkshire's See'schocolate-candy stores netted several corrupt cashiers withtheir hands in the till.   However, the spokesman says, &quot;People at Salomon are gladto have Buffett here.&quot;   Analysts say it's understandable that Mr. Buffett wants tochange Salomon's macho culture, which many say spawned theimproper activities by the firm's Treasury trading desk. Butthey say a drastic overhaul of the firm could backfire.   &quot;Buffett could turn out to be a big problem for them,&quot;says Lawrence Eckenfelder, a brokerage analyst at PrudentialSecurities Inc.   One area that Mr. Buffett is sure to anger many employeesis pay. Mr. Buffett appears convinced that Salomon shelledout far too hefty bonuses last year. In testimony this monthbefore a Senate subcommittee, Mr. Buffett noted that about 90Salomon Brothers employees earned $1 million or more lastyear.   &quot;I hope to make the system of compensation somewhat morerational than in the past,&quot; Mr. Buffett told thesubcommittee.   Mr. Buffett privately sees compensation as the mostsignificant decision facing the firm, associates say.Bonuses, which are expected to be handed out in December, andare virtually certain to be smaller, cover Salomon'scompensation year ending today. Here's the problem: Salomonwill drive away top talent if it slashes bonuses too much.But it's sure to face congressional criticism if it doesn't.Washington is particularly sensitive about bonuses sinceDrexel doled out big bonus checks shortly before it collapsedlast year.   At a recent meeting with Salomon executives, Mr. Maughansaid the firm is &quot;prepared to lose some big hitters.&quot; Mr.Maughan told the firm's managers they will be rewarded asmuch for how they help colleagues as for their individualcontribution to the firm's profit. Long-term views will beneeded, Mr. Maughan said.   Some aren't likely to wait. The Whitney Group, anexecutive-search firm, already has been in contact with morethan 100 Salomon staffers world-wide looking to exploreoutside positions. &quot;There aren't that many loyalists atSalomon anymore,&quot; says Gary Goldstein, Whitney's president.&quot;Very few people are willing to stake their career onsticking around and waiting to see if the firm survives.&quot;   Since the scandal surfaced, at least four Salomonexecutives have bolted for rival firms, including onemanaging director. Some Salomon managing directors wereplanning to leave soon anyway. That's because of a $100million deferred-pay pool that will be divvied up among about115 Salomon managing directors early next year. Thedeferred-compensation plan, launched in 1988, was intended tokeep key employees from defecting, which they were doing indroves at the time. When the pot -- which has now swelled tomore than $130 million with interest -- is doled out,high-level departures could snowball, Salomon employees say.And that could scare clients doing business with departingtop Salomon veterans.   Already, the firm is holding the hands of skittishclients. Although Salomon says it has retained the big bulkof its corporate clients, some big public clients --including British Telecommunications PLC, the World Bank andseveral state pension funds -- already have suspendeddealings with Salomon.   A big test for Salomon could come soon. Today, the WorldBank -- one of Salomon's biggest customers and among theworld's biggest bond market players -- plans to review itsdecision to suspend dealings with Salomon. Already, Salomonhas been hurt by its inability to trade with the biginstitution, which has a $20 billion fixed-income portfoliomostly invested in government securities.   Representatives of the World Bank have been mum on today'sreview. And Salomon investment bankers, recognizing thegravity of the decision, are keeping their fingers crossed.&quot;This whole thing has been an uphill battle,&quot; said one.&quot;We're just praying we get back in.&quot;   Even if Salomon wins its battles on funding, clients andpersonnel defections, government officials aren't sold onsaving the firm. Despite Mr. Buffett's success in Washington,some government officials are dismayed over Mr. Maughan'sperformance at Thursday's hearing in front of the House Waysand Means Oversight Subcommittee.   Mr. Maughan, to be sure, offered apologies of his own. Butby contrast, he brought up the prickly point that Salomon wasso big that it should be granted leniency.   &quot;We have typically been one of the largest of the primarydealers,&quot; Mr. Maughan told the panel. &quot;And as a former{British} government official, I would be concerned {with} .. . what we would term systemic risk. If you fell this tree,what other trees fall? This is a tall tree.&quot;   The remarks brought derision from some Washingtonofficials, who wondered whether the tone has changed inSalomon's presentations. &quot;This tells me a bit about how thefirm is going to operate,&quot; said one senior official. &quot;Seemslike the swagger is back.&quot;   ---   Steven Lipin in New York and Kevin G. Salwen in Washingtoncontributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>