<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910501-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>910501-0084.</DOCID><HL>   Ill-Fated:   Although Cures Exist,   Poverty Fells Many   Afflicted With Cancer   ---   Treatment of Breast Tumors   Shows Scope of Problem   And Complexity of Causes   ---   Waiting for Mammograms   ----   By Dorothy J. Gaiter   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)MEDICAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)</IN><GV>HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><RE>FLORIDA (FL)ILLINOIS (IL)NEW YORK (NY)</RE><LP>   At the end, June Kirchik said she welcomed death. Hercancerous tumor had grown so large that it ruptured herbreast, swelling it to the size of a basketball.   Doctors say that the tumor probably had been growing fortwo years and that Mrs. Kirchik, 58 years old, was seriouslyill before she sought treatment. Then, two private hospitalsin Miami turned her away because she had no money orinsurance. By the time she got treatment, her chances hadsunk even further, and she died in February.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;If you don't have money, go make funeral arrangements,&quot;says Marshal Kirchik, her former husband. &quot;I know I soundbitter.&quot;   As the incidence of breast cancer grows, tales of painfuldeaths such as June Kirchik's can be heard throughout theU.S. The National Cancer Institute says cases of the diseasejumped 26% between 1982 and 1988, though no one knows whetherthis is because of better detection or more peoplecontracting the cancer. The disease is expected to strike175,000 Americans this year, the American Cancer Societysays, and kill 44,500 women and 300 men.   Medical advances -- particularly mammograms -- arerescuing thousands. The low-dose X-ray mammogram can nowdetect a breast cancer at least two years before a lump canbe felt, and it is in this early stage that the disease ismost curable. More than 90% of woman who detect the cancerearly are alive five years later.   But, as with many advances in health care, the benefitsare largely eluding people such as June Kirchik. Medicaid --the government-financed insurance for the poor -- doesn'tcover mammograms in all states. What's more, ignorance,bureaucratic obstacles and cultural inhibitions oftendiscourage the poor from seeking or getting the early medicalcare that can save lives. As the nation's health-care costssoar, and tight budgets cut into public services, health carefor the poor is only likely to worsen. The trend in breastcancer -- which kills more black women than any other cancerand is the No. 2 cancer killer of women overall -- may verywell produce more June Kirchiks.   Clearly, wealth and education affect the survival rates ofbreast-cancer patients. The five-year survival rate for whitewomen with incomes less than $15,000 is 63%, while the ratefor white women earning more than $30,000 is 78%, accordingto the National Cancer Institute. The corresponding figuresfor black women are 64% and 68%. For white college graduatesthe survival rate is 81%, compared with 64% of whites and 61%of blacks with less than a high-school education. (There areno figures for college-educated black women.)   For poor groups in some urban centers, the statistics aremore striking. Among breast-cancer patients at New York'sHarlem Hospital, only 22% are alive five years afterdiagnosis, says a report issued by New York City'scomptroller. Poor women suffer higher mortality rates becausethe disease has often advanced to its later, deadlier stagesbefore they get treatment, doctors say. The National CancerInstitute estimates that breast cancer deaths would declineby at least 30% if women had mammograms as recommended --once every one to two years for women 40-49, and every yearfor women 50 and over, with some doctors saying the firstmammogram should be gotten at age 35.   But the poor often don't seek medical care if they can'tpay for it. And even access to health insurance doesn'talways solve the problem. Gloria Brown, a New York home-careworker, has a medical plan through her union. But she saysshe feared that surgery would force her to stop working herseven-day workweek, and her rent would go unpaid. So shesilently watched her breast tumor grow for a year.   &quot;I took pain like I don't know what,&quot; says Ms. Brown, 58years old. &quot;I didn't want to tell my friends because I knewthey would want me to see a doctor and that I would have tofight them. But I was afraid of losing my home.&quot;   By the time she sought care, she needed a radicalmasectomy, a removal of the breast and surrounding tissue.Instead of earning $538 a week with overtime, she was soonliving off food stamps and worrying about her $582 monthlyrent.   Lately, Ms. Brown's prospects have improved a bit. A fewweeks ago, she started receiving disability and welfarepayments, totaling $244 a week. She hopes to return to workthis month.   Medical experts once thought that race made black womenmore vulnerable to breast cancer than white women. But now,following the research of Dr. Harold Freeman, chief ofsurgery at Harlem Hospital and a former president of theAmerican Cancer Society, many believe that the criticalfactor is poverty. Indeed, fewer than 26% of both black andwhite women with less than a high-school education have everhad a mammogram, according to the National Cancer Institute.For women of both races with more than a high-schooleducation, that number jumps to 48%. Roughly the samepercentages hold when you compare women earning less than$10,000 a year to woman earning more than $35,000.   Not surprisingly, then, two-thirds of the women withbreast cancer who came into Boston City Hospital from thecity's poorest neighborhood were diagnosed as being at a latestage. But two-thirds of the cases from the most affluentneighborhood were detected in early stages, says Dr. MarianneProut, associate professor of public health at BostonUniversity School of Medicine.   A crucial problem is the ordeal a poor woman often facestrying to get necessary tests. Sofya Katz, a 53-year-oldRussian immigrant who settled in Miami three years ago, hasbeen waiting for a biopsy since December. She lost her rightbreast to cancer a few months after arriving in Miami.Because the Jewish Federation, which helped her relocate inthe U.S., provided temporary health coverage, her firstoperation was paid for. But now, the unemployed office workeris without insurance, has $3 to her name and is at the mercyof the system. Since she has already had cancer, the mass shediscovered in her left breast has a high chance of beingcancerous, too.   Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami's only public hospital,originally scheduled her biopsy for June 20. &quot;For thisdisease, this is a lot of time. But I wait, I wait for that,&quot;she says. Fortunately for her, Jackson is having a breastcancer &quot;marathon&quot; on May 18, to do biopsies and otherprocedures to reduce its backlog. Ms. Katz will get her carethen -- six months after she sought it.   Ms. Katz is hardly alone. On a typical day this year, 450poor women were on the waiting list for mammograms atJackson. &quot;We've been trying to get waiting times down, and intwo years we haven't solved the problem,&quot; says MarleneRifkin, Jackson's vice president for quality assurance.   Overworked and understaffed, many public hospitals aresimply straining to keep up with the indigent caseload. AtJackson, for example, a woman calling now for a first-timeevaluation would be given an appointment in the first week ofJuly, says Alex Stolfi, an oncology nurse at Jackson whohelps patients navigate the system. At that July session, thepatient would get an appointment for a mammogram inSeptember. If the hospital confirmed through her mammogramthat she had a mass, she would get her biopsy in November orDecember. &quot;That's six months,&quot; Ms. Stolfi says. &quot;That'spsychologically devastating, and it makes a difference inprognosis.&quot;   Consider the case of Josephine Alvarado. She was a widowedmother of three who died in 1988 after 14 trips to Jackson,during which time her pea-sized tumor grew to the size of agrapefruit. &quot;Josephine waited eight months for her firstappointment when doctors told her she needed an ultrasound,&quot;recalls Ms. Rifkin. Then it took months more to complete thebiopsy process. &quot;At one point, she didn't come back for ninemonths she was so scared and upset. June {Kirchik} andJosephine represent opposite ends of the extreme,&quot; Ms. Rifkinsays. &quot;June's was an education problem. Josephine's was thedelays.&quot;   There are other problems. When the poor seek diagnosis,they often turn to public hospitals or clinics, which aregeared toward the obviously ill, not preventive care. Ifthese centers offer mammograms, they may be of the type thatare used to diagnose masses that can be felt, not to detectearly problems.   Even where early-detection screening programs do exist,demand often overwhelms them. The paper work can be dauntingfor indigents and few breast screening programs are costfree. The state of Illinois has only two free centers, andboth are in Chicago, says Dr. David Ansell, director of thebreast and cervical screening program at Cook CountyHospital, one of the free programs.   &quot;We can no longer keep up with the demand,&quot; he says. CookCounty's mammogram machines are sometimes busy seven days aweek.   Even when mammograms, which range in price from $50 to$200, are free and easily accessible, many women avoid themout of fear and denial -- which know no socioeconomic bounds.Shear lack of knowledge merely aggravates this problem. Areport in 1981 found that 54% of blacks surveyed believedthat cancer spreads if it is exposed to air. In some Hispaniccultures, it is taboo for women to touch their breasts; thus,many aren't examining themselves, doctors say.   While various cancer groups are working to increaseeducation programs and awareness of the disease, the federalgovernment has taken steps to ease the financial burden oncancer patients. Congress recently extended Medicare coveragefor mammograms, though many physicians object to the $55reimbursement cap and, thus, still don't accept Medicarepatients, who are primarily retirees. Several members ofCongress are also pressing this year to get Medicaid, thehealth program for the poor, to provide uniform, nationwidecoverage for poor women seeking mammograms.   But even if new Medicaid legislation passes, it will betoo late for women like June Kirchik.   Mrs. Kirchik, whose case became a cause celebre in theMiami press, told doctors that she discovered her lump inOctober, but it was so large that doctors think it may havebeen growing for a couple of years. &quot;If June had receivedtreatment in the early stages of her disease, she would bealive today,&quot; says Ms. Stolfi, the Miami nurse, who tried tohelp Mrs. Kirchik.   Mrs. Kirchik's former husband first took her to HialeahHospital, which turned her away because she was indigent andnot an emergency case, says JoLynn de la Torre, a spokeswomanfor the private hospital. Ms. de la Torre says Hialeah doesaccept emergency charity cases amounting to about $8 milliona year.   Hialeah referred Mrs. Kirchik to the public JacksonMemorial Hospital. On Nov. 13, a doctor there arranged for abiopsy. The prognosis-fair-came in a week later and Mrs.Kirchik received an appointment to see the oncology team fortreatment on Dec. 4.   But before she could keep that appointment, someone atJackson called and told Mrs. Kirchik not to come back withoutmoney or proof that she was indigent, Mr. Kirchik says. Thehospital concedes that this was possible; though its policyis to accept anyone, it does try to collect fees when it can.With his ex-wife in pain, Mr. Kirchik then set out with herto get the needed documentation. Mrs. Kirchik had just beenlaid off from her job as a childcare worker and hadn't yetapplied for Medicaid. After a while, she simply begged to gohome.   Embarrassed to return to Jackson without money ordocuments, Mrs. Kirchik tried Mount Sinai Medical Center onMiami Beach. The spokeswoman there said that although MountSinai provides charity care for indigents, it chose not totreat Mrs. Kirchik because she was neither an emergency casenor an indigent Miami Beach resident.   Then someone at Jackson Memorial leaked the story to thelocal press. As Mr. Kirchik recalls, Jackson Memorial &quot;rolledout the red carpet, took her right in and put her in aprivate room with an open menu and treated her like a queen.It takes something like that to get a poor woman help.&quot;   But by then it was too late. Because of her own delayingand the vagaries of the system, her cancer was beyondtreatment. Mrs. Kirchik died two weeks later.</TEXT></DOC>