<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911210-0137</DOCNO><DOCID>911210-0137.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- On Sports:   Bills Snatch Victory From Paws of Raiders   ----   By Frederick C. Klein</HL><DATE>12/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Los Angeles -- If the NFL is smart, and from time to timeit gives indications that it is, it'll sneak a rerun ofSunday's Buffalo Bills-L.A. Raiders game into its comingplayoff schedule. Sure, a lot of folks will have seen it, butthere's a 90-10 chance they'd still like it better thanwhatever else might fill the slot.   The game, contested in 58-degree weather here before anear-full Coliseum of Angelenos who dressed as if thetemperature were 38 and complained as though it had been 18,had everything. It had long passes and short runs, and shortpasses and long runs. One guy returned a kickoff for atouchdown. Another turned a nineyard pass into a 78-yard TDplay.</LP><TEXT>   There were goats as well as heroes, but that only made theshow better. Jay Schroeder, the L.A. QB, threw his first 19passes with generally good effect, only to have his last twointercepted and his gang done in thereby. The second ofthose, in an overtime period, set up the winning, 42-yardfield goal by the Bills' Scott Norwood and saved the latterfrom terminal goathood.   Norwood previously had missed fieldgoal tries from 49, 32and 36 yards and -- gasp] -- botched an extra point thatwould have given his mates the victory in regulation time.You may recall that he's the fella whose 49-yarder was wideright with four seconds left against the New York Giants inthe last Super Bowl, dooming the Bills to a 20-19 loss. Itwas a measure of the fervor of Sunday's game that he saidthat it, not his SB failure, was the toughest kicking dayhe's had.   Buffalo won, 30-27, after trailing 14-27 well into thefourth quarter, and the victory over playoff-caliberopposition had the Bills and their coaches talking afterwardabout &quot;character.&quot;   &quot;John Wooden said ability gets you to the top but it takescharacter to stay there,&quot; Buffalo coach Marv Levy quoted theformer UCLA basketball coach as saying. The parallel betweenthe Bills -- champions of nothing of late but the Easternfraction of the NFL's American Conference -- and the mastersof the collegiate-hoops universe Wooden once tutored wasn'taltogether clear, but nobody called Prof. Marv on it.   In Levy's defense, though, it should be noted that thiswas a game his Bills might have phoned in. Los Angeles is anice place to visit but a tough place to win when the Raidersare hosts. Moreover, the Raiders, 9-4 in the won-lost columngoing in, were scrapping for a divisional title and playoffberth while the Bills, 11-2, had clinched both and had onlythe home-field playoff advantage for which to strive. Somaybe superior character did enter in, although an aversionto airline food also might have played a role.   One thing that certainly had a part in the game's outcomewas the offensive explosiveness that has put the boys fromNickel City atop the NFL's yardage chart this campaign. TheBills strike from a formation that often utilizes four widereceivers and emphasizes the passing of quarterback JimKelly. Yet their ace running back, Thurman Thomas, leads theleague in rushing and, before Sunday, had alone recorded morenet yards overland (1,316) than the entire infantry of 12 NFLclubs.   The Bills, moreover, strike swiftly, sans huddles, andhave put the lie to that overused statistic measuring time ofball possession. They'd owned the spheroid an average of just25 minutes, 45 seconds a game over their first 13 contests --last in the league -- but their point total of 379 was secondonly to Washington's 409. The moral, obviously, is whatcounts ain't how long you own the ball but what you do withit when you've got it.   With that as backdrop, the Raiders' defense could takebows for the way it performed for the first 50 or so minutesof Sunday's action. The Bills managed but two touchdowns inthat stretch, and neither resulted from a sustained offensivedrive. Al Edwards got the first all by himself on a 91-yardkickoff runback. Cliff Hicks, usually a defensive back, setup the second with a 59-yard punt return.   The Raiders, meantime, nicely mixed pass and run to scorefive times in their first eight possessions. Three tailbacks-- veterans Marcus Allen and Roger Craig, and rookie NickBell -- shared the running load, while Schroeder hit speedyreceivers Tim Brown and Mervyn Fernandez with short passesthat those worthies turned into long gains. The highlight wasthe 78-yard Schroeder-to-Brown connection in quarter one.   L.A. took a 27-14 lead midway through the third period,and led in yardage better than three-to-one, but then a funnything happened: L.A. stopped passing. Its next fourpossessions consisted of 10 runs and a single pass, and itsurrendered the ball without a first down each time.   A couple of missed field goals kept the Bills from gettingcloser for a while, but Kelly andamp; Co. couldn't be deniedindefinitely. The ex-U. of Miami strongboy led a 67-yard,12-play drive that made it 27-20 with four minutes left(Norwood missed the extra point). Next trip, Kelly took hismates 64 yards to the end zone on eight plays, all passes,with a minute to go, and this time the extra point was good.   L.A. finally passed again during its last possession ofregulation time, but Schroeder's heave was intercepted.Norwood missed that field goal try, but made his next oneafter Mark Kelso intercepted Schroeder's first pass inovertime and a 31-yard Kelly-to-Andre Reed connection put theBills in scoring range.   Buffalo carries two placekickers, and Levy later commentedthat he wouldn't say it never crossed his mind to use backupBrad Daluiso for the overtime boot. But he said he thoughtNorwood needed the chance to redeem himself, and the kickeragreed. &quot;It'd be tough to have a positive attitude after aday that's all negative,&quot; said he.   In the Raiders' post-game locker room, there was testinessabout questions concerning the last-quarter play-calling,which bespoke a lack of confidence in the historicallyscatter-armed Schroeder. (&quot;The plays were OK. We just didn'trun them right,&quot; snapped coach Art Shell.) And even the factthat L.A. backed into a playoff spot because the New YorkJets lost couldn't dull the pain of a missed opportunity.   &quot;When you get a lead like we had, you should hold it,&quot;said Shell. &quot;No more to say about that.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>