<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911004-0109</DOCNO><DOCID>911004-0109.</DOCID><HL>   Telecommunications (A Special Report)   ---   Babes in Europeland:   Fenced in at Home, Regional Firms   See Greener Grass in Europe   ----   By Robert L. Simison</HL><DATE>10/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R5</SO><CO>   AIT BEL BLS CWP F.SLE G.DAI G.DGB G.MMW NYN PAC SBC USW</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)FACTORY EQUIPMENT (FAC)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)WATER UTILITIES (WAT)</IN><NS>JOINT VENTURES (JVN)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)CZECHOSLOVAKIA (CK)COLORADO (CO)EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FINLAND (FI)FRANCE (FR)GEORGIA (GA)GERMANY (GE)GREECE (GR)HUNGARY (HU)ILLINOIS (IL)ITALY (ITA)MISSOURI (MO)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NORWAY (NOY)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)POLAND (PL)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SCANDINAVIA (SCA)SPAIN (SP)SWEDEN (SW)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   BRUSSELS -- San Francisco's regional telephone company isgoing into the mobile-phone business in Germany, and itssister company from Chicago is soon to do the same in Poland.   Meanwhile, American phone companies from New York, Denver,St. Louis and elsewhere are threatening BritishTelecommunications PLC with local competition in the U.K. AndNynex Corp. is already running the phone system in Gibraltar.</LP><TEXT>   It's all part of a scramble into Europe by the Baby Bells,the seven regional U.S. phone companies that were created bythe 1984 breakup of American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.Constrained at home by mature markets and legal limitations,the cash-laden concerns are looking abroad for growth. Andsince the mid-1980s, they have seized an impressive share ofEurope's newly competitive telecommunications business.   Behind the burgeoning opportunities in Europe are twoforces. In the West, the drive for market integration in theEuropean Community after 1992 is pushing governments to openentrenched telephone monopolies to outside competition. TheU.K., Germany and France are furthest along. And in the East,the fall of the Iron Curtain has spurred governments to seekhelp in upgrading outmoded systems in, among other places,Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary.   It adds up to potentially explosive growth. Even inWestern Europe, decades of government protection of nationalmonopolies have left telephone systems in need of majormodernization and ripe for competition in new services. Andin Eastern Europe, there are just eight to 14 phone lines foreach 100 people -- far fewer than the 40 to 50 for each 100found in Western Europe and the U.S.   &quot;We're talking billion-dollar businesses here,&quot; saysCharles Many, the Brussels-based president of Nynex'sinternational operations. &quot;In the 1990s, we expect thetelecommunications environment in Europe to be like it was inthe U.S. in the '70s and '80s.&quot; He sees Europe repeating theU.S. pattern of progressively introducing competition firstin telephone sales and then in services such as longdistance, mobile and data communications.   &quot;I think the opportunities will start rolling in fasterand faster,&quot; Mr. Many predicts. &quot;I believe that someday therewill be competing carriers {to national phone companies}. Theonly question is when -- whether it's in five, 10 or 15years. And I think it will be sooner because of the pressurefrom business customers.&quot;   His view is echoed by industry consultants, who see theBaby Bells positioning themselves to play a significant roleas the competition heats up. In general, Bell Atlantic Corp.,Nynex, Pacific Telesis Group and U S West Inc. have been themost aggressive in Europe of the seven.   Just now, the rivalry for business is fiercest in mobilecommunications. Already, Ameritech Inc., Bell Atlantic, U SWest, Nynex, Pacific Telesis and BellSouth Corp. areparticipants in several ventures.   The other main focal point is cable television. Nynex, U SWest, Pacific Telesis, BellSouth and Southwestern Bell Corp.all have interests. Most of them are focusing on the U.K.,which has cleared cable-TV operators to offer phone servicein competition with British Telecom, and some of the BabyBells are moving to do so.   One thing the Baby Bells have to offer is investment cash-- as much as $1 billion each, estimates BIS StrategicDecisions, a U.K. telecommunications consulting group ownedby Nynex. The Americans also have expertise with advancedtelecommunications technology, superior network-managementskills and software, and a better-developed sense of customerservice.   But more important, they have entrepreneurial drive.&quot;There are very few companies in Europe that are capable ofgoing into another country and competing,&quot; says GarryGarrard, an industry consultant with PA Consulting Group inLondon. &quot;The traditional {public telephone companies}especially tend to see it as not the gentlemanly thing to do.... The changing of that attitude is one thing coming from{the Baby Bells'} being here.&quot;   All of that makes the Baby Bells formidable competitorsfor Europe's leading telecom concerns. Going after the samebusiness are such giants as British Telecom, France TelecomInc., Telefonica de Espana S.A., Deutsche Bundespost andCable andamp; Wireless PLC. In sales, assets and availableinvestment funds, the Baby Bells are the equals of thesecompanies.   Paradoxically, the Baby Bells also make for desirablepartners. The costs and risks associated with most big dealsare usually far more than one company can handle alone, soconsortium bidding has become the norm.   &quot;In some countries in Eastern Europe, the Americanconnection is very strong, and you need an American partner,&quot;says John Griffiths, head of European mobilephone businessdevelopment for British Telecom. He notes that in Poland,cultural links to Polish emigrants in the U.S., as well aspolitical sympathies, create a preference for dealing withAmerican companies -- a preference that is reinforced byAmerican lobbying.   And often it is just as helpful politically for U.S.companies to have a European partner. A joint venture betweenAmeritech and France Telecom, for instance, won amobile-phone contract in Poland. Among the other competitorswas a consortium consisting of Bell Atlantic, BritishTelecom, Swedish Telecommunication International AB andTelecom Finland.   The linkups in Poland underscore the shifting nature ofcompetitive alliances in the global telecom wars. Althoughthey were in competing consortia in Poland, Bell Atlantic andAmeritech were partners in acquiring 50% of Telecom Corp. ofNew Zealand in 1989. And in other arenas, British Telecom andFrance Telecom have worked together.   &quot;We find that {the Baby Bells} make quite good partners,&quot;says Yves-Andre Leroux, chief of France Telecom'sinternational office. France Telecom and Southwestern Bellwere allies in buying a controlling interest in Telefonos deMexico last year, and France Telecom says it has technicalrelationships with Nynex and U S West.   Because the recently awarded Polish cellular franchisewould have a monopoly over a market of 38 million people, itmay be the most attractive such deal in Eastern Europe, andthe quickest to turn profitable. In Western Europe, themobile-phone licenses being put up for bid typically are forrights to build a second system to compete with one alreadyestablished by the national phone company.   Ameritech and France Telecom are to hold 49% of a jointventure with the Polish national phone company. Nobody iswilling to project the value of the pact, but building thesystem is expected to cost about $150 million. In addition,the Polish government required a cash injection into thenational phone company to help upgrade its system. Ameritechdeclines to disclose the size of its bid for the project, butindustry sources put it at $100 million, roughly twice theamount offered by the closest competitor.   Until it snared the Polish contract, Ameritech had been aminor participant in Europe. But, declares Andres Bande,president of Ameritech's international operations, &quot;We'reright on target. ... Now we will turn to Western Europe.&quot; Inparticular, he says, Ameritech is interested in mobile-phoneprojects in Italy and Spain.   All told, the Baby Bells so far have invested more than $2billion in mobile systems in Europe, according to SystemsDynamics Ltd., a U.K. consulting firm. The biggest deal byfar was the 1989 award of a franchise to build a secondmobile network in Germany.   Five of the Baby Bells joined in the German bidding, whichwas won by a group led by Mannesmann AG. Now, PacificTelesis, a 26% participant in the Mannesmann group, ishandling the bulk of the design and engineering. Otherpartners include Cable andamp; Wireless, Deutsche Genos senschaftsBank and Lyonnaise des Eaux. Nynex, a member of a losingconsortium, expects to help sell the service in a partnershipwith Daimler-Benz AG.   Pacific Telesis brought along plenty of experience inbuilding and operating its own mobile systems in California.But it has learned a few lessons about operating in Europe,says George Schmitt, vice president, engineering, and amember of the board of the Mannesmann consortium. For onething, it takes longer to hire experienced engineers inGermany because most have to give three to six months' noticeto their old employers. And the company had a lot of troublefinding cellular sites and then getting the air-conditioningand antenna designs right for them.   But the biggest problem, Mr. Schmitt says, has beengetting the phones themselves to work. The German mobilesystem is pioneering a new, Europe-wide digital standard thatscrambles transmissions, making eavesdropping difficult. &quot;Itis a real secure system -- not as tough as NATO's, butclose,&quot; Mr. Schmitt says. That requires sophisticatedhardware and software and about 15 times the memory capacityof U.S. mobile phones.   The consortium's phone suppliers didn't work out all thebugs until late August, and equipment needed to test thephones for government approval wasn't expected to be readyuntil November. So Mr. Schmitt doesn't expect the network togo into commercial operation before December at the earliest,even though it has been ready since July 1. &quot;It has been abig disappointment for us after working our tails off for 18months,&quot; Mr. Schmitt says.   Once it is working, the system will have a big impact onthe market, Mr. Schmitt promises. &quot;There's a thing calledcompetition here now, and the Deutsche Bundespost {whichoperates Germany's national phone company} isn't going tolike it,&quot; he says.   Initially, the technically more-advanced Mannesmanngroup's system will offer its phones at about 2,500 markseach (US$1,500), compared with the Bundespost's 4,500 marks,Mr. Schmitt says, and initial user costs are expected toslightly undercut those of the existing system. But Mr.Schmitt says he personally aims by early 1993 to cut phoneprices to 1,000 marks and user costs sharply below those ofthe Bundespost.   In August, a consortium involving Pacific Telesis wasawarded a license to build a cellular-phone system inPortugal to compete with a network operated by TelecomPortugal, a joint venture of the two state-owned phonecompanies. Pacific Telesis holds a 23% stake and is the onlytelecommunications operating company in the winning group,known as Telecel.   One of the most aggressive Baby Bells in Europe has beenBell Atlantic. &quot;To be a leader in our industry, you must beinternational,&quot; declares Edgar L. Brown Jr., president ofBell Atlantic Europe S.A. Bell Atlantic aims to generate atleast 10% of revenue -- or about $1.5 billion a year -- frominternational operations by 1994. By the end of last year,Mr. Brown says, the company was already halfway there.   Last year, the Philadelphia-based concern set up aheadquarters in Brussels to supervise a group of businessunits that employ more than 900 people in 10 countries. ItsEuropean activities include computer-maintenance services inthe U.K., France, Italy, Germany, Switzerland and Austria.Bell Atlantic recently sold a half-interest in the operationto International Computers Ltd., the 80%-owned British unitof Fujitsu Ltd. The idea was to enhance the unit's marketingclout.   Together with U S West and the Post and TelecommunicationsAdministrations of the Czech and Slovak republics, BellAtlantic is also building mobile-telephone anddata-transmission networks in Czechoslovakia. The two U.S.companies are splitting a $60 million investment and 49%ownership in the projects, which started operating lastmonth.   But Bell Atlantic recently has narrowed the focus of itsEuropean strategy. Whereas a few months ago it was pursuingcellular licenses in 16 countries, including Poland, Norwayand the Soviet Union, it is now active in just six countries-- still including Norway and the Soviet Union. Losing toAmeritech and France Telecom in Poland was a particularlyheavy blow.   &quot;Maybe one reason we weren't as successful as we wouldhave liked to have been,&quot; Mr. Brown suggests, &quot;was that weweren't throwing enough resources into each project. . . .Now we are going to focus more heavily on each one.&quot;   Bell Atlantic did skip an earlier stampede forcable-television franchises in the U.K. Under U.K. governmentrules, cable operators are allowed to offer telephone servicein direct competition with British Telecom. Partly because ofthat, Nynex, U S West, Pacific Telesis and Southwestern Bellhave obtained U.K. cable holdings covering a potential 6.7million subscribers.   But some Baby Bell officials, as well as a number ofindustry consultants, are skeptical. &quot;Sure, you can providedial tone over a cable network,&quot; Mr. Brown says. &quot;But nobodyhas been able to do that economically.&quot;   Royce Caldwell, Southwestern Bell's group vice president,international, concedes that &quot;it's not obvious you'd makemoney.&quot; But he argues that there is potential for significanteconomies of scale, and he expects to decide soon whether tooffer phone service. Southwestern Bell holds U.K. cablefranchises covering 1.2 million potential subscribers andexpects to spend $200 million to $300 million over the nexttwo or three years building the systems.   U S West, the Baby Bell with the biggest potential cablebase -- some 2.5 million subscribers -- is already offeringphone service in the U.K. Although its customers so far arefew, it says the initial subscription rates are better thanexpected, and it calculates that the service will beprofitable at competitive prices. And Nynex says it expectsto invest $100 million a year over the next five years inbuilding its U.K. cable TV-telephone networks.   Serious local-phone competition via cable networks willtake years to develop in the U.K., and it isn't likely topose much of a threat to British Telecom, with its 26 millioncustomers. But industry consultants say the mere presence ofsuch rivals as the Baby Bells, with their more finely honedcustomer-service skills, is likely to change the way theformer monopoly does business. Already, British Telecom inMarch unveiled a pds 60 million (US$104 million)image-building campaign to improve its reputation forservice.   The toughest competition for new business may be yet tocome. Spain, Italy and Greece are expected to be among thenext to award mobile-phone franchises, and the Baby Bells arelikely to be in the thick of the bidding.   Moreover, telecom-industry executives and consultantswidely expect rising pressure from business customers andfrom the EC to force other Western European countries tofollow the U.K. lead in deregulating telecommunications.Sweden, Finland and Germany may be the first.   &quot;European business is demanding better service and morechoices,&quot; says Georges Orban, a Brussels consultant. Industryexecutives expect value-added services such as the offeringof private data networks to be opened first to competition,and later, perhaps even long-distance service.   Eastern European countries are under tremendous pressureto modernize, and they lack the enormous amounts of capitalthat will be required. While privatization was widelysuggested earlier as the most likely solution, governments inHungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland have been reluctant togive up that much control. Now some industry executivesexpect such countries to rely on loans, supplier credit andinvestments by some minority Western partners.   Most of the Baby Bells are jockeying for position. MariaMalicka, Bell Atlantic's marketing director for Poland, isstaying on even though her company lost the mobile-phonefranchise after more than a year's work. She expects topropose other projects that would involve Bell Atlantic.&quot;They have so many needs,&quot; she says.   In the only recent European privatization, Nynex beat outBritish Telecom, Spain's Telefonica and Japan's MarubeniCorp. in late 1989 to win a 50-50 telephone partnership withthe Gibraltar government. Since then, Nynex has beenreplacing Gibraltar's creaky, 1950s-technology phone systemwith a modern digital fiberoptic network. It has cut thewaiting list for phone service from 1,600 people -- some ofwhom had been on hold for as long as four years -- to fewerthan 500, and it vows to take care of those customers thisyear.   The Gibraltar contract was worth only about $10 million toNynex and covered a network of just 11,000 stations. But withGibraltar booming as a banking center, the system is expectedto double in size in the next five years. Nynex is holding itup as a demonstration of what it could do on a larger scaleelsewhere in Europe.   ---   Mr. Simison is a staff reporter in The Wall StreetJournal's Brussels bureau.</TEXT></DOC>