<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910729-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>910729-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Telecommunications:   Bell Ruling Seen Touching Off Legal, Legislative Battles   ----   By Mary Lu Carnevale   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   AIT BEL BLS MCIC NYN PAC SBC USW</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)COLORADO (CO)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)GEORGIA (GA)ILLINOIS (IL)MISSOURI (MO)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- When a judge on Thursday reluctantly openedthe way for regional Bell telephone companies to enter theinformation services business, the Baby Bells hailed a newera in telecommunications.   But what they are more likely to get, it now appears, is alegal and legislative battle of at least six months' durationand uncertain outcome. Whether the Baby Bells win or lose, amajor part of national telecommunications policy and the wayit is made will never be the same.</LP><TEXT>   Within hours, federal Judge Harold Greene's decisiontouched off a lobbying storm to get Congress to bypass thecourts and settle the matter with legislation. Lobbyists forthe Consumer Federation of America, the American NewspaperPublishers Association and the International CommunicationsAssociation of America, for example, were all on Capitol Hillthe next day warning against any Bell company entry intoinformation services.   &quot;We're going to go to the mat on this. We'll take everystep legally that we can to keep the Bell companies out ofinformation services,&quot; says Bert C. Roberts Jr., president ofMCI Communications Corp.   Some lawmakers are more than eager to respond. &quot;The courtmay have given the Bell companies a green light to enter theinformation services area, but it's Congress's job to put upthe stop signs and yield signs,&quot; says Rep. Edward Markey, whochairs the House Telecommunications and Finance subcommittee.   The Massachusetts Democrat plans to introduce a bill thisweek allowing the seven Bells limited ability to manufacturetelephone equipment and curbing any other new ventures --including information services. Within 24 hours of JudgeGreene's decision, he says, he received &quot;a nine-inch stack ofphone messages.&quot;   Those messages signal that the telecommunicationsindustry, already staffed with hundreds of lobbyists, isabout to become politicized as never before. &quot;The decisionwill bring enormous change in very substantial businesses,&quot;says Phil Verveer, who as a young Justice Department lawyerhelped launch the government suit that broke up the Bellsystem in 1984. The changes, he says, will be felt&quot;economically, politically and culturally.&quot;   At the very least, it will mark the end of anextraordinary nine-year period during which many of thebiggest decisions governing the nation's telecommunicationspolicy weren't made in the White House, the FederalCommunications Commission or Congress, but in Judge Greene'schambers at the U.S. District Court for the District ofColumbia.   The judge's power derived from his having presided overthe government's antitrust case against American Telephone andamp;Telegraph Corp. That case culminated in his 1982 acceptanceof a consent decree that required ATandamp;T to divest itself ofthe Bell companies in exchange for the right to keep itslucrative long-distance and equipment making businesses andto enter a host of other businesses. The Bells kept thecash-cow telephone companies and directory publishingbusinesses. But because of their monopolies, they were barredfrom long distance, manufacturing or information services.   Ever since, when any of the parties have wanted a changeor an interpretation of this fundamental structure, they havegone to Judge Greene.   Suddenly, however, &quot;The dynamics are all different,&quot; saysBrian Moir, a Washington lawyer who represents theInternational Communications Association, a trade group ofcompanies that each spend in excess of $1 million a year ontelephone services. &quot;You have a group of people who must havelegislation,&quot; he says. By Friday morning, Mr. Moir was onCapitol Hill calling on members of the House Commerce andJudiciary committees. If the Bells are allowed intoinformation services, he warned the congressmen, theirpropensity to cross-subsidize would mean higher rates to alltheir customers, an argument the Bells deny.   Mr. Moir -- like MCI, the publishers, informationproviders, consumers groups and other Bell opponents -- wantslawmakers to severely restrict the Bells' activities once theGreene decision wends its way through the appeals process.   Publishers argue that the Bells won't impartially providethe best possible communications service to purveyors ofnews, advertising and other information if the Bellsthemselves are in the information business, competing againsttheir customers who provide information. The Bells, say thepublishers, would probably provide their information servicecompetitors with inferior connections or higher rates.Meanwhile, the Bells would be free to snap up electronicinformation businesses and offer electronic yellow pages ads.   In this view they are philosophically, if not judicially,supported by Judge Greene himself. In his decision, hewarned: &quot;The most probable consequences of . . . entry by theregional companies into the sensitive information servicesmarket will be the elimination of competition from thatmarket and the concentration of the sources of information ofthe American people in just a few dominant, collaborativeconglomerates, with the captive local telephone monopolies astheir base.&quot; He was only acting, he said, because his handhad been forced by the appeals court. And he stayed his orderpending appeals.   Echoing the judge, Terry Maguire, senior vice president ofthe American Newspaper Publishers Association, says the Bellsshould be kept out of the information business until there isreal competition for the local phone networks. On Friday theANPA sent its lobbyists to contact members of keycongressional committees. The association's legislative staffwas already preparing testimony for its new chairman,Cathleen Black, who will fire the ANPA's opening shot in aHouse Judiciary Committee hearing Thursday.   The bottom line, says Mr. Maguire, is that the publisherswant &quot;very stringent requirements that the regional Bellstreat all information services on an absolutelynondiscriminatory basis.&quot;   For their part, the Bells -- Bell Atlantic Corp., based inPhiladelphia; Ameritech Corp., Chicago; BellSouth Corp.,Atlanta; Nynex Corp., White Plains, N.Y.; Southwestern BellCorp., St. Louis; Pacific Telesis Group, San Francisco; and US West Inc., Denver -- want to preserve their winnings: thefreedom to use their networks to provide a wide range ofinformation services from yellow pages listings delivered oncomputer screens to home security systems tovoice-recognition services that assist the hearing-impaired.   Within hours of the decision, the Bells' lobbyists hadalso sprung into action. By Friday, they were meeting withlawmakers and pumping out press releases about fancy newinformation services they could bring to market. The heads ofthe Bell companies' Washington offices also scheduled ameeting today with Rep. Markey.   With deep pockets and 550,000 employees nationwide, theBaby Bells carry formidable clout in Congress. Anticipatinglegislative battles, Nynex, for example, last week hiredformer Rep. Thomas Tauke, who as a member of thetelecommunications panel co-authored legislation to allow theBaby Bells into both manufacturing and information services,to head its Washington office.   The Bells are already taking their case directly to thepublic. Within an hour of Judge Greene's decision, BellAtlantic Chairman Raymond Smith and Vice Chairman RobertLevetown were on the phone with reporters, explainingservices their phone companies may offer once the appealsprocess is complete. Bell Atlantic and the other Baby Bellshold out the promise of quickly developing an optical fibernetwork that can carry sophisticated video, data and voicecommunications nationwide.   A $21 million war chest earmarked more than a year ago todrum up grassroots support for lifting the restrictions isalready paying off as swarms of small businesses, communitybusiness leaders and groups representing the elderly andhandicapped are carrying the Bells' message to Congress.   But for all their clout, the Bells face a tricky task.They are already pushing the House to move forward with abill that would allow them to manufacture telecommunicationsequipment. Although the Senate has passed such a measure, itsprospects in the House seem dim unless it is tied to theinformation services issue. But linking their legislativepush on manufacturing with information services could losethe Baby Bells more ground than they have already gained fromthe court.   That leaves the spotlight on Rep. Markey, an affableconsensus-builder who is willing to let the Baby Bells intoinformation services -- but only on a short leash.   The bill he will introduce this week would beef up federaland state regulation by requiring the Bells to operateinformation services or other new ventures out of separatesubsidiaries. It would also limit transactions between thenew units and the phone company subsidiaries and open theirbooks to regulators.   Passing that or any other bill won't be easy, however,despite pressure to do it quickly. Standing in the way is thesubcommittee's own consensus culture, together with thealready bitterly divisive lobbying. For more than two years,the panel has discussed other Baby Bell legislation, only tosee version after version of draft measures. Now, however,Mr. Markey promises to move ahead aggressively. &quot;It's notlost on us that the Greene decision could be finalized by theend of the year,&quot; he says.   Even if Congress could act that quickly, which most doubt,there will be legions of Bell opponents ready to turn againto challenge the law. MCI's Mr. Roberts vows his company willfight &quot;all the way to the Supreme Court if we have to.&quot; Heforecasts: &quot;This whole matter is going to be tied up inlitigation for several years.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>