<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920220-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>920220-0008.</DOCID><HL>   Thatcher's Heirs, Reagan's Heirs   ----   By David Brooks</HL><DATE>02/20/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>EUROPE (EU)NORTH AMERICA (NME)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   LONDON -- The style of conservative politics that is goingto carry the future is not Patrick Buchanan's, and it'scertainly not George Bush's. It was on display 3,000 mileseast of New Hampshire in the English resort town ofEastbourne, where Britain's Young Conservatives held theirannual conference this month.   As one would expect from a group of hormonally chargedpoliticos, these conferences start at frenzy and then moveup. Speakers who mentioned the word &quot;Thatcher&quot; brought on anorgiastic fever of cheers and stomping; kind words about JohnMajor induced delirium shivers of groupie loyalty; andattacks on the European Community practically had the YCswrithing on the floor.</LP><TEXT>   But the issue that really animated the conferees -- thathad them perspiring on their mobile phones -- was thelast-minute effort to derail the chairmanship campaign ofMartin Potter, 25. Mr. Potter's sins include facial hair andan interest in railway history.   The Young Conservatives are concerned that during theThatcher years their organization developed the reputation asa home for socially awkward young people who sit up late atnight reading pamphlets on privatizing the educationalsystem. The coup plotters at Eastbourne astutely realizedthat in times of political normality, people will not dopolitical gruntwork because of ideological fervor, but needmore normal motivations -- such as the chance to meet membersof the opposite sex as ambitious as themselves.   A new slate came into being, promising hipness, lots ofpartying and no facial hair. Mr. Potter -- dubbed &quot;Potter theTrain Spotter&quot; -- never knew what hit him.   In their own insufferable way, the Young Conservativeshave addressed the task that has utterly defeated GeorgeBush. They have tried to create a style of politics suited tothe post-Reagan/Thatcher era of normality, but that stilladvances the conservative agenda.   These Young Conservatives have never shaved except underConservative government. That means they never experiencedthe feeling of being an outsider that &quot;MovementConservatives&quot; in the U.S. and &quot;One of Us&quot; Thatcheritesexperienced in the 1960s and 1970s. They tend to be moregenial, less embattled than their eldersmore conformist, lessnerdy. Taking for granted the institutions of theconservative counter-establishment -- think tanks, theconservative press -- they also take Thatcherism as theirpolitical center of gravity, not as some radical departure.They are novel political creatures: Stalwart conservativeswho can get dates.   The acid test for conservatives is the tabloid press (theequivalent of talk radio in the U.S.). Most of thepre-Thatcher conservatives have guilty consciences about themassively popular Tory tabloids, which are read by millionsof working-class people (known in Britain as C-2s, and in theU.S. as Reagan Democrats). The older Tories are vaguelyembarrassed by the tabloids' jingoism, their emotionalappeals on social issues, their outrage over crime. For theyounger set, working-class conservatism is a natural andwonderful fact of life. Their attitude toward the tabloidstends to be: Let 'em rip.   George Bush faces a choice they will never face, whetherto be an establishment figure or a conservative outsider. Mr.Bush, typically unable to define himself, flops around like afish in a rowboat. On the campaign trail, he tries toimpersonate a Reaganite conservative (and in the processcomes out looking like a French kid trying to do rap music --lots of effort, no effect). But back in Washington, thisideological slumming doesn't translate into a governingphilosophy. There, Mr. Bush reverts to his establishmentarianinstincts, which often produce rudderless conciliation. Toborrow the French categories, Mr. Bush campaigns as if theRepublicans are the Party of Movement, but governs as if theyare the Party of Order.   The grown-up British conservatives face the same kind ofchoice as Mr. Bush, but they haven't bungled it as badly ashe has. The current leaders of the party argue thatconservatism's radical phase is over. &quot;Conservative politicsare not the same as Maoism,&quot; Conservative Party chairmanChris Patten argues. &quot;We don't need to turn everything upsidedown again or to endorse permanent revolution.&quot; Instead hewants the emphasis to be on consolidation, not confrontation.He wants a country &quot;at peace with itself.&quot;   These are deeply conservative instincts, but juniormembers of the party want to keep the Thatcher revolution ontrack, and at full speed. Michael Portillo, one of JohnMajor's important domestic policy advisers, took a veiledshot at Mr. Patten, his former mentor, under the guise oftalking about a similar debate that took place in 1987: &quot;Thewould-be consolidators were asking us to throw away ourgreatest single advantage over Labor: the fact that we hadideas and were prepared to pursue reforms.&quot;   Here too, an important difference is generational, and itmirrors the generational splits that cleave the U.S.Republican Party. Mr. Patten is among the class of Torypoliticians who entered Parliament in 1979, when Mrs.Thatcher was elected prime minister. His cohorts were thelast Tories to form their views in the pre-Thatcher world.Mr. Patten helped found the Blue Chip caucus, disdaining Mrs.Thatcher's radicalism, and uncomfortable with Thatcheriteappeals to working-class social issues. Mr. Patten would liketo see the Tories mimic Germany's Christian Democratic Party,with its huge social services. Mr. Portillo enteredParliament in a 1984 by-election, with the first group ofThatcher-era parliamentarians. Calling themselves the NoTurning Back group, they remain the bubbling cauldron ofThatcherism.   John Major joined politics in 1979, but significantly, hewas not a member of the Blue Chips (perhaps he didn't havethe social credentials). Thirteen months in office, heremains a policy enigma, but a personally popular one. Instyle, he is in many ways the opposite of Mrs. Thatcher. Heis genial, not unrelenting; modest, not inspiring (orexhausting); he radiates suburban domesticity, not thepolitical hothouse. Where he stands on the Patten-Portillodivide is still unclear.   For Thatcherites, the agenda for the '90s isstraightforward. It is to continue gradual tax cutting, andto debureaucratize social services. The education departmentremains genuinely radical, promoting school choice. Toryhealth service reforms, which introduce competition to thesystem, are beginning to succeed. Public housing sales andprivatization would continue, most immediately theprivatization of British Coal and British Rail. All of thiswould reduce the size of the public sector unions, thebackbone of Labor support.   Mr. Major has not shied away from any of this. Incomparison to George Bush, Mr. Major has been a good leaderfor the post-Thatcher/Reagan era. He has kept his sense ofdirection, without letting himself be guided by the otherside's criteria. It helps that he has to go to Parliamentevery week and get in a screaming match with his opposition.Mr. Bush can't seem to remember which players are on his teamand which are on the other.   Mr. Major shares Mr. Bush's weakness on public spending,which has ballooned during both their tenures. Mr. Major'sexcuse is that he's been in campaign-mode since his first dayin office, and has been assiduously trying to bribe as manyvoters as possible.   The British election shows how tough it is for aright-wing party to lose these days. The British are draggingalong the bottom of their longest recession in 60 years.After 13 years of Conservative rule, the public is sick ofthe Tories' faces. Yet the Tories remain even in the polls.When it seemed like they were slipping behind last month,they pulled out the tax issue, which proved devastating.(George Bush blew that one.)   But their campaign strategy, devised by Mr. Patten, bearsthe marks of a conciliator's campaign. Instead of emphasizingstrengths, the Tories are trying to neutralize theirweaknesses by boasting of how much money they really arespending on, say, the National Health Service.   Someday a leader will come along with the genial,establishmentarian personality of John Major and theideological instincts of Margaret Thatcher. In Britain, thatperson could still be John Major. In the U.S., George Bushprobably has just one last chance.   ---   Mr. Brooks is deputy editorial page editor of The WallStreet Journal Europe.</TEXT></DOC>