<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900604-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>900604-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Bush's Hopes of Resolving Issues of Arms Control,   German Unity Remain Stalled Following Summit   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP FORGN</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush emerged from the latestsuperpower summit with his foreign policy stalled by MikhailGorbachev's unwillingness or inability to compromise onGerman unification and Europe's future.   The meager results of the four days of talks raise seriousquestions about whether the U.S. and Soviet presidents canmeet the historic goals they set in December at Malta: tosign two major arms-control pacts and settle Germany's futurein a series of meetings scheduled for the rest of this year.</LP><TEXT>   The disappointing outcome leaves in doubt whether Mr. Bushwill be able to fulfill his top foreign policy objective,which is to lock in these sweeping agreements remaking theface of Europe on Western terms while Mr. Gorbachev remainspowerful enough to conclude them.   Despite Mr. Gorbachev's public protests to the contrary,it seemed clear during the summit that he is worried about achallenge to his power from maverick Russian leader BorisYeltsin and uncertain how to deal with the demand by tinyLithuania for independence from the U.S.S.R. He complainedabout both in bitter terms during meetings with U.S.officials, who were dismayed by his new rigidity.   &quot;I think the summit was a triumph for Gorbachev,&quot; saidRichard Perle, the Pentagon's top strategist during theReagan administration. &quot;He came here weak, managed to appearstrong, collected concessions on arms control and trade, andgave up nothing.&quot;   Rep. Lee Hamilton of Indiana, a leading CongressionalDemocrat on foreign affairs, termed the summit a success forimproving the tone of superpower relations, but conceded that&quot;the two big issues there are still there. I didn't see anydiscernible movement&quot; on Germany or Lithuania.   One of the administration's top foreign policy officialssaid after the summit that &quot;I don't think things haveadvanced very much, certainly not in any substantive sense.Our impression is that Gorbachev still hasn't come to termswith the changes in Germany and Europe and they still don'thave specific positions.&quot;   Mr. Bush and his aides put a brave face on the meeting,heaping lavish public praise on Mr. Gorbachev, whosepopularity has been sinking at home. Both men stressed theyhad grown closer personally. The U.S. president tried toboost Mr. Gorbachev's standing by signing a trade agreementthe Soviet leader repeatedly pleaded for as a politicalsymbol. Moreover, Mr. Bush suggested that his decision onwhether to send the trade pact to Congress for approval won'tbe linked to Mr. Gorbachev ending his economic embargo onLithuania, but only to passage of a new Soviet emigrationlaw.   Yet the Soviet leader refused to budge on the U.S. demandthat a united Germany be a full member of the North AtlanticTreaty Organization and that a conventional arms pact besigned to formally seal the Red Army's retreat from EasternEurope.   &quot;I'm not sure we narrowed&quot; differences over Germany, Mr.Bush said at the concluding news conference, at which bothleaders spoke.   U.S. officials saw glimmers of hope in two stands Mr.Gorbachev took in private talks on Germany. In one meetingthe Soviet leader said he agreed in principle with Mr. Bushthat the German people have the right to pick theiralliances. Such a Soviet position could clear the way for avote by Germans to join NATO.   But Mr. Gorbachev didn't explain in subsequent meetingswhat he meant, Bush administration aides said, and the U.S.isn't sure how meaningful his remarks were. He pointedlyavoided repeating them at the closing news conference. SomeU.S. officials think he simply blundered and was straightenedout later by his staff.   Mr. Gorbachev also suggested overcoming the German impasseby having NATO and the Warsaw Pact, the East bloc militaryalliance, meet to solve the issue. But the proposal wasvague, and U.S. officials aren't sure how it would work.   Offsetting those vague glimmers of hope, Mr. Gorbachevseemed at yesterday's press conference to toughen his standson three key matters:   -- On Germany and NATO, the Soviet leader issued a vaguethreat that if a united Germany were to enter the Westernalliance, the U.S.S.R. would review its recent militarycutbacks and arms control concessions. &quot;Then we should goback and see where we are,&quot; he said. &quot;What's happening to oursecurity? What should we be doing with our armed forces,which we are both reforming and reducing?&quot;   -- On Lithuania, Mr. Gorbachev asserted that it could takeas long as seven years to negotiate the Baltic republic'ssecession, instead of the two to three years he'd recentlysuggested.   -- On emigration by Soviet Jews, he threatened to slow orhalt the issuance of exit permits unless Israel stoppedsettling the emigrants in occupied Arab territory. &quot;Either .. . our concern will be heeded in Israel and they will makecertain conclusions. Or else we must give further thought toit in terms of what we can do with issuing permits for exit.&quot;   Mr. Gorbachev's comments on Jewish emigration are likelyto further fuel an emotional debate about Mr. Bush's decisionto sign a trade agreement with the Soviet Union at thesummit. Mr. Bush had entered the summit uncertain aboutwhether he would agree to sign it, both because the Sovietlegislature still hasn't passed a new emigration law requiredbefore the Soviets can receive most-favored nation tradestatus, and because of unhappiness over Lithuania.   But in the end, Mr. Gorbachev won American approval of atrade agreement, partly by making unusually intense personalappeals directly to President Bush. He urged completion ofthe trade pact three separate times in his private meetingswith Mr. Bush, administration officials said. At the sametime, lower-ranking Soviet officials were suggesting that ifMr. Gorbachev didn't get the trade agreement he wanted, hewouldn't sign a five-year agreement to buy millions of tonsof grain from the U.S., a sale that politically potentAmerican farmers badly want.   The combination of Mr. Gorbachev's appeals and the threatagainst a grain deal convinced Bush aides that Mr. Gorbachevneeded the political boost of the trade agreement more thanthey suspected.   Just before the deal was signed, Secretary of State JamesBaker bluntly told Soviet Foreign Minister EduardShevardnadze that the trade pact could be challenged byAmerican lawmakers unless Mr. Gorbachev lifts his economicembargo against Lithuania and opens serious negotiations withthe breakaway republic. Despite such warnings, Mr. Bushacknowledged yesterday that the U.S. hasn't received any&quot;assurances&quot; from Mr. Gorbachev that the embargo will belifted. But administration officials said the president cameaway from a long, private talk with Mr. Gorbachev reassuredthat the Soviet leader will try to find a politicallypalatable way out of the Lithuania deadlock.   Still, American conservatives will be incensed by Mr.Bush's decision to sign the trade deal without winning inreturn any guarantees that Lithuania will receive itsfreedom. They will be further angered by Mr. Bush'sindication that he won't link the situation in Lithuania tohis eventual decision about sending the trade deal toCongress for approval.   The American right also is likely to gripe that Mr.Gorbachev gave up too little on arms control. The meeting hadbeen billed as an &quot;arms control&quot; summit at which it would beannounced that the major issues in long-range nuclear missiletalks, called START, were settled. There also werepredictions of major progress on conventional arms talks,which are really an exercise aimed at legally affirming theSoviet retreat from Eastern Europe.   But even the summit's progress in arms control was lessthan expected. To be sure, the two presidents did signtreaties curbing chemical weapons and nuclear arms testing.They also issued a statement listing agreements on a STARTtreaty. But three of the four major START issues unresolvedat the summit's outset were still hanging when the meetingended. Two of these -- limits on tests of heavy missiles andon the Soviet Backfire bomber -- are considered critical byAmerican conservatives, who fear the U.S. will wind up givingthe Soviets too much leeway.   The conventional forces talks moved ahead slightly duringthe summit. The two sides apparently agreed on a definitionof what constitutes a tank and made progress on the issue ofdestroying excess weapons.   But the Soviets are indicating that their willingness toreduce their traditional edge in conventional arms depends onthe outcome of the dispute over Germany. Moscow can't flatlyblock German unification unless it unleashes its 380,000troops in East Germany to stop it by force, something theU.S. hardly expects. But Mr. Gorbachev can deny the newGermany full sovereignty and freedom in its probable capital,Berlin, by refusing to relinquish rights over Germany theU.S.S.R. acquired as a World War II victor. And he can refuseto set a firm date for withdrawing Soviet forces from EastGerman territory.   To try to calm Soviet fears about Germany in NATO, Mr.Bush trotted out nine uncontroversial American ideas, such asensuring that Germany not build nuclear weapons, andpresented them as a package. But the U.S. effort to give Mr.Gorbachev a political fig leaf for losing Eastern Europeseemed to fail, at least for now.   One reason may be that Moscow, in its separate directtalks with West Germany, is trying to extract a largeeconomic and political price for Soviet acquiescence inunification. Any early agreement by the Soviets could lowerthe ultimate price Bonn would pay.</TEXT></DOC>