<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>  ZF108-441-364  </DOCNO><DOCID>08 441 364.andM;</DOCID><JOURNAL>UNIX Review  May 1990 v8 n5 p6(4)* Full Text COPYRIGHT Miller Freeman Publications 1990.andM;</JOURNAL><TITLE>Currents. (column)andM;</TITLE><DESCRIPT>Topic:     Computer IndustryUNIXMainframe ComputersMinicomputersProduct DevelopmentStandardizationStrategic PlanningCooperative Agreement.andM;</DESCRIPT><TEXT>CURRENTS ATandamp;T Tandem Computers Inc.andM;An agreement concerning the development and marketing of fault-tolerantsystems has been signed by ATandamp;T (Morristown, NJ) and Tandem Computers Inc.andO;(Cupertino, CA).andP;  Under the agreement, ATandamp;T acquires rights to marketTandem's System V fault-tolerant products and technology on a worldwidebasis.andP;  The alliance also provides for a joint development effort aimed ataccelerating the availability of fault-tolerant systems based on System V.andO;ATandamp;T Network Systems announced plans to use RISC-based fault-tolerantplatforms resulting from this relationship as a foundation for certainoperations, support systems, and new intelligent network services it providesto telephone companies and entities within ATandamp;T.andM;Sentinel Systems Inc.andM;Sentinel Systems Inc. (Horsham, PA) has been formed to provide entry-levelfault-tolerant systems.andP;  Its objective is to offer users of small systemsthose levels of availability, serviceability, and data integrity associatedwith high-priced machines but at a lower cost.andP;  Sentinel Systems is backed byprivate funding with Richard Sergo serving as its president and CEO.andM;Multiflow Computer Corp.andM;The Wall Street Journal has reported that Multiflow Computer Corp. (Branford,CT) has ceased operations after failing to negotiate an agreement foradditional funding.andM;Tektronix Inc. Image Data Corp. Gemini Technology Corp.andM;Tektronix Inc. (Wilsonville, OR) has formed a strategic partnership withImage Data Corp. (Pasadena, CA) to create a fully integrated image andgraphics workstation.andP;  In this product, expected to become available latethis year, Tektronix will attempt to implement interactive visualization bytightly coupling imaging, graphics, and video technologies with its family ofMotorola 88000-based workstations.andM;In another move, Tektronix has formed an alliance with Gemeni TechnologyCorp. (Irvine, CA) that will make Gemini's Generic Visual System softwareavailable for Tek's XD99 series of graphics workstations.andM;LSI Logic Metaflow Technologies Hyundai Electronics AmericaandM;Hyundai Electronics America (San Jose, CA) is heading an effort with LSILogic (Milpitas, CA) and Metaflow Technologies (San Diego, CA) to develop anext-generation Sparc chip.andP;  The new processor will be used in ahigh-performance workstation to be introduced by Hyundai in 1991.andP;  The n ewchip, known as Lightning, will be based on an architecture developed byMetaflow Technologies that is expected to improve the chip's performancesignificantly.andP;  Hyundai has acquired the rights to Metaflow's technology andhas reached an agreement with LSI Logic that will allow LSI to share in themanufacturing and marketing rights to the new chip.andM;IBM IXI Ltd. Dell Computer Corp.andM;IXI Ltd. (Cambridge, England) has signed a licensing agreement with DellComputer Corp. (Austin, TX) that will permit Dell to bundle IXI's X.desktopdesktop manager with its Station 325 and Station 425E systems.andM;On a similar front, IXI has licensed X.desktop to IBM (Rye Brook, NY).andP;  IBMwill incorporate X.desktop as part of its AIXwindows Environment/6000 productfor RISC System/6000 Powerstations and Powerservers.andM;D2B SA Information Systems MarketingandM;Information Systems Marketing (Washington, DC) has formed a partnership withD2B SA, a French provider of UNIX tools and software for videotex.andO;Information Systems will market and provide techndical support for D2B'sUnisex range of products in North America.andM;SecureWare Inc. Open Software FoundationandM;OSF (Cambridge, MA) has released details of the advanced security features inthe first release of its OSF/1 operating system.andP;  A supporting rationaledocument was also released.andP;  The selected technology provider, SecureWareInc. (Atlanta, GA), will supply the advanced security features of OSF/1,which are targeted at the National Computer Security Center's B1 level andbased on SecureWare's SMP+ technology.andP;  The SecureWare technology wasselected through a competitive bid process in consultation with the OSFsecurity special-interest group.andM;Motorola Inc. Visix Software Inc. Solbourne Computer Inc.andM;Visix Software Inc. (Reston, VA) and Solbourne Computer Inc. (Longmont, CO)have signed a strategic marketing agreement that will allow Solbourne tosupply Visix's Looking Glass desktop manager to users of Solbourne'sworkstations and servers.andM;In another move, Visix has signed an agreement with Motorola Computer Group,a group of divisions of Motorola Inc. (Schaumburg, IL), to license Visix'sLooking Glass product.andP;  Looking Glass will be included with Motorola's newMultipersonal computer system, and will be available for some of its otherUNIX-based computers.andM;Data General Corp. Information Presentation TechandM;Data General Corp. (Westboro, MA) has signed a marketing agreement withInformation Presentation Technologies Inc. (Calabasas, CA).andP;  Under the termsof the agreement, IPT will provide software that integrates Apple Macintoshesand DOS machines with Data General UNIX-based Aviion systems.andM;Apple Computer Inc.andM;Jean-Louis Gassee has resigned from his post as president of Apple productsat Apple Computer Inc. (Cupertino, CA).andM;Tradux Inc. Coral Pacific Inc.andM;Coral Pacific Inc. (Marina Del Rey, CA) has signed an agreement with TraduxInc. for exclusive worldwide rights to Tradux's foreign-language translationproduct, the Linguist.andP;  The Linguist can translate English, Japanese, German,and Spanish, each to the other, according to Coral Pacific.andP;  Chinese will beadded shortly; French, Russian, Italian, and Portugese modules are underconsideration.andP;  The Linguist is expected to become available in the thirdquarter of this year.andM;Motorola Inc. Frame Technology Corp. Visual Edge Software Ltd.andM;A licensing agreement has been signed by Motorola Computer Group, a group ofdivisions of Motorola Inc. (Schaumburg, IL), and Frame Technology Corp. (SanJose, CA) under which a trial copy of Frame's FrameMaker publishing softwarewill be included with Motorola's new Multipersonal computer systems.andO;FrameMaker will also be available on Motorola's Delta Series 3000 and 8000systems when they are configured with X Windows and OSF/Motif.andM;On another front, Motorola Computer Group and Visual Edge Software Ltd.andO;(Montreal, Quebec) have signed a licensing agreement that will permitMotorola to offer Visual Edge's UIMX software-development toolkit on itsMultipersonal computers.andP;  UIMX is designed to help programmers develop icons,symbols, and window boxes for graphical interfaces running under X Windows orOSF/Motif.andM;Businessland Inc. Compaq Computer Corp.andM;Compaq Computer Corp. (Houston, TX) has authorized Businessland Corp. (SanJose, CA) to sell and service Compaq products throughout the US.andO;Businessland will continue to sell and service Compaq products in the UK, aswell.andM;Harris Corp. Messerschmitt-Boelkow-BlohmandM;Harris Corp's Computer Systems Division (Ft.andP;  Lauderdale, FL) has beenawarded a $1.5 million contract for the sale of its Night Hawk real-timecomputers to Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm (Munich, West Germany).andO;Messerschmitt will use the systems as the primary host systems forsimulations in its engineering simulation facility in Ottobrun, near Munich.andM;Sun Microsystems Inc.andM;The Combined Higher-Education Software Team (CHEST, located at the Universityof Bath and at Leicester Polytechnic in the UK) has signed a licensingagreement that designates PC-NFS as the standard PC networking system forhigher-education institutions.andP;  PC-NFS is the DOS implementation of NFS fromSun Microsystems Inc. (Mountain View, CA).andP;  CHEST is the organizationresponsible for negotiating software licenses on behalf of Britishhigher-education institutions.andM;Sybase Inc. Data General Corp.andM;A marketing and technology agreement has been signed by Sybase Inc.andO;(Emeryville, CA) and Data General Corp. (Westboro, MA) under which the SybaseRDBMS will be pointed to the Data General Aviion family of UNIX systems.andO;Sybase and Data General will jointly market both companies' products.andM;DDC-I Inc. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.andM;DDC-I Inc. (Phoenix, AZ) has been selected by Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.andO;to integrate and upgrade its Ada compiler system for use on computers aboardNASA's Freedom space station.andM;BBN Advanced Computers Inc.andM;BBN Advanced Computers Inc. (Cambridge, MA) has received a $4.5 millioncontract from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory for a 126-processormodel of its BBN TC2000 computer.andP;  The TC2000 RISC-based system is acomponent of Lawrence Livermore's Massively Parallel Computing Initiative, athree-year effort to demonstrate practical applications for massivelyparallel machines.andP;  BBN's machine runs its nX implementation of 4.3BSD and aset of X Windows development tools created by BBN.andM;IBM Graphic Software Systems Inc.andM;IBM (Rye Brook, NY) has signed a contract with Graphic Software Systems Inc.andO;(Beaverton, OR) to license and market GSS's graphics software for its RISCSystem/6000 family of machines.andP;  IBM will market the GSS software as the IBMAIX Computer Graphics Interface Toolkit 6000.andP;  The toolkit will besource-code compatible with toolkits that GSS has developed for IBM's DOS andOS/2 platforms.andM;Logicraft Inc. Digital Equipment Corp.andM;Logicraft Inc. (Nashua, NH) and Digital Equipment Corp. (Maynard, MA) havesigned a contract worth $250,000 to Logicraft.andP;  The contract calls forLogicraft to develop a low-cost, DOS co-processor board based on the 80386chip for DEC workstations.andP;  Under the terms of the agreement, DEC will have ahand in determining the board's specifications, but Logicraft will own andengineer the product.andP;  DEC is expected to assist Logicraft with sales andmarketing.andM;Top Log International Informix Software Inc.andM;Informix Software Inc. (Menlo Park, CA) and Top Log International have signedan agreement making Top Log a distributor of Informix's line ofinformation-management software.andP;  Top Log will distribute Informix softwarethroughout the UK, France, Germany, Spain, and Benelux, being the soledistributor in France and Spain.andP;  The two-year contract is valued at $10million.andO;</TEXT></DOC>