<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>  ZF108-312-438  </DOCNO><DOCID>08 312 438.andM;</DOCID><JOURNAL>UNIX Review  April 1990 v8 n4 p6(3)* Full Text COPYRIGHT Miller Freeman Publications 1990.andM;</JOURNAL><TITLE>Currents. (UNIX community news)andM;</TITLE><DESCRIPT>Topic:     Computer IndustryTrade and Professional AssociationsWorkstationsIndustry-Sponsored ResearchAcquisitionTrade ShowsSoftware PublishersCooperative Agreement.andM;</DESCRIPT><TEXT>A MONTHLY COMPENDIUM OF UNIX COMMUNITY NEWS British Telecom Sun MicrosystemsInc.andM;Sun Microsystems Inc. (Mountain View, CA) and British Telecom have signed anagreement for BT's long-term purchase of Sun equipment.andP;  The contractinvolves Sparc-based workstations and servers, and in the first year alone,British Telecom is likely to order more than $10 million worth of Sunhardware.andP;  Some of the equipment will be used by British Telecom in itsinternal systems and research projects, but a portion of it is planned forresale into the company's marketplace.andM;UNIX Expo WestandM;National Expositions Inc., the producer and sponsor of the UNIX Expo showheld every autumn in New York, has created a new exposition and conferencedesigned to serve the west-coast marketplace.andP;  UNIX Expo West will debut onMay 7 and extend through May 9 at the Los Angeles Convention Center.andP;  LikeUNIX Expo, Expo West will feature a program of seminars, panel sessions, andpresentations from industry authorities.andP;  An exhibition area will displayproducts and applications from companies in the industry.andM;Sony Microsystems Co. Telephone Technolgies Inc.andM;A VAR agreement has been signed by Sony Microsystems Co. (San Jose, CA) andTelephone Technologies Inc. (Garden City, NJ).andP;  TTI will purchase Sony Newsworkstations and integrate them as departmental servers in large,heterogeneous network environments.andM;Microsoft Corp. Interactive Systems Corp. Graphics Software Systems Inc.andM;Interactive Systems Corp. (Santa Monica, CA) will license its X Windows andMotif products to Graphics Software Systems Inc. (Beaverton, OR) fordistribution with the GSS line of graphics applications.andP;  GSS will distributeInteractive's 386/ix X11 development and runtime systems and Motifdevelopment and user-environment products.andP;  In addition, GSS will offer itsproprietary DGIS X server and kernel drivers with the Interactive products.andM;In another move, Interactive has licensed LAN Manager/X from Microsoft Corp.andO;(Redmond, WA) for distribution with its 386/ix product family.andP;  InteractiveLAN Manager/X, scheduled for release in the second quarter of this year, willallow interoperability of UNIX with LAN Manager on 386- and 486-basedEthernet or Token-Ring networks.andM;ATandamp;T NCSAandM;ATandamp;T (Morristown, NJ) has established a strategic partnership with theNational Center for Supercomputing Applications (Urbana-Champaign, IL) toenhance UNIX for use in supercomputing environments.andP;  The partnership isintended to incorporate supercomputers into the widespread use of opencomputer operating systems and universal data connectivity.andP;  As part of thethree-year agreement, ATandamp;T will, during the first year, contribute initialfunding and provide three Bell Labs scientists to the facility.andP;  Funding andstaffing levels for the subsequent two years are expected to grow and will bedetermined later.andM;Boeing Silicon Graphics Inc.andM;Boeing Commercial Airplanes and Boeing Military Airplanes have signedcontracts worth a total of $2.3 million with Silicon Graphics Inc. (MountainView, CA).andP;  The majority of the order is for Personal Iris systems, with aportion consisting of upgrades and new orders for Iris Power Series systems.andO;The new orders complement Boeing's existing base of SGI Iris systems valuedat approximately $12 million.andM;Oracle Corp. Pyramid Technology Corp. Integrated Micro Products Inc.andM;Integrated Micro Products Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA) and Pyramid Technology Corp.andO;(Mountain View, CA) have agreed to integrate their products together with theOracle RDBMS from Oracle Corp. (Belmont, CA).andP;  The intent of the union is tocreate open, high-availability transaction-processing systems.andP;  Thearchitecture of the hybrid system will consist of one or more PyramidMIServers connected to IMP'S XR fault-tolerant systems over redundant TCP/IPnetworks.andP;  The Oracle RDBMS engine will run on the MIServer, while itsfront-end tools will run on the XR system.andM;Saber Software Inc. Platform TechnologiesandM;Saber Software Inc. (Cambridge, MA) has signed an agreement with PlatformTechnologies (Sydney, Australia) for the distribution of Saber's Saber Cdevelopment environment in Australia.andP;  Platform Technologies currentlydistributes a variety of UNIX software in Australia.andM;Systech Corp. Sequent Computer Systems Inc.andM;Systech Corp. (San Diego, CA) has signed a five-year, $25 million contractwith Sequent Computer Systems Inc. (Beaverton, OR) calling for Systech tosupply Sequent with communications subsystems and controllers.andP;  The Systechproducts will be used in Sequent's Symmetry series of parallel computers.andM;MasPar computer Corp.andM;MasPar Computer Corp. (Sunnyvale, CA) has joined the Data-Parallel ResearchInitiative, an organization created in May 1989 to encourage research intonew and improved parallel computing applications.andP;  MasPar is the thirdcompany to join the initiative, following Digital Equipment Corp. (Maynard,MA) and Thinking Machines Corp. (Cambridge, MA).andM;Wind River Systems  concurrent Computer Corp., Concurrent Computer Corp.andM;Wind River Systems (Emeryville, CA) has signed an agreement with ConcurrentComputer Corp. (Tinton Falls, NJ) allowing Concurrent to distribute WindRiver's VxWorks real-time operating system as part of a real-time hardwareand software system.andP;  Under the agreement, Concurrent will offer users areal-time development and execution system combining Concurrent hardware andits RTU real-time UNIX with Wind River's VxWorks.andM;Sybase Inc. Solbourne Computer Inc.andM;Sybase Inc. (Emeryville, CA) has signed an ISV agreement with SolbourneComputer Inc. (Longmont, CO) that will permit Sybase to license its RDBMSsoftware to users of Solbourne workstations and servers.andM;Acucobol Inc. Sony Microsystems Co.andM;Sony Microsystems Co. (San Jose, CA) has signed an agreement with AcucobolInc. (San Diego, CA) calling for Acucobol's COBOL compiler to be madeavailable for the Sony News family of workstations.andP;  Under the terms of theagreement, Acucobol will provide its Acucobol-85 compiler directly to Sonyend-users and resellers of Sony workstations.andP;  Sony and Acucobol willcooperatively market the software through Sony's Synergy cooperativemarketing program.andM;Netwise Inc. Data General Corp.andM;Data General Corp. (Westboro, MA) will license and distribute the Netwise RPCTool from Netwise Inc. (Boulder, CO).andP;  Data General will include RCP Tool aspart of its DAA OpenLAN product set.andM;VisionWare Ltd. UniPress Software Inc.andM;A distribution agreement has been signed by VisionWare Ltd. (Leeds, England)and UniPress Software Inc. (Edison, NJ).andP;  Under the terms of the agreement,UniPress will distribute a suite of VisionWare products that displays DOS andUNIX applications on PCs networked with a UNIX host.andP;  Wyse Technology HunterSystems Software Inc.andM;Wyse Technology (San Jose, CA) and Hunter Systems Software Inc. (MountainView, CA) have signed an OEM agreement allowing Wyse to bundle HunterSystems' XDOS Transformer with every Wyse Series 5000i and 9000i UNIX system.andO;The XDOS Transformer permits Series 5000i and 9000i users to install a fullsuite of XDOS applications on their systems.andP;  XDOS applications are UNIXports of DOS applications.andM;IBM Corp.andM;Alsys Inc.andM;Alsys Inc. (Burlington, MA) and IBM Corp. (Rye Brook, NY) have signed anagreement to provide an Alsys Ada language compilation system on IBM's newRISC System/6000.andP;  Previously, Alsys has signed agreements with IBM todevelop Ada environments for IBM Enterprise System/370 and PS/2 computers,both running AIX.andM;Rhino Sales Co.andM;Bull HN Information Systems Inc.andM;Bull HN Information Systems Inc. (Billerica, MA) has signed on a new masterVAR, Rhino Sales Co. Under the terms of the agreement, Rhino will sell Bull'sDPX/2 UNIX product line to its reseller network.andP;  The contract's value forthe first year is to reach $2 million.andM;Unisys Corp.andM;VISystems Inc.andM;Unisys Corp. (Blue Bell, PA) and VISystems Inc. (Dallas, TX) will jointlymarket a transaction-processing system developed by VISystems.andP;  The Dallasfirm has agreed to become a marketing associate through the Unisysvalue-added marketing division, and will market--with Unisys--its VIS/TPfamily of transaction-processing software products.andM;Motorola Inc.andM;Systems Strategies Inc.andM;Motorola Inc. (Austin, TX) has licensed the CommLink line of SNAcommunications software from Systems Strategies Inc. (New York, NY).andO;Motorola will use the software on its new Delta 8000 family of computersystems.andP;  The communications software will enable Delta 8000 users tocommunicate with IBM mainframe and midrange systems.andM;Integrated Device Technology Inc.andM;A RISC subsystems division of Integrated Device Technology Inc. (Santa Clara,CA) has been formed to provide customers with RISC CPU module products.andP;  TheRISC subsystem division will supply Mips RISC R3000-based modules as well aslow-cost development tools.andO;</TEXT></DOC>