<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>  ZF108-080-326  </DOCNO><DOCID>08 080 326.andM;</DOCID><JOURNAL>UNIX Review  Jan 1990 v8 n1 p6(3)* Full Text COPYRIGHT Miller Freeman Publications 1990.andM;</JOURNAL><TITLE>Currents: a monthly compendium of UNIX community news.andM;</TITLE><DESCRIPT>Topic:     Product DevelopmentDistribution AgreementsMergerContractsMicrocomputersSupercomputersValue-Added ResellersService CentersVoice CommunicationsSoftware DesignConferencesOEMsCompaniesGovernment ContractsInformation ServicesMarketing AgreementsLicensing.andM;</DESCRIPT><TEXT>CURRENTSandM;Megatek Corp. Sun Microsystems Inc. Goldstar Software Ltd. Goldstar SoftwareLtd. (Seoul, Korea) plans to design and market high-performance desktopcomputers based on the Sparc RISC processor from Sun Microsystems Inc.andO;(Mountain View, CA).andP;  Goldstar has licensed SunOS and other system softwarefrom Sun.andP;  According to Goldstar, its first Sparc systems will be availablein late 1990.andM;In a different move, Goldstar has signed a deal with Megatek Corp. (SanDiego, CA) that will make it responsible for the distribution of all Megatekproducts in South Korea.andM;NEC Technologies Inc.andM;Nec Information Systems Inc. and NEC Home Electronics Inc. have merged tocreate a new corporate entity: NEC Technologies Inc. (Boxborough, MA).andP;  Theresulting company is responsible for the development, marketing, manufacture,and distribution of NEC computer, peripheral, audio/visual, and homeentertainment products.andM;NCR Corp. Businessland Inc. NCR Corp. (Dayton, OH) and Businessland Inc. (SanJose, CA) have signed an agreement calling for the latter firm to sell NCRpersonal computer products through its 125 locations.andP;  The products that willbe sold by Businessland's sales force include NCR's PC486/MC and other PC andworkstation systems.andM;CERN Institute Hewlett-Packard Co. Sun Microsystems Inc.andM;The Apollo division of Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto, CA) has been awarded acontract from the CERN Institute (Geneva, Switzerland) to supply ApolloSeries 10000 personal supercomputers and visualization systems.andP;  CERN willuse the machines for high-energy physics applications and to controlexperiments.andP;  The systems will also serve as central computing resources forthe laboratory's extensive network of computers.andM;On a similar front, CERN has licensed the Sparc RISC processor from SunMicrosystems Inc. (Mountain View, CA) for use in a system that will gatherdata from electron-positron collision experiments.andP;  Several hundred networkedSparc controllers will be used around CERN's particle accelerator.andO;Information retrieved by the controllers will be sent to a large mainframe orsupercomputer for analysis.andM;Carnegie Mellon University Conner Scelza Associates Inc.andM;Conner Scelza Associates Inc. (Wexford, PA) has signed a distributionagreement with Carnegie Mellon University (Pittsburgh, PA).andP;  Under the termsof the agreement, CSA will be distributing prototype source tape versions ofthe current research releases of the Mach operating system to the researchand development community.andP;  In addition to the twice-yearly releasestraditionally supplied by CMU, CSA is planning to offer Mach support,enhancements, and custom development services.andM;Data General Vykor TechnologyandM;Data General (Westboro, MA) and Vykor Technology (Santa Barbara, CA) havesigned a VAR agreement calling for Vykor to market DG's Aviion systems.andP;  TheDG machines will be running scanning, imaging, and communicationsapplications that interoperate with DEC, IBM, and Wang products.andM;Systech Corp. Pyramid Technology Corp.andM;Systech Corp. (San Diego, CA) and Pyramid Technology Corp. (Mountain View,CA) have signed a contract calling for Systech to supply terminal I/O controlsystems to Pyramid.andP;  Pyramid will use the control systems in its entire lineof MIServer products.andP;  The contract is valued at $10 million.andM;Prime Computer Sun Microsystems Inc.andM;Prime Computer (Natick, MA) has signed a two-year, $200 million agreement toresell Sparc workstations and servers from Sun Microsystems Inc. (MountainView, CA).andP;  Prime will offer the Sun systems with its Cadds, Medusa, Theda,and GIS software.andM;Control Data Corp. Tandem Computers Inc. Mips Computer Systems Inc.andM;A system service agreement has been signed by Tandem Computers Inc.andO;(Cupertino, CA) and Mips Computer Systems Inc. (Sunnyvale, CA).andP;  Under theagreement, Tandem will provide on-site service support to Mips customersthroughout the US.andP;  As a result of this relationship, Mips will be able toexpand both the number of its service locations and available hours ofcoverage.andM;On a different front, Control Data Corp. (Minneapolis, MN) and Mips havesigned an agreement allowing Control Data to sell computers manufactured byMips.andM;Voicetek Corp. Stratus Computer Inc.andM;Stratus Computer Inc. (Marlboro, MA) and Voicetek Corp. (Chelmsford, MA) havesigned an agreement to jointly market an intelligent voice network platformthat combines fault-tolerant computers with high-performance voice-processingsystems.andP;  The resultant system is expected to find application in thetelecommunications field and a variety of other industries where servicessuch as voice mail, voice processing, telephone answering, and reservationsrecording are desired.andM;Software Development '90andM;In-depth presentations from theoreticians and practitioners in the softwaredevelopment industry will be given at Software Development '90, sponsored bythe seminars group of Miller Freeman Publications.andP;  The three-day conferencewill be held in Oakland, CA from February 6 to 9.andM;Hewlett-Packard Co. Fourgen Software Inc.andM;As the result of a software-supplier agreement, products from FourgenSoftware Inc. (Edmonds, WA) will be sold to operate on RISC computer systemsfrom Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto, CA).andM;Intergraph Corp. Natural Language Inc.andM;Intergraph Corp. (Huntsville, AL), and Natural Language Inc. (Berkeley, CA)have signed an OEM agreement for NLI to port is database access tools toIntergraph workstations and servers.andP;  Both companies will also jointly marketeach other's products.andM;Frame Technology Westmount TechnologyandM;An OEM agreement has been signed by Frame Technology (San Jose, CA) andWestmount Technology (Delft, The Netherlands) to combine Westmount'sintegrated CASE products with Frame's publishing software.andP;  The two companieswill market the resulting product worldwide.andM;Ingres Corp.andM;Relational Technology Inc. (Alameda, CA) has changed its name to Ingres Corp.andO;(Alameda, CA).andM;Intel Corp. DDC-I Inc.andM;Intel Corp. (Santa Clara, CA) has signed an agreement with DDC-I Inc.andO;(Phoenix, AZ) to adapt and market the DDC-I Ada compiler for the i860microprocessor.andP;  Under the terms of the contract, DDC-I will produce an i860Ada cross compiler for VAX host computers.andM;Unisys Corp.andM;Unisys Corp. (Blue Bell, PA) has been awarded a $45 million contract by theFederal Aviation Administration to expand the automated radar terminalsystems at the nation's busiest airports.andP;  This contract and successivecontracts will provide the capacity and performance upgrades the FAA needs tosupport its air traffic control systems until they are replaced in the late1990s.andM;On a different front, Unisys has been awarded what could amount to a $700million contract from the Department of Defense for its PW2 microcomputersystems.andP;  the initial contract is for two years and $233 million.andP;  Itspecifies the purchase of 75,000 Unisys microcomputer systems.andP;  The systemswill run a POSIX-compliant version of UNIX.andP;  With all options on the contractexercised, the number of units sold could expand to 250,000.andM;General ElectricandM;The Genie service, an on-line consumer information service for PC enthusiastsoffered by General Electric Information Services (Rockville, MD), has added aUNIX roundtable to its menu of personal computing roundtables.andP;  The UNIXroundtable is a forum for first-time users of UNIX to help them learn to useand program in the Unix environment.andP;  A separate area within the roundablewill support experienced UNIX programmers.andM;Specialix Inc. Digital Access Corp.andM;An agreement signed by Specialix Inc. (Los Gatos, CA) and Digitial AccessCorp. (Reston, VA) enables Digital to distribute Specialix's family ofintelligent I/O controller boards.andP;  The boards will be packaged in Digital'salready established products.andM;ATandamp;T Anasazi Inc.andM;ATandamp;T (Morristown, NJ) and Anasazi Inc. (Phoenix, AZ) will jointly market acomputer-based reservations system for the lodging industry.andP;  ATandamp;T willparticipate in the development of the system, which is expected to becomeavailable in late 1990.andM;Numertrix Inc. Hewlett-Packard Co.andM;A marketing agreement has been signed by Hewlett-PAckard Co. (Palo Alto, CA)and Numetrix Inc. (Toronto, Ontario).andP;  Under the terms of the agreement,Numetrix's production-scheduling software will be ported to HP computers.andM;SL Corp. Digital Equipment Corp.andM;Digital Equipment Corp. (Maynard, MA) has licensed SL-GMS, a graphicalmodeling package, from SL Corp. (Corte Madera, CA).andP;  Digital will use the SLsystem for creating visual application interfaces for its Basestarintegration platform.andO;</TEXT></DOC>