<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>  ZF207-755-553  </DOCNO><DOCID>07 755 553.andM;</DOCID><JOURNAL>Release 1.0  May 21 1989 v89 n5 p31(2)* Full Text COPYRIGHT EDventure Holdings 1989.andM;</JOURNAL><TITLE>Natural language... and computer parallels. (Soviet Union)</TITLE><AUTHOR>Dyson, Esther.andM;</AUTHOR><DESCRIPT>Topic:     Soviet UnionLanguage TranslationProgramming LanguagesCommunicationArtificial IntelligenceExpert Systems.andM;</DESCRIPT><TEXT>One problem I had talking with Russians is that they don't seem to haveenough experience talking to foreigners to talk slowly.andP;  I could alwaysunderstand people until the conversation got interesting and they started tospeak quickly in excitement.andP;  There's a very practical solution: Each personshould speak in the other's language.andP;  The natural tendency is to do just theopposite: I speak in mine; you speak in yours.andP;  The trouble is that eachspeaker knows what he means and expresses himself perfectly, but the amountthat actually gets communicated is very little.andP;  When each uses a foreignlanguage, by contrast, he uses only words he knows -- and the listener, thenative user of the language, knows them too, of course.andP;  The level of theconversation is reduced to the thoughts that each party can express inanother language -- but those thoughts actually get through to the otherside.andM;In fact, this is precisely what we do with computers.andP;  We use commands thatare intelligible to the computer -- because we know it doesn't understandnatural language.andP;  Meanwhile, it talks to us in user-friendly menus andprompts and dialogues and help texts that are foreign to it -- but that it/its programmer knows we'll understand.andP;  Each side knows how to translate itsmost important thoughts into the other's language -- but could neverunderstand the full range of the other's thoughts/processes in the other'slanguage.andP;  (Of course, if either side assumes it understands more than itdoes, you still have problems.)andM;Artificial intelligence and contextandM;Along those same lines, a person encountering a foreign society has somenotion of the problems of simulating natural language or nonbrittle AI.andP;  I'msmart and logical and I know the language (some), but as far as Russiansociety goes I don't have the real-world knowledge or context that I need.andO;How are things done? Why are there three lines in the stores? The language isonly part of it; you need to know the situations in which it applies.andP;  Is itrude if someone uses the familiar form of &quot;you&quot;? If the woman in the nextshower stall tells you to use more soap? If someone shows up half an hourlate? What are the social implications of going to a restaurant or sharing anice cream? Why do parents send their kids to the country? Why no bicycles inMoscow? (Pollution, harsh winters, and a fine alternative with the metro.) Isit permissible to phone someone after 10 pm?andM;There are things they never bother to never tell you -- like where do you payon the trolley car? The subway is simple; you put 5 kopeks into the turnstile-- not that there's a sign anywhere, but the change machines marked 10, 15and 20 give you the appropriate number of 5-kopek pieces.andP;  These are thekinds of details people always forget to render explicitly in expert systems-- and without which it's impossible to function properly.andM;Then there is knowledge more along the lines of the patterns a neural netrecognizes than the explicit rules that control an expert system.andP;  And itoperates on all senses.andP;  For example, there's a certain taste I can'tdescribe, a sort of marinade associated with cabbage and other coldvegetables.andP;  I'd never encountered it before and at first I didn't mind it.andO;But it's now clearly imprinted on my synapses and I hate it.andP;  I've beensensitized to it forever, and whenever I encountered it I gagged.andM;Borrowed identityandM;Another interesting thing is the role of the translator.andP;  People have told metranslating can drive you crazy.andP;  What was difficult was the division ofloyalties: If I was translating the questions of a Russian who was testy,should I be testy, representing him properly? Or should I soften thequestions or reword them or even respond to them myself? The translator'scode says, I believe, that you should properly represent the person whosewords you are translating, but that can annoy your friends.andM;And finally, who are the people you meet when you have no context to placethem in? Is this guy really smart, or is he just normal around here? Is thisperson's political discussion group really the second most important afterthe Moscow Tribune or is he dreaming? Are people happy if they think theyare? Or if they never think about it? And finally, who are you when no oneknows who you are?andO;</TEXT></DOC>