<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>  ZF207-226-334  </DOCNO><DOCID>07 226 334.andM;</DOCID><JOURNAL>MacUser  June 1989 v5 n6 p64(1)* Full Text COPYRIGHT Ziff-Davis Publishing Co. 1989.andM;</JOURNAL><TITLE>Read-it! 2.0. (Software Review) (evaluation)</TITLE><AUTHOR>Beamer, Scott.andM;</AUTHOR><SUMMARY>Olduvai's Read-It! 2.0 optical character recognition software($495) is highly recommended.andP;  Version 2.0 is equipped withscanner drivers that are compatible with most Macintosh scanners.andO;A magnified view of the page is presented once the scan iscompleted.andP;  All material is translated to ASCII text, althoughother tools are available for processing files for different uses.andO;Read-It! comes with 22 font tables, so the user will rarely haveto build one.andP;  The program has a wide selection of user-adjustablecontrols.andP;  Read-It's manual is faulted for being inadequate in themore advanced sections.andM;</SUMMARY><DESCRIPT>Company:   Olduvai Corp. (products).andO;Product:   Read it! 2.0 (Computer program).andO;Topic:     EvaluationOptical Character Recognition Software.andM;</DESCRIPT><TEXT>Read-It!andP;  2.0 List Price: $495 Published by: Olduvai Corporation 7520 RedRoad, Suite A, South Miami, FL 33143; (800) 822-0772; (305) 665-4665 Version:2.0 Requires: Scanner Compatibility: All Macs with 1 megabyte.andP;  ApplicationSize: 211K.andP;  Supplied font-table library is 315K.andP;  Copy Protection: NoneandM;When Olduvai introduced Read-It! a couple of years ago, the company had theMac OCR (optical character recognition) market pretty much to itself.andP;  Sincethen, the market has tightened up, but Olduvai has continued upgrading itspackage, and Read-It!andP;  2.0 can hold its own -- even against its priciercompetitors.andM;Version 1.0 provided no scanner drivers, but version 2.0 has drivers foralmost all Mac-compatible scanners.andP;  For the few not included, Read-It!andP;  2.0can still translate pages the way version 1.0 did: you save the scaned imageto a hard disk and then open it from within Read-It! as a TIFF, PICT, orbit-mapped image.andM;Read-It! makes judging the quality of the scan easy by presenting a highlymagnified view of the page upon completing the scan, but it doesn't haveautomatic page definition.andP;  If the page has multiple columns or if you wantless than the whole page to be translated, you must select the areas to beread.andP;  You can save the selected pattern as a template.andM;If you have at least 2 megabytes of RAM, Read-It! will work in the backgroundunder MultiFinder.andP;  If you choose Batch Recognize from the Commands menu, allyou have to do is select a font table, the appropriate template, and thescanned images, and Read-It! will do the rest.andM;Read-It! can translate fax-modem documents in the same way, but since itscans fax documents at 200 dots per inch (dpi), you should expect the errorrate to be slightly higher than what you get with other documents.andM;In general, you can expect an error rate of 1-3 percent, but error rates cango even higher, depending on the quality of the original material, thequality of the scan, the font table, and the user's experience.andP;  Speed isalso widely variable, but assuming the appropriate font table is available,scanning a type-written page and translating it into ASCII text takes abouttwo minutes.andM;Read-It! translates all material to plain ASCII text, but it has severaltools for processing the resulting files for different uses.andP;  For instance,with a newspaper article, one option strips hyphens and carriage returns fromthe end of lines to give you normal word wrap in the translated file.andO;Another option inserts carriage returns, tabs, or commas in multiple spacesto make a file importable by a database or spreadsheet.andM;The most tedious part of using a trainable OCR product such as Read-It! isbuilding a new font table, but you rarely have to do so.andP;  You'll already havethe appropriate font table, either provided by Olduvai on the program disks(22 are supplied) or from the last time you worked with similar material.andM;If you're not sure whether you already have the necessary font table,Read-It! will look through the font-table library on disk, finding the bestmatch.andP;  I was surprised by how seldom the match was adequate.andP;  Still, ithelps to use a copy of an existing table for a head start on building a newone.andM;Another aid for starting a font table is built into the program.andP;  Just typean exact copy of a selected portion of a scanned page and choose Easy Learn.andO;Read-It! will the enter all the characters of the selected text into the fonttable.andP;  When it's done, you can use Learn and Recognize, the mode in whichRead-It! stops only on the characters it's unsure of.andM;Read-It! has a huge selection of user-adjustable controls.andP;  You don't have tolearn to use them to operate the program, but when you need them, they'rethere.andP;  These controls include the ability to adjust the program'ssensitivity to what is a space or a line, and its confidence level, the pointat which it marks a questionable character as an error or enters it into thetext.andM;Olduvai advertises that Read-It! works on a Mac Plus, but the manual hedges alitle on this claim.andP;  A 300-dpi scan of a full page takes up most of amegabyte by itself.andP;  The manual recommends scanning half a page at a time ifyou have only 1 megabyte.andM;Read-It!'s manual is well laid out and written in an informal style with muchexperience-based advice.andP;  When I felt ready to tackle the advanced controls,though, the section was much too short.andP;  Too often, when I was looking forspecific instructions, the advice was to experiment.andM;For performance and value, Read-It!andP;  2.0 is an excellent choice.andP;  It providesefficient -- if not necessarily blazing -- OCR performance without requiringa huge investment.andO;</TEXT></DOC>