<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>  ZF207-841-566  </DOCNO><DOCID>07 841 566.andM;</DOCID><JOURNAL>UNIX Review  Oct 1989 v7 n10 p6(4)* Full Text COPYRIGHT Review Publications Co. 1989.andM;</JOURNAL><TITLE>Currents: a monthly compendium of Unix community news.andM;</TITLE><DESCRIPT/><TEXT>CURRENTS A MONTHLY COMPENDIUM OF UNIX COMMUNITY NEWSandM;Ardent Computer Corp.andM;Stellar Computer Inc.andM;Ardent Computer Corp. (Sunnyvale, CA) and Stellar Computer Inc. (Newton, MA)have decided to merge, forming one graphics supercomputing firm calledStardent.andP;  The merger is subject to execution of a definitive agreement andreceipt of shareholder and various government approvals.andP;  Finance, marketing,sales, manufacturing, and engineering teams have been appointed to examineand integrate Ardent and Stellar activities.andP;  The new company will maintainfacilities on both coasts at current Ardent and Stellar headquarters.andP;  Overtime, all manufacturing of the two companies' product lines will beconsolidated at Kubota Ltd. of Japan, Ardent's major investor andmanufacturing partner.andP;  The Japanese company will be the exclusive supplierof Stardent products as well as the largest single shareholder in Stardent,with a 22 percent interest in the new company.andM;Interactive Systems Corp.andM;Fujitsu Microelectronics Inc.andM;Fujitsu Microelectronics Inc. (San Jose, CA) and Interactive Systems Corp.andO;(Santa Monica, CA) have reached an agreement calling for Interactive toprovide Sun Microsystems' SunOS UNIX version for the Fujitsu S-25 Sparc VMEboard set.andP;  Interactive claims that this is the first time a Sparcsemiconductor manufacturer and an independent SunOS licensee have workedtogether to implement a hardware and software environment for theSun-compatible workstation market.andM;Digital Equipment Corp.andM;Mortice Kern Systems Inc.andM;Digital Equipment (Maynard, MA) has purchased MKS Awk software technologyfrom Mortice Kern Systems Inc. (Waterloo, Ontario).andP;  DEC plans to use the Awksoftware in future versions of its Ultrix operating system.andM;Corollary Inc.andM;Hewlett-Packard Co.andM;The Santa Cruz Operation Inc.andM;Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto, CA) has entered into agreements with TheSanta Cruz Operation Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA) and Corollary Inc. (Irvine, CA) tooffer complete multiuser systems.andP;  Under the agreement with SCO, HP will selland support SCO UNIX System V/386 Release 3.2 on HP Vectra PCs.andP;  Through theagreement with Corollary, HP will market a custom version of Corollary'sserial I/O subsystem, which allows up to 32 terminals to be connected to anHP Vectra PC running the SCO operating system.andM;/usr/groupandM;The international association of UNIX systems users, /usr/group (Santa Clara,CA), has officially changed its name to UniForum.andP;  The name change is theresult of the association board's acceptance August 3 of general membershipvote held in June.andP;  The vote for the name change was welcomed by theassociation because it now will be able to capitalize on the name recognitionof the UniForum trade shows and conferences it sponsors.andP;  Doug Michels, vicepresident of The Santa Cruz Operation, has been named president of theUniForum association.andM;Hitachi Ltd.andM;Hewlett-Packard Co.andM;Hitachi Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) and Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto, CA) will worktogether to develop a new high-speed chipset based on HP's RISC technologyand Hitachi's semiconductor and circuit design technology.andP;  As part of theagreement, Hitachi will adopt HP's RISC architecture.andP;  Both companies plan tomanufacture the new chipset for use in high-performance computer systems thatthey will market independently under their own names.andP;  The companies alsoplan to equip their systems with software meeting OSF specifications.andM;Tolerant Systems Inc.andM;Tolerant Systems Inc. (San Jose, CA) has repositioned itself by moving awayfrom its role as a maker of fault-tolerant computer systems and concentratingon fault-tolerant software products.andP;  As a result, the company has changedits name to Tolerant Software Inc. The company will focus on unbundling itsfault-tolerant technology and offering it as system-level software andutilities.andP;  Initial products are expected to be packaged as part of ATandamp;T'sSystem V Release 4.0 and marketed directly to UNIX vendors.andM;Paragon Imaging Inc.andM;Sony Microsystems Co.andM;Boston Business Computing Ltd.andM;An agreement has been signed by Sony Microsystems Co. (Palo Alto, CA) andBoston Business Computing Ltd. (Andover, MA) that will provide BBC's EDT+ andVCL software for use with Sony workstations.andP;  The BBC software is designed tohelp users of DEC VAX VMS systems migrate to UNIX.andP;  Under the terms of theagreement, BBC will sell its products directly to Sony end users andresellers.andP;  The two companies will also market the products cooperativelythrough Sony's Synergy program.andM;In a similar move, imaging software from Paragon Imaging Inc. (Lowell, MA)will be made available for Sony workstations as part of an agreement signedby the two companies.andP;  As with BBC, Paragon's software will be marketedthrough Sony's Synergy program.andM;Sun Microsystems Inc.andM;Relational Technology Inc.andM;Sun Microsystems Inc. (Mountain View, CA) and Relational Technology Inc.andO;(Alameda, CA) have signed an agreement under which they will jointly engineerand market the Ingres RDBMS for Sun workstations.andP;  Under the terms of theaccord, the two companies will participate in joint engineering efforts toensure that Ingress runs optimally on all Sun platforms.andM;Solbourne Computer Inc.andM;Valid Logic Systems Inc.andM;Solbourne Computer Inc. (Longmont, CO) and Valid Logic Systems Inc. (SanJose, CA) have signed an agreement allowing both companies to market Valid'selectronic design automation software on Solbourne computers.andP;  The pact isworth an estimated $5 million over the next 12 months.andM;On another front, Solbourne has opened its first direct European subsidiary,Solbourne UK (Swindon, Wiltshire), which will conduct direct sales operationsin Europe and serve as Solbourne's European headquarters, as well asestablish distributors on the continent.andM;N.V.andP;  PhilipsandM;Sun Microsystems Inc.andM;A license agreement has been signed by N.V.andP;  Philips (The Netherlands) andSun Microsystems Inc. (Mountain View, CA) that will allow Philips Components,a division of the multinational firm, to design and market RISCmicroprocessors based on Sun's Sparc processor.andP;  Philips will build Sparcprocessors into embedded conrollers.andP;  The company may also sell Sparc chipsfor use in general-purpose computers.andM;In another, N.V.andP;  Philips has joined the board of Sparc International(Sunnyvale, CA).andM;EUUGandM;Usenix AssociationandM;The Usenix Association and the European UNIX system User Group (EUUG) havebegun a joint effort to monitor the ISO Posix standards effort.andP;  The twogroups will send a single representative, Dominic Dunlop, to ISO meetings.andO;Dunlop will report back to both Usenix and EUUG as well as provide the ISOgroup with information from Usenix and EUUG.andP;  In addition to participating inISO standards meetings, Dunlop will attend both Usenix and EUUG boardmeetings.andP;  Reprots of his findings will be published in ;login: and EUUGN,the newsletters of the two organizations.andM;Informix Software Inc.andM;The Wingz graphics spreadsheet from Informix Software Inc. (Lenexa, KS) hasbeen included in a $164 million contract awarded to Honeywell Federal SystemsInc. by the US Department of Defense.andP;  The Wingz portion of the contract mayamount to several million dollars.andM;Concurrent Computer Corp.andM;Triathon Business Computers Inc.andM;Concurrent Computer Corp. (Tinton Falls, NJ) and Triathon Business ComputersInc. (Irvine, CA) have signed an agreement that will permit Triathon, the USdistributor for Quadratron Systems Inc. (Sherman Oaks, CA), to distributeQuadratron office-automation software for the Concurrent 5000 and 6000 familyof real-time computers.andM;Sun Microsystems Inc.andM;Kinburn Technology Corp.andM;Sun Microsystems of Canada (Markham, Ontario) and Kinburn Technology Corp.andO;(Ottawa) have signed an agreement estimated to be worth $80 million overthree years.andP;  Under its terms, Kinburn and its subsidiaries will integratethe Sun-3 and Sparcstation product lines with a variety of hardware andapplication software enhancements, including mapping system software, forresale to Kinburn customers around the world.andM;Hitachi Ltd.andM;Cray Research Inc.andM;Hitachi Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) and Cray Research Inc. (Minneapolis, MN) havesigned a patent cross-license agreement that applies to the computer-relatedpatents of the two supercomputer manufacturers.andP;  The deal gives each companyfreedom to pursue designs without having to be concerned about accidentaldesign overlaps that might otherwise constitute infringement of patents heldby the other.andP;  Both companies have previously signed similar agreements withother firms.andP;  The accord does not provide for joint marketing efforts or thesharing of technology or trade secrets; nor does it allow for explicitduplication of computer designs.andM;Hewlett-Packard Co.andM;Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd.andM;Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto, CA) will share its RISC technology withSamsung Electronics Co. Ltd. (Japan) under an agreement signed recently bythe two companies.andP;  The chipsets will be used in entry-level workstationsthat HP and Samsung will co-develop over the next two years.andP;  Samsung willmanufacture the RISC workstations and sell them to HP under an OEM agreement.andO;However, the two companies will also market the new computers independetlyunder their own labels.andM;Ready SystemsandM;Sparc InternationalandM;The Vrtx32 real-time operating system will be ported to the Sparc processoras the result of an agreement signed by Ready Systems (Sunnyvale, CA), makerof Vrtx32, and Sparc International (Sunnyvale, CA).andP;  The port is expected tobe available in the first quarter of next year.andM;SST Data Inc.andM;Emerald Technology Inc.andM;Emerald Technology Inc. (Bothell, WA), a maker of 5250 emulation products forIBM mid-range systems, and SST Data Inc. (Mequon, WI), a company specializingin UNIX-to-IBM connectivity, have merged.andP;  Under the terms of the merger.andO;Under the subsidiary of Emerald Technology but retains its name and identityand will continue to operate from its headquarters outside Milwaukee.andM;RelixandM;The Santa Cruz Operation Inc.andM;The Santa Cruz Operation Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA) has licensed a line of OSIsoftware from Retix (Santa Monica, CA).andP;  The software, which supports OSIprotocols on loca- and wide-area networks, is licensed for use with the SCOUNIX System V/386 and Xenix operating systems.andP;  Under the terms of theagreement, SCO will distribute full sevel-layer OSI applications, includingthose for file transfer and management as well as X.400 message handling.andO;Retix estimates that revenues from the agreement will exceed $10 million overthe next five years.andM;Emulex Corp.andM;Emulex Corp. (Costa Mesa, CA) has joined both the Open Software Foundation(Cambridge, MA) and UNIX International Inc. (New York, NY).andM;IXI Ltd.andM;IXI Ltd. (Cambridge, England) has become a member of the Open SoftwareFoundation (Cambridge, MA).andM;Jyacc Inc.andM;Stratus Computer Corp.andM;Jyacc Inc. (New York, NY) and Stratus Computer Corp. (Marlboro, MA) havesigned a long-term licensing agreement permitting Stratus to markt Jyacc'sJAM product worldwide on Stratus machines.andM;Locus Computing Corp.andM;Sequent Computer Systems Inc.andM;Locus Computing Corp. (Inglewood, CA) and Sequent Computer Systems Inc.andO;(Beaverton, OR) have signed a license agreement allowing Locus' Merge 386product to be ported to Sequents's Dynix operating system.andM;Open Software FoundationandM;Membership in the Open Software Foundation (Cambridge, MA) has reached 150.andM;Next Inc.andM;Next (Palo Alto, CA) has announced that it will incorporate Rendermantechnology from Pixar (San Rafael, CA) in its future color products.andO;</TEXT></DOC>