<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> ZF32-062-026 </DOCNO><DOCID>11 125 365  OV: 11 125 187.andM; </DOCID><JOURNAL>PC Magazine  Sept 10 1991 v10 n15 p298(2)* Full Text COPYRIGHT Ziff-Davis Publishing Co. 1991.andM;</JOURNAL><TITLE>Wildcat! Version 2.55. (Mustang Software Inc.) (Software Review)(one of 10 evaluations of bulletin-board-system software packages)(evaluation)</TITLE><AUTHOR>Salemi, Joe.andM;</AUTHOR><SUMMARY>Mustang Software Inc's Wildcat! 2.55 bulletin-board system (BBS)software package offers many good features but suffers from somesignificant deficiencies that weaken its competitive position.andO;The program costs $129 for a single-user version, $249 for a10-user version and $499 for a 250-user version.andP;  Wildcat! is easyto install, and installation is automatic.andP;  It requires about1.5Mbytes of disk space; the installation utility creates allnecessary subdirectories and copies the appropriate files.andO;Wildcat! was originally designed for hobbyists rather thanbusinesses, and its roots tend to show.andP;  It allows only 24different message areas and 63 file areas.andP;  There is no way to loglocal users into the BBS automatically via a batch file, althoughWildcat! can run as a multiuser system through a local areanetwork The sysop can post a message file to a user who iscurrently on line.andP;  An upcoming upgrade, Version 3.0, promises toremove many of the limitations of the current version.andM;</SUMMARY><DESCRIPT>Company:   Mustang Software Inc. (Products).andO;Product:   Wildcat! 2.55 (Communications software) (evaluation).andO;Topic:     EvaluationCommunications softwareComputer bulletin boardsWide Area Networks.andO;Feature:   illustrationtable.andO;Caption:   Fact file. (table)Suitability to task. (table)andM;</DESCRIPT><TEXT>Wildcat!,andM;Version 2.55andM;Mixed in with Wildcat!'s many good points are some deficiencies that keep itfrom making its way to the top of the business BBS packages, although anupcoming release of the Mustang Software program holds promise.andP;  The currentrelease, Version 2.55, costs $129 for the single-user version, $249 for a10-user version, and $499 for 250 users.andM;Installing Wildcat! is a simple, automated process.andP;  The program requiresabout 1.5MB of disk space.andP;  The installation program creates the necessarysubdirectories, copies the appropriate files to them, and runs the MAKEWILDconfiguration program.andP;  MAKEWILD lets you reset defaults for the message andfile areas, security levels, and, if the board is going to be part ofFidoNet, the node information.andP;  The spiral-bound installation manual explainsall the different Wildcat! configuration options in great detail, making iteasy to change the system to suit your needs.andM;HOBBYIST ROOTSandM;Unfortunately, Wildcat! shows its roots as a hobbyist system, as it onlyallows 24 different message areas, and 26 file areas.andP;  TBBS, on the otherhand, offers 63 message and 63 file areas, while Remote-Access andSearchlight both support about 200 message and 200 file areas.andP;  In addition,Wildcat! supplies only 50 levels of security, placing it in the bottom thirdof the BBS packages we reviewed for this issue.andP;  You can modify the menustructure only as far as changing the name and activation key for the variousmenu functions and setting the security levels needed to access them.andM;One interesting feature of Wildcat! is its ability to post a message file toa user while he or she is on-line.andP;  If you need to inform someone that youhave to take down the bulletin board for some reason, you press a hotkey andsend your message out.andP;  Ten different message files are supported; five ofthem automatically log the user off the bulletin board after displaying thefile.andP;  One serves as the permanent lockout key; after the user is logged off,it denies him or her future access to the system.andM;Wildcat! is FidoNet-aware, offering limited built-in support for sharingmessages with other FidoNet systems.andP;  But you still need third-partyutilities to move the messages on and off the system and a front-end packageto communicate with other nodes.andM;LAN MESSAGING LIMITATIONSandM;Although it can run as a multiuser system through a LAN, Wildcat! does nothave a way to log local users into the BBS automatically via a batch file.andO;They have to log in through the main system screen, which limits Wildcat!'susefulness as an in-house messaging or mail system.andP;  One nice LAN feature,however, is the CATEYE utility, a small TSR you can run on a LAN workstationto monitor activity on the various BBS nodes.andM;Mustang built most of the major file- transfer protocols into Wildcat!,andO;including Zmodem.andP;  Up to ten external protocols are supported as well.andO;Additionally, like its namesake, Wildcat! runs fast, with particularly quickscreen updating and message processing.andM;TECHNICAL SUPPORTandM;Also on the plus side are Mustang's technical support policies.andP;  The companyprovides free phone support from 8:30 to 5:00 P.S.T.andP;  for 90 days afterpurchase.andP;  Lifetime support is available on a private BBS, and throughCompuServe's PC Vendor A (PCVENA) forum.andP;  A CompuServe introductory packcomes with every package.andP;  $50 a year buys an extended support plan thatlengthens the phone support period by one year and ensures that you receive acopy of every minor update and reduced prices on major upgrades.andM;In fairness to Mustang, many of the limitations we've discussed here will beremoved in Wildcat!, Version 3.0, which was in alpha testing at press time.andO;The new version is due for release in late summer of 1991.andP;  Of particularinterest will be the increase in the number of message and file areas to1,000 each, the doubling of the number of security levels, and the ability tolog onto the BBS directly and use the software as a LAN-based message andconference system.andM;In its current form, Wildcat! is better suited for dial-in use only.andO;Mustang's software does not include a configuration option or a command thattells it to go into local log-on mode automatically when it's first executed.andO;You might be able to rig up the proper initialization sequence with akeyboard-stuffing utility like PC Magazine's KEYFAKE or the shareware programStacKey, but other BBS programs already have this capability built-in.andO;Nevertheless, the current Wildcat!'s speed and network support will makeVersion 3.0 worth some consideration when it's released.andM;Wildcat!,andM;Version 2.55andM;Mustang Software Inc., P.O. Box 2264, Bakersfield, CA 93303; 800-999-9619,805-395-0223; Wildcat! HQ BBS: 805-395-0650.andM;List Price: 1-user version, $129; 10-user version, $249; 250-user version,$499.andP;  1-user version available on-line.andM;Requires: 384K RAM, hard disk, DOS 3.1 or higher.andM;In Short: The current version of Wildcat! is fast software with manyshortcomings that show its hobbyist roots, including a limited number of fileand message areas and security levels.andP;  But it includes most of the majorfile-transfer protocols and comes with a LAN monitoring utility.andP;  Lookforward to the next release, which promises to address most of the program'sshortcomings.andO;</TEXT></DOC>